buoyant masses of molten rock that rose toward the surface and solidified to produce a primitive crust. These rocky materials were enriched in oxygen and “oxygen-seeking” elements, particularly silicon and aluminum, along with lesser amounts of calcium, sodium, potassium, iron, and magnesium. In addition, some heavy metals such as gold, lead, and uranium, which have low melting points or were highly soluble in the ascending molten masses, were scavenged from Earth’s interior and concentrated in the developing crust. This early period of chemical differentiation established the three basic divisions of Earth’s interior: the iron-rich core; the thin primitive crust; and Earth’s largest layer, called the mantle, which is located between the core and crust.

An important consequence of the early period of chemical differentiation is that large quantities of gaseous materials were allowed to escape from Earth’s interior, as happens today during volcanic eruptions. By this process, a primitive atmosphere gradually evolved. It is on this planet, with this atmosphere, that life as we know it came into existence. extensive satellite systems, were also developing. Because of low temperatures far from the Sun, the material from which these planets formed contained a high percentage of ices—frozen water, carbon dioxide, ammonia, and methane—as well as rocky and metallic debris. The accumulation of ices partly accounts for the large size and low density of the outer planets. The two most massive planets, Jupiter and Saturn, had a surface gravity sufficient to attract and hold large quantities of even the lightest elements—hydrogen and helium.

As material accumulated to form Earth (and for a short period afterward), the high-velocity impact of nebular debris and the decay of radioactive elements caused the temperature of our planet to steadily increase. During this time of intense heating, Earth became hot enough that iron and nickel began to melt. Melting produced liquid blobs of dense metal that sank toward the center of the planet. This process occurred rapidly on the scale of geologic time and produced Earth’s dense, iron-rich core.

Following the events that established Earth’s basic structure, the primitive crust was lost to erosion and other geologic processes, so we have no direct record of its makeup. Nevertheless, there is general agreement that the continental crust formed gradually over the past 4 billion years. (The oldest rocks yet discovered are isolated fragments found in the Northwest Territories of Canada that have radiometric dates of about 4 billion years.) In addition, as you will see in subsequent chapters, Earth is an evolving planet whose continents and ocean basins have continually changed shape and even location during much of this period.

Sketch Earth’s internal structure and label and describe the main subdivisions. The preceding section outlined how differentiation of material early in Earth’s history resulted in the formation of three major layers defined by their chemical composition: the crust, mantle, and core. In addition to these compositionally distinct layers, Earth is divided into layers based on physical properties. The physical properties used to define such zones include whether the layer is solid or liquid and how weak or strong it is. Important examples include the lithosphere, asthenosphere, outer core, and inner core. Knowledge of both chemical and physical layers is important to our How did we learn about the composition and structure of Earth’s interior? The nature of Earth’s interior is primarily determined by analyzing seismic waves from earthquakes. As these waves of energy penetrate the planet, they change speed and are bent and reflected as they move through zones that have different properties. Monitoring stations around the world detect and record this energy. With the aid of computers, these data are analyzed and used to build a detailed picture of Earth’s interior. There is more about this in Chapter 12.

The right side of this cross section shows that there are three different layers based on differences in composition.

Structure of Earth’s interior based on chemical composition (right side of diagram) and physical properties (left side of diagram).

Layers on the left side are based on factors such as whether the layer is liquid or solid, weak or strong.

The crust, Earth’s relatively thin, rocky outer skin, is of two different types—continental crust and oceanic crust. Both share the word crust, but the similarity ends there. The oceanic crust is roughly 7 kilometers (4.5 miles) thick and composed of the dark igneous rock basalt. By contrast, the continental crust averages about 35 kilometers (22 miles) thick but may exceed about 70 kilometers (45 miles) in some mountainous regions such as the Rockies and Himalayas. Unlike the oceanic crust, which has a relatively homogeneous chemical composition, the continental crust consists of many rock types. Although the upper crust has an average composition of a granitic rock called granodiorite, it varies considerably from place to place. Continental rocks have an average density of about 2.7 g/cm3, and some have been discovered that are more than 4 billion years old. The rocks of the oceanic crust are younger (180 million years or less) and denser (about 3.0 g/cm3) than continental rocks. For comparison, liquid water has a density of 1 g/cm3; therefore, the density of basalt, the primary rock composing oceanic crust, is three times that of water.

More than 82 percent of Earth’s volume is contained in the mantle, a solid, rocky shell that extends to a depth of about 2900 kilometers (1800 miles). The boundary between the crust and mantle represents a marked change in chemical composition. The dominant rock type in the uppermost mantle is peridotite, which contains minerals richer in the metals magnesium and iron compared to the minerals found in either the continental or oceanic crust.

The upper mantle extends from the crust–mantle boundary down to a depth of about 660 kilometers (410 miles). The upper mantle can be divided into three different parts. The top portion of the upper mantle is part of the stronger lithosphere, and beneath that is the weaker asthenosphere. The bottom part of the upper mantle is called the transition zone. The lithosphere (“rock sphere”) consists of the entire crust plus the uppermost mantle and forms Earth’s is more than 250 kilometers (155 miles) thick below the oldest portions of the continents. Beneath this stiff layer to a depth of about 410 kilometers (255 miles) lies a soft, comparatively weak layer known as the asthenosphere (“weak sphere”). The top portion of the asthenosphere has a temperature/pressure regime that results in a small amount of melting. Within this very weak zone, the lithosphere is mechanically detached from the layer below. The lithosphere thus is able to move independently of the asthenosphere, a fact we will consider in the next chapter. It is important to emphasize here that the strength of various Earth materials is a function of both their composition and the temperature and pressure of their environment. You should not get the idea that the entire lithosphere behaves like a rigid or brittle solid similar to rocks found on the surface. Rather, the rocks of the lithosphere get progressively hotter and weaker (more easily deformed) with increasing depth. At the depth of the uppermost asthenosphere, the rocks are close enough to their melting temperature (some melting may actually occur) that they are very easily deformed. Thus, the uppermost asthenosphere is weak because it is near its melting point, just as hot wax is weaker than cold wax. From about 410 kilometers (255 miles) to about 660 kilometers (410 miles) in depth is the part of the upper mantle called the transition zone. The top of the transition zone is identified by a sudden increase in density from about 3.5 to 3.7 g/cm3. This change occurs because minerals in the rock peridotite respond to the increase in pressure by forming new minerals with closely packed atomic structures.

From a depth of 660 kilometers (410 miles) to the top of the core, at a depth of 2900 kilometers (1800 miles), is the lower mantle. Because of an increase in pressure (caused by the weight of the rock above), the mantle gradually strengthens with depth. Despite their strength, however, the rocks in the lower mantle are very hot and capable of extremely gradual flow. In the bottom few hundred kilometers of the mantle (pronounced “dee double-prime”). The nature of this boundary layer between the rocky mantle and the hot liquid iron outer core will be examined in Chapter 12.

The core is composed of an iron–nickel alloy with minor amounts of oxygen, silicon, and sulfur—elements that readily form compounds with iron. At the extreme pressure found in the core, this iron-rich material has an average density of nearly 11 g/cm3 and approaches 14 times the density of water at Earth’s center. The core is divided into two regions that exhibit very different mechanical strengths. The outer core is a liquid layer 2250 kilometers (1395 miles) thick. The movement of metallic iron within this zone generates Earth’s magnetic field. The inner core is a sphere that has a radius of 1221 kilometers (757 miles). Despite its higher temperature, the iron in the inner core is solid due to the immense pressures that exist in the center of the planet.

1. Name and describe the three major layers defined by their chemical composition. 2. Contrast the characteristics of the lithosphere and the asthenosphere. 3. Why is the inner core solid?

Sketch, label, and explain the rock cycle. Rock is the most common and abundant material on Earth. To a curious traveler, the variety seems nearly endless. When a rock is examined closely, we find that it usually consists of smaller crystals called minerals. Minerals are chemical compounds (or sometimes single elements), each with its own composition and physical properties. The grains or crystals may be microscopically small or easily seen with the unaided eye. The minerals that compose a rock strongly influA. The large crystals of light-colored ence its nature and appearance. In addition, minerals in granite result from the a rock’s texture—the size, shape, and/or slow cooling of molten rock deep arrangement of its constituent minerals— beneath the surface. Granite is also has a significant effect on its appearabundant in the continental crust. and texture, in turn, reflect the geologic processes that created it . Such analyses are critical to understanding our planet. This understanding also has many practical applications, including finding energy and mineral resources and solving environmental problems. Geologists divide rocks into three major groups: igneous, sedicooling of molten rock at Earth’s surface is responsible for the rock’s 1.21 provides some examples. As microscopically small crystals. you will learn, each group is linked Oceanic crust is composed mainly of basalt. to the others by the processes that act upon and within the planet. Earlier in this chapter, you learned that Earth is biosphere slowly disintegrate and decompose rocks. a system. This means that our planet consists of many The materials that result are often moved downslope by interacting parts that form a complex whole. Nowhere gravity before being picked up and transported by any is this idea better illustrated than when we examine the of a number of erosional agents, such as running water, rock cycle. The rock cycle allows us to view glaciers, wind, or waves. Eventually these particles and many of the interrelationships among different parts of dissolved substances, called sediment, are deposited. the Earth system. It helps us understand the origin of Although most sediment ultimately comes to rest in the igneous, sedimentary, and metamorphic rocks and to ocean, other sites of deposition include river floodplains, see that each type is linked to the others by processes desert basins, swamps, and sand dunes. that act upon and within the planet. Consider the rock Next, the sediments undergo lithification, a term cycle to be a simplified but useful overview of physical meaning “conversion into rock.” Sediment is usually geology. Learn the rock cycle well; you will be examinlithified into sedimentary rock when compacted by ing its interrelationships in greater detail throughout the weight of overlying layers or when cemented as this book. percolating groundwater fills the pores with mineral If the resulting sedimentary rock is buried deep The Basic Cycle within Earth and involved in the dynamics of mountain Magma is molten rock that forms deep beneath Earth’s sur- building or intruded by a mass of magma, it is subjected face. Over time, magma cools and solidifies. This process, to great pressures and/or intense heat. The sedimentary called crystallization, may occur either beneath the surface rock reacts to the changing environment and turns into or, following a volcanic eruption, at the surface. In either the third rock type, metamorphic rock. When metasituation, the resulting rocks are called igneous rocks. morphic rock is subjected to additional pressure changes If igneous rocks are exposed at the surface, they or to still higher temperatures, it melts, creating magma, undergo weathering, in which the day-in and daywhich eventually crystallizes into igneous rock, starting out influences of the atmosphere, hydrosphere, and the cycle all over again.

Where does the energy that drives Earth’s rock cycle come from? Processes driven by heat from Earth’s interior are responsible for creating igneous and metamorphic rocks. Weathering and erosion, external processes powered by energy from the Sun, produce the sediment from which sedimentary rocks form.

The metamorphic rock pictured here, known as the Vishnu Schist, is exposed in Canyon. Its formation is associated with environments deep below Earth's surface where temperatures and pressures are high and with the forces associated with ancient mountain-building processes that occurred in Precambrian time.

Viewed over long time spans, rocks are constantly forming, changing, and re-forming.

When magma or lava cools and solidifies, igneous rock forms.

Magma forms when rock melts deep beneath Earth’s athe sition We rt, depo rock is buried deep in the crust, heat and pressure (stress) change it to metamorphic rock.

Sediment is compacted and cemented to form sedimentary rock.

The rock cycle The rock cycle helps us understand the origin of the three basic rock groups. Arrows represent processes that link each group to the others. (https://goo.gl/dYWRsL) however, take time—vast amounts of time. We can observe different parts of the cycle operating all over the world. Today new magma is forming beneath the island of Hawaii. When it erupts at the surface, the lava flows Rockies are gradually being worn down by weathering and erosion. Some of this weathered debris will eventually be carried to the Gulf of Mexico, where it will add to the already substantial mass of sediment that has accumulated there.

1. List two rock characteristics that are used to determine the processes that created a rock. 2. Sketch and label a basic rock cycle. Make sure to include alternate paths.

List and describe the major features of the continents and ocean basins. The two principal divisions of Earth’s surface are the ocean basins and the continents. between the ocean basins and the continents is primarily due to differences in their respective densities and thicknesses: r Ocean basins. The average depth of the ocean floor is about 3.8 kilometers (2.4 miles) below sea level, or about 4.5 kilometers (2.8 miles) lower than the average elevation of the continents. The basaltic rocks that comprise the oceanic crust average only 7 kilometers (about 4.5 miles) thick and have an average density of about 3.0 g/cm3. r Continents. The continents are remarkably flat features that have the appearance of plateaus protruding above sea level. With an average elevation of about 0.8 kilometer (0.5 mile), continental blocks lie close to sea level, except for limited areas of mountainous terrain. Recall that the continents average about 35 kilometers (22 miles) thick and are composed of granitic rocks that have a density of about 2.7 g/cm3. The thicker, less dense continental crust is more buoyant than the oceanic crust. As a result, continental crust floats on top of the deformable rocks of the mantle at a higher level than oceanic crust for the same reason that a large, empty (less dense) cargo ship rides higher than a small, loaded (denser) one.

If all water were drained from the ocean basins, a great variety of features would be seen, including chains of volcanoes, deep canyons, plateaus, and large expanses of monotonously flat plains. In fact, the scenery would be nearly as diverse as that on the processes that form them are covered in detail in Chapter 13. During the past 65 years, oceanographers have used modern depth-sounding equipment and satellite technology to map significant portions of the ocean floor. These studies have led them to identify three major regions: continental margins, deep-ocean basins, and oceanic (mid-ocean) ridges.

The continental margin is the portion of the seafloor adjacent to major landmasses. It may include the continental shelf, the continental slope, and the continental rise. Although land and sea meet at the shoreline, this is not the boundary between the continents and the ocean basins. Rather, along most coasts, a gently sloping platform of material, called the continental shelf, extends seaward from the shore. Because it is underlain by continental crust, it is clearly a flooded extension of width of the continental shelf varies. For example, it States but relatively narrow along the Pacific margin of the continent. The boundary between the continents and the deep-ocean basins lies along the continental slope, a relatively steep dropoff that extends from the outer edge of the continental shelf to the floor of the deep we find that about 60 percent of Earth’s surface is represented by ocean basins and the remaining 40 percent by continents. In regions where trenches do not exist, the steep continental slope merges into a more gradual incline known as the continental rise, a thick wedge of sediment that moved downslope from the continental shelf and accumulated on the deep-ocean floor.

Deep-Ocean Basins Situated between the continental margins and oceanic ridges are deep-ocean basins. Parts of these regions consist of incredibly flat features his is a shoreline scene along the east coast of the United States. The Atlantic Ocean is on the right.

The most prominent feature on the ocean floor is the oceanic ridge, or mid-ocean Ridge and the East Pacific Rise are parts of this system. This broad elevated feature forms a continuous belt winding more than 70,000 kilometers (43,500 miles) around the globe, in a manner similar to the seam of a baseball. Unlike most continental mountains that consist of highly deformed rock, the oceanic ridge system consists of layer upon layer of igneous rock that has been fractured and uplifted.

The major features of the continents can be grouped into two distinct categories: uplifted regions of deformed rocks that make up present-day mountain belts and extensive flat, stable areas that have been young mountain belts tend to be long, narrow features at the margins of continents and that the flat, stable areas are typically located in the interiors of the continents. Mountain building is discussed in more detail in Chapter 14.

The most prominent continental features are mountains. Although their distribution appears to be random, this is not the case. The youngest mountains (those less than 100 million years old) are located principally in two major zones. The circum-Pacific belt (the region surrounding the Pacific Ocean) includes the mountains of the western Americas and continues into the western Pacific in the form of volcanic island arcs regions composed largely of volcanic rocks and deformed The other major mountain belt extends eastward from the Alps through Iran and the Himalayas and then dips southward into Indonesia. Careful examination of mountainous terrains reveals that most are places where thick sequences of rocks have been squeezed and highly deformed, as if placed in a gigantic vise. Older mountains are also found on the continents. Examples include the Appalachians in the eastern United States and the Urals in Russia. Their once lofty peaks are now worn low, the result of millions of years of weathering and erosion. The Stable Interior Unlike the young mountain belts that have formed within the past 100 million years, the interiors of the continents, called cratons, have been relatively stable (undisturbed) for the past 600 million years or even longer.

The Appalachians are old mountains. Mountain building began about 480 million years ago and continued for more than 200 million years. Erosion has lowered these once lofty peaks.

The Canadian Shield is an expansive region of ancient Precambrian rocks, some more than 4 billion years old. It was recently scoured by Ice Age glaciers.

The rugged Himalayas are the highest mountains on Earth and are geologically young. They began forming about 50 million years ago and uplift continues today.

Everest, Nepal. (Photo by Christian Kober/Robert Harding) is the first theory to provide a comprehensive view of the processes that produced Earth’s major surface features, including the continents and ocean basins. Within the framework of this theory, geologists have found explanations for the basic causes and distribution of earthquakes, volcanoes, and mountain belts. Further, we are now better able to explain the distribution of plants and animals in the geologic past, as well as the distribution of economically significant mineral deposits.

In this chapter, we will examine the events that led to this dramatic reversal of scientific opinion. We will also briefly trace the development of the continental drift hypothesis, examine why it was initially rejected, and consider the evidence that finally led to the acceptance of its direct descendant—the theory of plate tectonics.

1. Briefly describe the view held by most geologists regarding the ocean basins and continents prior to the 1960s. 2. What group of geologists were the least receptive to the continental drift hypothesis? Why?

List and explain the evidence Wegener presented to support his continental drift The idea that continents, particularly South America and Africa, fit together like pieces of a jigsaw puzzle came about during the 1600s, as better world maps became available. However, little significance was given to this notion until 1915, when Alfred Wegener (1880–1930), a German meteorologist and geophysicist, wrote The Origin of Continents and Oceans. This book outlined Wegener’s hypothesis called continental drift, which dared to challenge the long-held assumption that the continents and ocean basins had fixed geographic positions.

Wegener suggested that a single supercontinent Evidence: The Continental consisting of all Earth’s landmasses once existed.* He named this giant landmass Pangaea (pronounced Like a few others before him, Wegener suspected that further hypothesized that about 200 million years ago, the continents might once have been joined when he during the early part of the Mesozoic era, this supercontinent began to fragment into smaller landmasses. These continental blocks then “drifted” to their present positions over a span of milTethys Sea lions of years. Wegener and others who advocated the continental drift hypothesis collected substantial evidence to support their point of view. The fit of South America and Africa and the geographic distribuA Australia tion of fossils and ancient climates all seemed to buttress the idea that these now separate landmasses were once joined. Let us examine some of this evidence.

*Wegener was not the first to conceive of a long-vanished supercontinent. Edward Suess (1831–1914), a distinguished nineteenth-century geologist, pieced together evidence for a giant landmass comprising South America, Africa, India, and Australia.

Wegener’s Pangaea, redrawn from his book published in 1915.

Reconstructions of Pangaea The supercontinent of Pangaea, as it is thought to have formed in the late Paleozoic and early Mesozoic eras, more than 200 million years ago.

Two of the puzzle pieces America and Africa along the continental slope at a depth of 500 fathoms (about 900 meters [3000 feet]). (Based on Understanding the Earth, edited (scientists who study the fossilized remains of ancient organisms) agreed that some type of land connection was needed to explain the existence of similar Mesozoic age life-forms on widely separated landmasses. Just as modern life-forms native to North America are not the same as those of Africa and Australia, during the Mesozoic era, organisms on widely separated continents should have been distinctly different.

noticed the remarkable similarity between the coastlines on opposite sides of the Atlantic Ocean. However, other Earth scientists challenged Wegener’s use of present-day shorelines to “fit” these continents together. These opponents correctly argued that wave erosion and depositional processes continually modify shorelines. Even if continental displacement had taken place, a good fit today would be unlikely. Because Wegener’s original jigsaw fit of the continents was crude, it is assumed that he was Scientists later determined that a much better approximation of the outer boundary of a continent is the seaward edge of its continental shelf, which lies submerged a few hundred meters below sea level. In the early 1960s, Sir Edward Bullard and two associates constructed a map that pieced together the edges of the continental shelves of South America and Africa at a depth of about 900 meters (3000 feet). The remarkable fit obtained was more precise than even these researchers had expected.

Matching Across the Seas Although the seed for Wegener’s hypothAntarctica esis came from the striking similarities of the continental margins on opposite sides of the Atlantic, it was when he learned that identical fossil organisms Fossil evidence supporting continental drift Fossils of identical organisms have been that his pursuit of continental drift discovered in rocks of similar age in Australia, Africa, South America, Antarctica, and India— continents that are currently widely separated by ocean barriers. Wegener learned that most paleontologists accounted for these occurrences by placing these continents in their pre-drift locations.

connected Africa and South America but later subsided below sea level? Modern maps of the seafloor substantiate Wegener’s contention that if land bridges of this magnitude existed, their remnants would still lie below sea level.

How do land animals cross vast oceans? These sketches illustrate various proposals to explain the occurrence of similar species on landmasses now separated by vast oceans. (Used by permission of cited the distribution of the fossil “seed fern” Glossopteris as evidence for Pangaea’s existence (see leaves and seeds too large to be carried by the wind, this plant was known to be widely dispersed among Africa, Australia, India, and South America. Later, fossil remains of Glossopteris were also discovered in Antarctica.* Wegener also learned that these seed ferns and associated flora grew only in cool climates—similar to central Alaska. Therefore, he concluded that when these landmasses were joined, they were located much closer to the South Pole.

Evidence: Rock Types You know that successfully completing a jigsaw puzzle requires fitting the pieces together while maintaining the continuity of the picture. The “picture” that must match * In 1912 Captain Robert Scott and two companions froze to death lying beside 35 pounds (16 kilograms) of rock on their return from a failed attempt to be the first to reach the South Pole. These samples, collected on Beardmore Glacier, contained fossil remains of Glossopteris.

in the “continental drift puzzle” is one of rock types and geologic features such as mountain belts. If the continents were once together, the rocks found in a particular region on one continent should closely match in age and type those found in adjacent positions on the adjoining continent. Wegener found evidence of highly deformed igneous rocks in Brazil that closely resembled similar Similar evidence can be found in mountain belts that terminate at one coastline and reappear on landmasses across the ocean. For instance, the mountain belt that includes the Appalachians trends northeastward through the eastern United States and disappears off the coast of and structure are found in the British Isles and Scandinavia. When these landmasses are positioned as they were about 200 million years ago, as a nearly continuous belt.

Matching mountain ranges across the North Atlantic Paleoclimatic evidence for continental drift ago, ice sheets covered extensive areas of the Southern Hemisphere and India. Arrows show the direction of ice movement that can be inferred from the pattern of glacial scratches and grooves found in the bedrock. to their pre-drift positions account for tropical coal swamps that existed in areas presently located in temperate climates.

Because Alfred Wegener was a student of world climates, he suspected that paleoclimatic (paleo = ancient, climatic = climate) data might also support the idea of mobile continents. His assertion was bolstered by evidence that a glacial period dating to the late Paleozoic Australia, and India. This meant that about 300 million years ago, vast ice sheets covered extensive portions of Much of the land area that contains evidence of this Paleozoic glaciation presently lies within 30 degrees of the equator in subtropical or tropical climates. †Alfred Wegener, The Origin of Continents and Oceans, translated from the 4th 1. What was the first line of evidence that led early investigators to suspect that the continents were once connected? 2. Explain why the discovery of the fossil remains of Mesosaurus in both South America and Africa, but nowhere else, supports the continental drift 3. Early in the twentieth century, what was the prevailing view of how land animals migrated across vast expanses of open ocean? 4. How did Wegener account for evidence of glaciers in the southern landmasses at a time when areas in North America, Europe, and Asia supported lush tropical swamps?

One of the main objections to Wegener’s hypothesis stemmed from his inability to identify a credible mechanism for continental drift. Wegener proposed that gravitational forces of the Moon and Sun that produce Earth’s tides were also capable of gradually moving the continents across the globe. However, the prominent physicist Harold Jeffreys correctly argued that tidal forces strong enough to move Earth’s continents would have resulted in halting our planet’s rotation, which, of course, has not happened. Wegener also incorrectly suggested that the larger and sturdier continents broke through thinner oceanic crust, much as icebreakers cut through ice. However, no evidence existed to suggest that the ocean floor was weak enough to permit passage of the continents without the continents being appreciably deformed in the process. In 1930, Wegener made his fourth and final trip to the Greenland ice sheet. Although the primary focus of this expedition was to study this great ice cap and its climate, Wegener continued to test his continental drift hypothesis. While returning from Eismitte, an experimental station located in the center of Greenland, Wegener perished along with his Greenland companion. His intriguing idea, however, did not die. Why was Wegener unable to overturn the established scientific views of his day? Foremost was the fact that, although the central theme of Wegener’s drift hypothesis was correct, some details were incorrect. For example, continents do not break through the ocean floor, and tidal energy is much too weak to move continents. Moreover, for any comprehensive scientific theory to gain wide acceptance, it must withstand critical testing from all areas of science. Despite Wegener’s great contribution to our understanding of Earth, not all of the evidence supported the continental drift hypothesis as he had proposed it. Although many of Wegener’s contemporaries opposed and even ridiculed his views, some considered his ideas plausible. For those geologists who continued the search, the exciting concept of continents adrift held their interest. Others viewed continental drift as a solution to previously unexplainable observations such as the cause of earthquakes. Nevertheless, most of the scientific community, particularly in North America, either categorically rejected continental drift or treated it with considerable skepticism.

1. Describe two aspects of Wegener’s continental drift hypothesis that were objectionable to most Earth scientists. 2. What analogy did Wegener use to describe how the continents move through the ocean floor?

Alfred Wegener shown waiting out the 1912–1913 Arctic winter during an expedition to Greenland, where he made a 1200-kilometer traverse across the widest part of the island’s ice sheet.

List the major differences between Earth’s lithosphere and asthenosphere and explain the importance of each in the plate tectonics theory. painstakingly began to emerge. From this work came the discovery of a global oceanic ridge system that winds through all the major oceans. In other parts of the ocean, more new discoveries were being made. Studies conducted in the western Pacific demonstrated that earthquakes were occurring at great depths beneath deep-ocean trenches. Of equal importance was the fact that dredging of the seafloor did not bring up any oceanic crust that was older than 180 million years. Further, sediment accumulations in the deepocean basins were found to be thin, not the thousands of meters that were predicted. By 1968 these developments, among others, had led to the unfolding of a far more encompassing theory than continental drift, known as the theory of plate tectonics (tekto = to build).

According to the plate tectonics model, the crust and the uppermost, and therefore coolest, part of the mantle constitute Earth’s strong outer layer, the lithosphere (lithos = stone). The lithosphere varies in both thickness and density, depending on whether it is oceanic or continental lithosphere. Oceanic lithosphere is about 100 kilometers (60 miles) thick in the deep-ocean basins but is considerably thinner along the crest of the oceanic ridge system—a topic we will consider later. By contrast, continental lithosphere averages about 150 kilometers (90 miles) thick but may extend to depths of 200 kilometers Rigid lithosphere overlies the weak asthenosphere (Weak layer, rocks near their melting temperatures) (125 miles) or more beneath the stable interiors of the continents. Further, the composition of both the oceanic and continental crusts affects their respective densities. Oceanic crust is composed of basalt, rich in dense iron and magnesium, whereas continental crust is composed largely of less dense granitic rocks. Because of these differences, the overall density of oceanic lithosphere (crust and upper mantle) is greater than the overall density of continental lithosphere. This important difference will be considered in greater detail later in this chapter. The asthenosphere (asthenos = weak) is a hotter, in the upper asthenosphere (100 to 200 kilometers [60 to 125 miles] in depth) are such that rocks at this depth are very near their melting temperatures and, hence, respond to forces by flowing, similar to the way a thick liquid would flow. By contrast, the relatively cool and rigid lithosphere tends to respond to forces acting on it by bending or breaking but not flowing. Because of these differences, Earth’s rigid outer shell is effectively detached from the asthenosphere, which allows these layers to move independently.

Earth’s major lithospheric plates Arabian plate, are composed mostly of oceanic lithosphere. In addition, several smaller plates (microplates) have been identified but are not shown in FigNorth ure 2.11.

Scotia plate Antarctic plate Divergent, convergent, and transform plate boundaries “weak and can become fragmented” such as southern China, which is literally being squeezed as the Indian Because plates are in constant motion relative to each other, most major interactions among them (and, therefore, most deformation) occur along their boundaries. In fact, plate boundaries were first established by plotting the locations of earthquakes and volcanoes. Plates are bounded by three distinct types of boundaries, which are differentiated by the type of movement they exhibit. These boundaries r Divergent plate boundaries—where two plates move apart, resulting in upwelling and partial melting of hot material from the mantle to create new seafloor r Convergent plate boundaries—where two plates move together, resulting either in oceanic lithosphere descending beneath an overriding plate, eventually to be reabsorbed into the mantle, or possibly in the collision of two continental blocks to create a mountain r Transform plate boundaries—where two plates grind past each other without the production or destruction Divergent and convergent plate boundaries each account for about 40 percent of all plate boundaries. Transform boundaries, or faults account for the remaining 20 percent. In the following sections we will summarize the nature of the three types of plate boundaries.

1. What new findings about the ocean floor did 2. Compare and contrast Earth’s lithosphere and 3. List the seven largest lithospheric plates. 4. List the three types of plate boundaries and describe the relative motion along each.

Sketch and describe the movement along a divergent plate boundary that results in the formation of new oceanic lithosphere. Most divergent plate boundaries (di = apart, vergere = to move) are located along the crests of oceanic ridges and can be thought of as constructive plate margins because this is where new ocean floor is generated. Here, two adjacent plates move away from each other, producing long, narrow fractures in the ocean crust. As a result, hot molten rock from the mantle below migrates upward to fill the voids left as the crust is being ripped apart. This molten material gradually cools to produce new slivers of seafloor. In a slow yet unending manner, adjacent plates spread apart, and new oceanic lithosphere forms between them. For this reason, divergent plate boundaries are also called spreading centers.

Oceanic Ridges and The majority of, but not all, divergent plate boundaries are associated with oceanic ridges: elevated areas of the seafloor characterized by high heat flow and volcanism. The global oceanic ridge system is the longest topographic feature on Earth’s surface, exceeding 70,000 2.11, various segments of the global ridge system have Representing 20 percent of Earth’s surface, the oceanic ridge system winds through all major ocean basins, like the seams on a baseball. Although the crest of the oceanic ridge is commonly 2 to 3 kilometers (1 to 2 miles) higher than the adjacent ocean basins, the term ridge may be misleading because it implies “narrow” when, in fact, ridges vary in width from 1000 kilometers (600 miles) to more than 4000 (2500 miles) kilometers. Further, along the crest of some ridge segments is a deep canyonlike structure called a rift valley (Figure 2.13). This structure is evidence that tensional (opposing) forces are actively pulling the ocean crust apart at the ridge crest. The mechanism that operates along the oceanic ridge system to create new seafloor is appropriately called seafloor spreading. Spreading typically averages around 5 centimeters (2 inches) per year, roughly the same rate at which human fingernails grow.

Seafloor spreading Most divergent plate boundaries are situated along the crests of oceanic ridges—the sites of seafloor plate boundaries are sites of seafloor spreading.

Continental rifting occurs where plate motions produce opposing tensional forces that thin the lithosphere and promote upwelling in the mantle.

Stretching causes the brittle crust to break into large blocks that sink, generating a rift valley.

Continued spreading generates a long narrow sea similar to the present-day Red Sea.

Eventually, an expansive deep-ocean basin containing a ridge is formed by age dependent. The older (cooler) it is, the greater its thickness. Oceanic lithosphere that exceeds 80 million years in age is about 100 kilometers (60 miles) thick— approximately its maximum thickness.

Divergent boundaries can develop within a continent, in which case the landmass may split into two or more smaller segments separated by an ocean basin. Continental rifting begins when plate motions produce tensional forces that pull and stretch the lithosphere. This stretching, in turn, promotes mantle upwelling and broad upwarping of the overlying lithosphere (Figure while the brittle crustal rocks break into large blocks. As the tectonic forces continue to pull apart the crust, the broken crustal fragments sink, generating an elongated depression called a continental rift, which can widen African Rift. Whether this rift will eventually result in the breakup of Africa is a topic of ongoing research. Nevertheless, the East African Rift is an excellent model of the initial stage in the breakup of a continent. Here, tensional forces have stretched and thinned the lithosphere, allowing molten rock to ascend from the mantle. Evidence for this upwelling includes Kilimanjaro and Mount Kenya, the tallest peaks in Africa. Research suggests that if rifting continues, the 1. Sketch or describe how two plates move in relation to each other along divergent plate 2. What is the average rate of seafloor spreading in modern oceans?

African Rift valley represents the early stage in the breakup of a continent. Areas shown in red consist of lithosphere that has been stretched and thinned, allowing magma to well up from the mantle.

3. List four features that characterize the oceanic ridge system. 4. Briefly describe the process of continental rifting. Where is it occurring today?

n December 2011 a new volcanic island formed near the southern end of the Red Sea. Less than 2 years later, in late October 2013, another volcanic island emerged in the same area. These volcanic islands are part of several small islands in the Zubair Group located off the west coast of Yemen, along the Red Sea Rift.

New volcanic island, 2013 Compare and contrast the three types of convergent plate boundaries and name a location where each type can be found.

portions of oceanic lithosphere descend into the mantle at a rate equal to seafloor production. This activity occurs along convergent plate boundaries, where two plates move toward each other and the leading edge of one is bent downward as it slides beneath the other.

When the leading edge of a plate capped with continental crust converges with a slab of oceanic lithosphere, the buoyant continental block remains “floating,” while buoyant, which results in a low angle of descent. As the two plates converge, the overriding plate scrapes over the top of the subducting plate below—a type of forced Chile trench experiences great earthquakes, including the 2010 Chilean earthquake—one of the 10 largest on As oceanic lithosphere ages (gets farther from the spreading center), it gradually cools, which causes it to thicken and increase in density. In parts of the western Pacific, some oceanic lithosphere is 180 million years old—the thickest and densest in today’s oceans. The very dense slabs in this region typically plunge into the mantle at angles approaching 90 degrees. This largely explains why most trenches in the western Pacific are deeper than Although all convergent zones have the same basic characteristics, they vary considerably depending on the type of crustal material involved and the tectonic setting. Convergent boundaries can form between one oceanic plate and one continental plate, between two oceanic plates, or between two continental plates .

(fragment of oceanic crust) plate boundaries when both plates are capped with continental crust.

convergent plate boundary Mount Hood, Oregon, is one of more than a dozen large composite volcanoes in the Cascade Range, a continental volcanic arc.

of about 100 kilometers (60 miles), melting is triggered within the wedge of hot asthenosphere that lies above it. But how does the subduction of a cool slab of oceanic lithosphere cause mantle rock to melt? The answer lies in the fact that water contained in the descending plates acts the way salt does to melt ice. That is, “wet” rock in a high-pressure environment melts at substantially lower temperatures than does “dry” rock of the same Sediments and oceanic crust contain large amounts of water, which is carried to great depths by a subducting plate. As the plate plunges downward, heat and pressure drive water from the hydrated (water-rich) minerals in the subducting slab. At a depth of roughly 100 kilometers (60 miles), the wedge of mantle rock is sufficiently hot that the introduction of water from the slab below leads to some melting. This process, called partial melting, is thought to generate some molten material, which is mixed with unmelted mantle rock. Being less dense than the surrounding mantle, this hot mobile material gradually rises toward the surface. Depending on the environment, these mantle-derived masses of molten rock may ascend through the crust and give rise to a volcanic eruption. However, much of this material never reaches the surface but solidifies at depth—a process that thickens the crust. The volcanoes of the towering Andes are the product of molten rock generated by the subduction of the Nazca plate beneath the South American continent (see are produced in part by volcanic activity associated with the subduction of oceanic lithosphere, are called continental volcanic arcs. The Cascade Range in Washington, Oregon, and California is another mountain system consisting of several well-known volcanoes, including Mount Rainier, Mount Shasta, Mount St. Helens, and Mount Hood. This active volcanic Garibaldi and Mount Silverthrone.

Water driven from the plate triggers melting in the mantle.

When an oceanic plate descends into the asthenosphere, water driven from the subducting slab lowers the melting temperature of mantle rock sufficiently to generate magma. The Cascade Range is a continental volcanic arc formed by the subduction of the Juan de Fuca plate under the North American plate.

Islands are a volcanic island arc produced by the subduction of the Pacific American plate.

St. Pierre and killing an estimated 28,000 people. This chain of islands also includes Montserrat, where volcanic activity has occurred as recently as 2010. Island arcs are typically simple structures made of numerous volcanic cones underlain by oceanic crust that is generally less than 20 kilometers (12 miles) thick. By contrast, some island arcs are more comAniakchak plex and are underlain by highly deformed crust that may reach 35 kilometers (22 miles) in thickness. Examples include Japan, Indonesia, These island arcs are built on material generated by earlier episodes of subduction or on small slivers of continental crust that have rafted away from the mainland.

Indian plate 55 million years ago 71 million years ago had been placed in a gigantic vise. The result is the formation of a new mountain belt composed of deformed sedimentary and metamorphic rocks that often contain slivers of oceanic lithosphere. Such a collision began about 50 million years ago, when the subcontinent of India rammed into Asia, producing the Himalayas—the most spectacular collision, the continental crust buckled and fractured and was generally shortened horizontally and thickened vertically. In addition to the Himalayas, several Appalachians, and Urals, formed as continental fragments collided. This topic will be considered further in Chapter 14.

1. Explain why the rate of lithosphere production is roughly equal to the rate of lithosphere 2. Why does oceanic lithosphere subduct, while continental lithosphere does not? 3. What characteristic of a slab of oceanic lithosphere leads to the formation of deep-ocean trenches instead of shallow trenches? 4. What distinguishes a continental volcanic arc from a volcanic island arc? 5. Briefly describe how mountain belts such as the Himalayas form.

Describe the relative motion along a transform fault boundary and be able to locate several examples on a plate boundary map. Along a transform plate boundary, also called a transform fault, plates slide horizontally past one another, without the production or destruction of lithosphere. The nature of transform faults connected two spreading centers (divergent boundaries) or, less commonly, two trenches (convergent boundaries). Most transform faults are found on the ocean floor, where they offset segments Most transform faults offset segments of a spreading center, producing a zigzag-appearing plate that are roughly perpendicular to the offset ridge segments. They include both the active transform fault and its “fossilized” trace.

Transform faults facilitate plate motion Seafloor generated along the Juan de Fuca Ridge moves southeastward, past the Pacific plate. Eventually it subducts beneath the North American plate. Thus, this transform fault connects a spreading center (divergent boundary) to a subduction zone Andreas Fault, a transform fault that connects a spreading center located in the Gulf of California and the Mendocino Fault.

The Mendocino transform fault facilitates the movement of seafloor generated at the Juan de Fuca Ridge by allowing it to slip southeastward past the Pacific plate to its American plate.

transform faults lie only between the two offset ridge segments and are generally defined by weak, shallow earthquakes. Here seafloor produced at one ridge axis moves in the opposite direction of seafloor produced at an opposing ridge segment. Thus, between the ridge segments, these adjacent slabs of oceanic crust are grinding past each other along a transform fault. Beyond the ridge crests are inactive zones, where the fractures are preserved as linear topographic depressions. The trend of these fracture zones roughly parallels the direction of plate motion at the time of their formation. Thus, these structures help geologists map the direction of plate motion in the geologic past. Transform faults also provide the means by which the oceanic crust created at ridge crests can be transported to a site of destruction—the deep-ocean trenches. States and Canada. The southern end of this plate is Fault. This transform boundary connects the Juan de Fuca Ridge to the Cascadia subduction zone. Therefore, it facilitates the movement of the crustal material created at the Juan de Fuca Ridge to its destination beneath the North American continent. Like the Mendocino Fault, most other transform fault boundaries are located within the ocean basins; however, a few cut through continental crust. Two examples are the earthquake-prone San Andreas Fault of California and New Zealand’s Alpine Fault. Notice a spreading center located in the Gulf of California Fault. Along the San Andreas Fault, the Pacific plate is moving toward the northwest, past the North American plate. If this movement continues, the part of California west of the fault zone, including Mexico’s Baja Peninsula, will become an island off the west coast of the United States and Canada. However, a more immediate concern is the earthquake activity triggered by movements along this fault system.

Colorado Rockies and created a large delta at the Question 2 had not been deposited, the Gulf of California would extend northward to include the inland sea shown in this satellite image. What is the name of this inland sea?

Explain why plates such as the African and Antarctic plates are increasing in size, while the Pacific plate is decreasing in size. Although Earth’s total surface area does not change, the size and shape of individual plates are constantly changing. For example, the African and Antarctic plates, which are mainly bounded by divergent boundaries—sites of seafloor production—are continually growing in size as new lithosphere is added to their margins. By contrast, the Pacific plate is being consumed into the mantle along much of its flanks faster that it is growing along the East Pacific Rise and thus is diminishing in size. Another result of plate motion is that boundaries also migrate. For example, the position of the Peru–Chile trench, which is the result of the Nazca plate being bent downward as it descends beneath the South American of the westward drift of the South American plate relative to the Nazca plate, the Peru–Chile trench has migrated in a westerly direction as well. Plate boundaries can also be created or destroyed in response to changes in the 200 Million Years Ago forces acting on the lithosphere. Plates carrying continental crust are presently moving toward one another. For example, in the South Pacific, Australia is moving northward toward southern Asia. If Australia continues its northward migration, the boundary separating it from Asia will disappear as these plates become one. Other plates are moving apart. Recall that the Red Sea is the site of a relatively new spreading center that came into existence less than 20 million years ago, when the Arabian Peninsula began to break apart from Africa. The breakup of Pangaea is a classic example of how plate boundaries change through geologic time.

Wegener used evidence from fossils, rock types, and ancient climates to create a jigsaw-puzzle fit of the continents, thereby creating his supercontinent of China and Pangaea. By employing modern tools not available Wegener, geologists have re-created Pangaea as it appeared 200 million the steps in the breakup Ag o years ago, in the late Triassic period. of this supercontiIndia nent, an event that The first major event during the breakup of Pangaea began about 180 was the separation of North America and Africa, which marked the opening of the North Atlantic. million years China and ago. From this By 90 million years ago, the South Atlantic had opened. work, the dates Continued breakup in the Southern Hemisphere led to when individual the separation of Africa, India, and Antarctica. crustal fragments During the past 20 separated from one By 20 million years ago million years Arabia and their relative s Ag o India had begun its rifted from Africa 50 Mill motions have been continued its northward journey. ongoing collision with Eurasia to create the while Baja California, well established Himalayas and the separated from Mexico . Tibetan Highlands. to form the Gulf of An impor0 tant conseIndia quence of PanAmerica gaea’s breakup was the creation of ocean basin: the Atlantic. As you can see in FigAustralia ure 2.23, splitting of the supercontinent did not occur Gulf of America simultaneously along the margins of the Atlantic. The Here, the continental crust was highly fractured, providAntarctica ing pathways for huge quantities of fluid lavas to reach the surface. Today, these lavas are represented by weathered igneous rocks found along States—primarily buried beneath the sedimentary rocks that form the continental shelf. Radiometric dating of these solidified lavas indicates that rifting began between 200 million and 190 million years ago. This time span represents the “birth date” for this section Atlantic began to open near the tip of what is now South Africa. As this zone of rifting migrated northward, it gradually opened the South Atlantic (Figures Mediterranean, the last remnant of a once-vast ocean called the Tethys Ocean, and the initiation of another led to the separation of Africa and Antarctica and sent tralia will be astride the equator and, along with New about 50 million years ago, Australia had separated from Guinea, will be on a collision course with Asia. MeanAntarctica, and the South Atlantic had emerged as a full- while, North and South America will begin to separate, while the Atlantic and Indian Oceans will continue to grow, at the expense of the Pacific Ocean. event that began about 50 million years ago and created the Himalayas and the Tibetan Highlands. About the nature of the globe 250 million years in the future. In this scenario the Atlantic seafloor will eventucompleted the breakup of the northern landmass. During ally become old and dense enough to form subducthe past 20 million years or so of Earth’s history, Arabia tion zones around much of its margins, not unlike the has rifted from Africa to form the Red Sea, and Baja present-day Pacific basin. Continued subduction of the California has separated from Mexico to form the Gulf floor of the Atlantic Ocean will result in the closing of the Atlantic basin and the collision of the Amerijoined North America and South America to produce our cas with the Eurasian–African landmass to form the globe’s familiar modern appearance.

The world as it may look 50 million years from now This reconstruction is highly idealized and based on the assumption that the processes that caused the breakup of Pangaea will continue to operate.

for the possible closing of the Atlantic comes from a similar event, when an ocean predating the Atlantic closed during Pangaea’s formation. Australia is also projected to collide with Southeast Asia by that time. Earth as it may appear 250 million years from will end when the continents reorganize into the next Such projections, although interesting, must be viewed with considerable skepticism because many assumptions must be correct for these events to unfold as just described. Nevertheless, changes in the shapes and positions of continents that are equally profound will undoubtedly occur for many hundreds of millions of years to come. Only after much more of Earth’s internal heat has been lost will the engine that drives plate motions cease.

List and explain the evidence used to support the plate tectonics theory. Some of the evidence supporting continental drift was presented in Section 2.3. With the development of plate tectonics theory, researchers began testing this new model of how Earth works. Although new supporting data were obtained, it has often been new interpretations of already existing data that have swayed the tide of opinion.

Glomar Challenger, a drilling ship capable of working in water thousands of meters deep, was built. Hundreds of Some of the most convincing evidence for seafloor holes were drilled through the layers of sediments that spreading came from the Deep Sea Drilling Project, blanket the ocean crust, as well as into the basaltic rocks which operated from 1966 until 1983. One of the early below. Rather than use radiometric dating, which can be goals of the project was to gather samples of the ocean unreliable on oceanic rocks because of the alteration of floor in order to establish its age. To accomplish this, the basalt by seawater, researchers used the fossil remains of microorganisms found in the sediments resting directly on the crust to date the seafloor at each site. Core samples show that the thickness of sediments increases with increasing distance from the ridge crest. When the oldest sediment from each drill site was plotted against its distance from the ridge crest, the plot showed that the sediments increased in age with increasing distance from the Age of seafloor supported the seafloor-spreading hypothesis, which predicted that Drilling ship collects core the youngest oceanic crust would be samples of seafloor sediments and basaltic crust found at the ridge crest, the site of seafloor production, and the oldest oceanic crust would be located adja) cent to the continents. Ocean crust ( The distribution and thickness of ocean-floor sediments provided additional verification of seafloor spreading. Drill cores from Chikyu is a state-of-the-art revealed that sediments drilling ship designed to are almost entirely absent drill up to 7,000 meters on the ridge crest and that (more than 4 miles) below sediment thickness increases the seafloor. with increasing distance sediment distribution should be expected if the seafloorspreading hypothesis is correct. The data collected by the Deep Sea Drilling Project also reinforced the idea that the ocean basins are geologically young because no seafloor older than 180 million years was found. By comparison, most continental crust exceeds several hundred million years in age, and some has been located that exceeds 4 billion years in age. In 1983, a new ocean-drilling program was launched by the Joint Oceanographic Institutions for Deep Earth uses multiple vessels for exploration, including the massive 210-meter-long (nearly 690-foot-long) Chikyu (“planet complete section of the ocean crust, from top to bottom.

Ages given in millions of Hot-spot volcanism and the formation of the Hawaiian chain Radiometric dating of the Hawaiian Islands shows that volcanic activity increases in age moving away from the Big Island of Hawaii.

Hot spots and hot-spot tracks Locations of some well-documented hot spots and hot-spot tracks thought to be associated with mantle plumes.

Earth’s magnetic field Earth’s magnetic field consists of lines of force much like those a giant bar magnet would produce if placed at the center of interesting discovery. The magnetic alignment of iron-rich minerals in lava flows of different ages indicated that the position of the paleomagnetic poles had changed through measured from Europe, revealed that during the past 500 million years, the pole had gradually “wandered” from a location near Hawaii northeastward to its present location over the Arctic Ocean. This was strong evidence that either the magnetic north pole had migrated, an idea known as polar wandering, or that the poles had remained in place and the continents had drifted beneath them—in other words, Europe had drifted relative to the magnetic north pole. * Some sediments and sedimentary rocks also contain enough iron-bearing mineral grains to acquire a measurable amount of magnetization.

Although the magnetic poles are known to move in a somewhat erratic path, studies of paleomagnetism from numerous locations show that the positions of the magnetic poles, averaged over thousands of years, correspond closely to the positions of the geographic poles. Therefore, a more acceptable explanation for the apparent polar wander was provided by Wegener’s hypothesis: If the magnetic poles remain stationary, their apparent movement is produced by continental drift. Further evidence for continental drift came a few years later, when a polar-wandering path was constructed 300 million years or so, the paths for North America and Europe were found to be similar in direction—but separated by about 5000 kilometers (3000 miles). Then, during the middle of the Mesozoic era (180 million years The explanation for these curves is that North America and Europe were joined until the Mesozoic, when the Atlantic began to open. From this time forward, these continents continuously moved apart. When North America and Europe are moved back to their pre-drift positions, as Europe were once joined and moved relative to the poles as part of the same continent.

Axis of de Fuca Magnetic reversals and seafloor spreading When new basaltic rocks form at mid-ocean ridges, they magnetize according to Earth’s existing magnetic field. Hence, oceanic crust provides a permanent record of each reversal of our planet’s magnetic field over the past 200 million years.

Ocean floor as a magnetic intensities are recorded when a magnetometer is towed across a segment of the symmetrical stripes of low- and high-intensity magnetism that parallel the Ridge. The stripes of highintensity magnetism occur where normally magnetized oceanic rocks enhanced the existing magnetic field. Conversely, the lowintensity stripes are regions where the crust is polarized in the reverse direction, which weakens the existing magnetic field.

this technique for the past few million years. The major divisions of the magnetic time scale are called chrons and last for roughly 1 million years. As more measurements became available, researchers realized that several short-lived reversals (less than 200,000 years long) often occurred during a single chron. Meanwhile, oceanographers had begun magnetic surveys of the ocean floor in conjunction with their efforts to construct detailed maps of seafloor topography. These magnetic surveys were accomplished by towing very sensitive instruments, called magnetomI to map variations in the strength of Earth’s magnetic field that arise from differences in the magnetic properties of the underlying crustal rocks. The first comprehensive study of this type was carried out off the Pacific coast of North America and had an unexpected outcome. Researchers discovered alternating stripes of high- and low-intensity magnetism, as shown in high- and low-intensity stripes supported the concept of seafloor spreading. Vine and Matthews suggested that the stripes of high-intensity magnetism are regions where the paleomagnetism of the ocean crust these rocks enhance (reinforce) Earth’s magnetic field. Conversely, the low-intensity stripes are regions where the ocean crust is polarized in the reverse direction and therefore weaken the existing magnetic field. But how do parallel stripes of normally and reversely magnetized rock become distributed across the ocean floor? Vine and Matthews reasoned that as magma solidifies along narrow rifts at the crest of an oceanic ridge, it is magnetized with the polarity of the existing magnetic field . Because of seafloor spreading, this strip of Earth’s magnetic field reverses polarity, any newly formed seafloor having the opposite polarity would form in the middle of the old strip. Gradually, the two halves of the old strip would be carried in opposite directions, away from the ridge crest. Subsequent reversals would build a pattern both trailing edges of the spreading ocean floor, we should expect the pattern of stripes (width and polarity) found on one side of an oceanic ridge to be a mirror image of those Ridge just south of Iceland reveals a pattern of magnetic stripes exhibiting a remarkable degree of symmetry in relation to the ridge axis.

1. What is the age of the oldest sediments recovered using deep-ocean drilling? How do the ages of these sediments compare to the ages of the oldest continental rocks? 2. How do sedimentary cores from the ocean floor support the concept of seafloor spreading? 3. Assuming that hot spots remain fixed, in what direction was the Pacific plate moving while the Hawaiian Islands were forming? related the seafloor-spreading hypothesis to magnetic reversals.

Is Plate Motion Measured? Describe two methods researchers use to measure relative plate motion. techniques not only confirm that lithospheric plates move but allow us to trace those movements back in geologic time.

Using ocean-drilling ships, researchers have obtained dates for hundreds of locations on the ocean floor. By knowing the age of a sample and its distance from the ridge axis where it was generated, an average rate of plate motion can be calculated. Scientists used these data, combined with their knowledge of paleomagnetism stored in hardened lavas on the ocean floor and seafloor topography, to create from the present to about 30 million years ago. The width of the bands indicates how much crust formed during that time period. For example, the reddish-orange band along the East Pacific Rise is more than three times Ridge. Therefore, the rate of seafloor spreading has been approximately three times faster in the Pacific basin than Maps of this type also provide clues to the current direction of plate movement. Notice the offsets in the ridges; these are transform faults that connect the spreading centers. Recall that transform faults are aligned parallel to the direction of spreading. When measured carefully, transform faults reveal the direction of plate movement. To establish the direction of plate motion in the past, geologists can examine the long fracture zones that extend for hundreds or even thousands of kilometers from ridge crests. Fracture zones are inactive extensions of transform faults and therefore preserve a record of past directions of plate motion. Unfortunately, most of the ocean floor is less than 180 million years old, so to look deeper into the past, researchers must rely on paleomagnetic evidence provided by continental rocks.

Antarctic plate Millions of years sites repeatedly over a number of years. Data obtained from these and other techniques are moving in a northwesterly direction and approaching is retreating from a location in England at a speed of 1.7 confirming small-scale crustal movements such as those that occur along faults in regions known to be tectonically active (for example, the San Andreas Fault).

Describe plate–mantle convection and explain two of the primary driving forces of plate motion. Researchers are in general agreement that some type of convection—where hot mantle rocks rise and cold, dense oceanic lithosphere sinks—is the ultimate driver of plate tectonics. Many of the details of this convective flow, however, remain topics of debate in the scientific community.

Convection is a type of heat transfer that involves the movement of a substance.

Ridge push is a gravity-driven force that results from the elevated position of the ridge.

Geophysical evidence confirms that although the mantle consists almost entirely of solid rock, it is hot and weak enough to exhibit a slow, fluid-like convective flow. The simplest type of convection is analogous to heating a pot of water on a stove. Heating the base of a pot causes the water to become less dense (more buoyant), causing it to rise in relatively thin sheets or blobs that spread out at the surface. As the surface layer cools, its density increases, and the cooler water sinks back to the bottom of the pot, where it is reheated until it achieves enough buoyancy to rise again. Mantle convection is similar to, but considerably more complex than, the model just described. Geologists generally agree that subduction of cold, dense slabs of oceanic lithosphere is a major driving force of plate motion. This phenomenon, called slab pull, occurs because cold slabs of oceanic lithosphere are more dense than the underlying warm asthenosphere and hence “sink like a rock”—meaning that they are pulled down into the mantle by gravity. Another important driving force is ridge push (see from the elevated position of the oceanic ridge, which causes slabs of lithosphere to “slide” down the flanks of the ridge. Ridge push appears to contribute far less to plate motions than slab pull. The primary evidence for this is that the fastest-moving plates—Pacific, Nazca, and Cocos plates—have extensive subduction zones along their margins. By contrast, the Atlantic basin, which is nearly devoid of subduction zones, is one of the lowest, at about 2.5 centimeters (1 inch) per year.

Friction between the overriding plate and the subducting plate resists plate motion.

Mantle drag resists plate Slab pull results from the sinking of a cold, dense slab of oceanic lithosphere and is the major driving force of plate motion.

Although the subduction of cold, dense lithospheric plates appears to be the dominant force acting on plates, other factors are also at work. Flow in the mantle, perhaps best described as “mantle drag,” is also thought to affect plate, mantle drag enhances plate motion. However, if the asthenosphere is moving more slowly than the plate, or if it is moving in the opposite direction, this force tends to resist plate motion. Another type of resistance to plate motion occurs along some subduction zones, where friction between the overriding plate and the descending slab generates significant earthquake activity.

Although convection in the mantle has yet to be fully understood, researchers generally agree on the following: r Convective flow in the rocky 2900-kilometer- (1800 mile-) thick mantle—in which warm, buoyant rock rises and cooler, denser material sinks—is the underlying driving force for plate movement.

Convection in the mantle enhances plate motion when the velocity of the asthenosphere exceeds that of the overlying plate.

Spreading center Subduction of dense oceanic ducted int t con oceanic lithosphere are the downward limbs of convection cells, while rising mantle plumes carry hot material from the core–mantle boundary toward the surface.

Cold descending oceanic plate lithosphere and a sluggish lower layer that carries heat upward without appreciably mixing with the layer above.

One group of researchers favor some type of whole-mantle convection model, also called the plume model, in which cold oceanic lithosphere sinks to great depths and stirs the entire mantle ultimate burial ground for these subducting lithospheric slabs is the core–mantle boundary. The downward flow of these subducting slabs is balanced by buoyantly rising mantle plumes that transport hot mantle rock toward the Two kinds of plumes have been proposed—narrow tube-like plumes and giant upwellings, often referred to as mega-plumes. The long, narrow plumes are thought to originate from the core–mantle boundary and produce hot-spot volcanism of the type associated with the Hawaiian Islands, Iceland, and Yellowstone. Scientists believe that areas of large mega-plumes, as shown in why southern Africa has an elevation much higher than would be predicted for a stable continental landmass. In the whole-mantle convection model, heat for both types of plumes is thought to arise mainly from Earth’s core, while the deep mantle provides a source for chemically distinct magmas. However, some researchers have questioned that idea and instead propose that the source of magma for most hot spot volcanism is found in the upper mantle (asthenosphere).

Some researchers argue that the mantle resembles a “layer cake” divided at a depth of perhaps 660 kilometers (410 miles) but no deeper than this layered model has two zones of convection—a thin, dynamic layer in the upper mantle and a thick, larger, sluggish one located below. As with the whole-mantle model, the downward convective flow is driven by the subduction of cold, dense oceanic lithosphere. However, rather than reach the lower mantle, these subducting layer in the layer cake model is littered with recycled oceanic lithosphere of various ages. Melting of these fragments is thought to be the source of magma for some of the volcanism that occurs away from plate boundaries, In contrast to the active upper mantle, the lower mantle is sluggish and does not provide material to support volcanism at the surface. Very slow convection within this layer likely carries heat upward, but very little mixing between these two layers is thought to occur. Geologists continue to debate the nature of the convective flow in the mantle. As they investigate the possibilities, perhaps a hypothesis that combines features from the layer cake model and the whole-mantle convection model will emerge.

1. Describe slab pull and ridge push. Which of these forces appears to contribute more to plate motion? 2. Briefly describe the two models of mantle–plate 3. What geologic processes are associated with the upward and downward circulation in the mantle?

The Cave of Crystals, Chihuahua, Mexico, contains giant gypsum crystals, some of the largest natural crystals ever Geographic Stock /Getty Images) arth’s crust and oceans are home to a wide variety of useful and essential minerals. Most people are familiar with the common uses of many basic metals, including aluminum in beverage cans, copper in electrical wiring, and gold and silver in jewelry. But some people are not aware that pencil “lead” contains the greasy-feeling mineral graphite and that bath powders and many cosmetics contain the mineral talc. Moreover, many do not know that dentists use drill bits impregnated with diamonds to drill through tooth enamel. In fact, practically every manufactured product contains materials obtained from minerals. In addition to the economic uses of rocks and minerals, every process that geologists study in some way depends on the properties of these basic Earth materials. Events such as volcanic eruptions, mountain building, weathering and erosion, and even earthquakes involve rocks and minerals. Consequently, a basic knowledge of Earth materials is essential to understanding all geologic phenomena.

a repetitive, orderly arrangement of atoms, whereas substances such a glass 1. Naturally occurring. Minerals form by natural geologic processes. Synthetic materials, meaning those produced in a laboratory or by human intervention, are not considered minerals. 2. Generally inorganic. Inorganic crystalline solids, such as ordinary table salt (halite), that are found naturally in the ground are considered minerals. (Organic compounds, on the other hand, are generally not. Sugar, a crystalline solid like salt but extracted from sugarcane or sugar beets, is a common example of such an organic compound.) Many marine animals secrete inorganic compounds, such as calcium carbonate (calcite), in the form of shells and coral reefs. If these materials are buried and become part of the rock record, geologists consider them minerals. 3. Solid substance. Only solid crystalline substances are considered minerals. Ice (frozen water) fits this criterion and is considered a mineral, whereas liquid water and water vapor do not. The exception is mercury, which is found in its liquid form in nature. 4. Orderly crystalline structure. Minerals are crystalline substances, made up of atoms (or ions) that are arranged in an orderly, repetitive manner. This orderly packing of atoms is reflected in the regularly shaped objects called crystals. Some naturally occurring solids, such as volcanic glass (obsidian), lack a repetitive atomic structure and are not considered 5. Definite chemical composition that allows for some variation. Minerals are chemical compounds having compositions that can be expressed by a chemical formula. For example, the common mineral quartz This proportion of silicon to oxygen is true for any sample of pure quartz, regardless of its origin. However, the compositions of some minerals vary within specific, well-defined limits. This occurs because certain elements can substitute for others of similar size without changing the mineral’s internal structure.

in such a way that their individual properties are retained. Note that the different minerals that make up granite can be easily identified. However, some rocks example is the sedimentary rock limestone, which is an impure mass of the mineral calcite. In addition, some rocks are composed of nonmineral matter. These include the volcanic rocks obsidian and pumice, which are noncrystalline glassy substances, and coal, which consists of solid organic debris. Although this chapter deals primarily with the nature of minerals, keep in mind that most rocks are simply aggregates of minerals. Because the properties of rocks are determined largely by the chemical composition and crystalline structure of the minerals contained within them, we will first consider these Earth materials.

In contrast to minerals, rocks are more loosely defined. Simply, a rock is any solid mass of mineral, or mineral-like, matter that occurs naturally as part of our planet. Most rocks, like the aggregates of several different minerals. The term aggregate implies that the minerals are joined underground mining has over open pit mining? what change in working conditions would have occurred as it evolved from an underground mine to an open pit mine?

he accompanying image is of the world’s largest Australia. Known as the Super Pit, it originally consisted of a number of small underground mines that were consolidated into a single, open pit mine. Each year, about 28 metric tons of gold are extracted from the 15 million tons of rock shattered by blasting and then transported to the surface.

Compare and contrast the three primary particles contained in atoms. When minerals are carefully examined, even under optical microscopes, the innumerable tiny particles of their internal structures are not visible. Nevertheless, scientists have discovered that all matter, including minerals, is composed of minute building blocks called atoms—the smallest particles that cannot be chemically split. Atoms, in turn, contain even smaller particles: protons and neutrons located in a central nucleus that is surrounded by electrons.

Neutrons (charge 0) Electrons (charge –1) charges of protons and electrons are equal in magnitude but opposite in polarity, so when these two particles are paired, the charges cancel each other out. Since matter typically contains equal numbers of positively charged protons and negatively charged electrons, most substances are electrically neutral. Illustrations sometimes show electrons orbiting the nucleus in a manner that resembles the planets of our depiction is to show electrons as a cloud of negative charges arrangements of electrons show that they move about the nucleus in regions called principal shells, each with an associated energy level. In addition, each shell can hold a specific number of electrons, with the outermost shell containing valence electrons. These electrons can be transferred to or shared with other atoms to form chemical bonds. Most of the atoms in the universe (except hydrogen and helium) were created inside massive stars by nuclear fusion and released into interstellar space during hot, fiery supernova explosions. As this ejected material cooled, the newly Tendency to formed nuclei attracted electrons to lose outermost complete their atomic structure. At to uncover full outer shell the temperatures found at Earth’s surface, all free atoms (those not bonded to other atoms) have a full complement of electrons—one for each proton in the nucleus.

Lanthanide series Actinide series Step-like line divides metals from nonmetals.

Examples of minerals that are composed of a single element (Photos by Dennis two-letter symbol. The atomic numbers and masses for each element are also shown on the periodic table. Atoms of the naturally occurring elements are the basic building blocks of Earth’s minerals. Most elements join with atoms of other elements to form chemical compounds. Therefore, most minerals are chemical compounds composed of atoms of two or more elements.

These include the minerals quartz (SiO2), halite (NaCl), and calcite (CaCO3). However, a few minerals, such as native (occurring in pure form in nature) copper, diamonds, sulfur, and gold, are made entirely of atoms of only one element.

1. Make a simple sketch of an atom and label its three main particles. Explain how these particles differ from one another. 2. What is the significance of valence electrons?

Except for a group of elements known as the noble gases, atoms bond to one another under the temperature and pressure conditions that occur on Earth. Some atoms bond to form ionic compounds, some form molecules, and still others form metallic substances. Why does this happen? Experiments show that electrical forces hold atoms together and bond them to each other. These electrical attractions lower the total energy of the bonded atoms, which, in turn, generally makes them more stable. Consequently, atoms that are bonded in compounds tend to be more stable than atoms that are free (not bonded).

shorthand way of representing the number of valence electrons, and so on, up to eight valence electrons in The noble gases have very stable electron arrangements with eight valence electrons (except helium which Dot diagrams for certain elements Each dot represents a valence electron found in the outermost principal shell.

has two) and, therefore, tend to lack chemical reactivity. Many other atoms gain, lose, or share electrons during chemical reactions, ending up with electron arrangements of the noble gases. This observation led to a chemical guideline known as the octet rule: Atoms tend to gain, lose, or share electrons until they are surrounded by eight valence electrons. Although there are exceptions to the octet rule, it is a useful rule of thumb for understanding chemical bonding. When an atom’s outer shell does not contain eight electrons, it is likely to chemically bond to other atoms valence shell of electrons. Some atoms do this by transferring all their valence electrons to other atoms, so that an inner shell becomes the full valence shell. When the valence electrons are transferred between the elements to form ions, the bond is an ionic bond. When the electrons are shared between the atoms, the bond is a covalent bond. When the valence electrons are shared among all the atoms in a substance, the bonding is metallic.

Perhaps the easiest type of bond to visualize is the ionic bond, in which one atom gives up one or more valence electrons to another atom to form ions—positively and negatively charged atoms. The atom that loses electrons becomes a positive ion, and the atom that gains electrons becomes a negative ion. Oppositely charged ions are strongly attracted to one another and join to form ionic Consider the ionic bonding that occurs between sodium (Na) and chlorine (Cl) to produce the solid ionic compound sodium chloride—the mineral halite atom gives up its single valence electron to chlorine and, as a result, becomes a positively charged sodium ion. Chlorine, on the other hand, gains one electron and becomes a negatively charged chloride ion. We know that ions having unlike charges attract. Thus, an ionic bond is the attraction of oppositely charged ions to one another, and it produces an electrically neutral ionic compound. chlorine ions in ordinary table salt. Notice that salt consists of alternating sodium and chlorine ions, positioned in such a manner that each positive ion is attracted to and surrounded on all sides by negative ions and vice versa. This arrangement maximizes the attraction between ions with opposite charges while minimizing the repulsion between ions with identical charges. Thus, ionic compounds consist of an orderly arrangement of oppositely charged ions assembled in a definite ratio that provides overall electrical neutrality.

Sometimes the forces that hold atoms together cannot be understood on the basis of the attraction of oppositely charged ions. One example is the hydrogen molecule tightly and no ions are present. The strong attractive force that holds two hydrogen atoms together results from a covalent bond, a chemical bond formed by the sharing of one or more valence electrons between a pair of atoms. Imagine two hydrogen atoms (each with one proton and one electron) approaching one another, as words, the two electrons are shared by both hydrogen atoms and are attracted simultaneously by the positive in the solid ionic compound sodium chloride (NaCl), table salt.

Formation of the ionic compound sodium Formation of a covalent bond When hydrogen atoms bond, the negatively charged electrons are shared by both hydrogen atoms and attracted simultaneously by the positive charge of the proton in the nucleus of each atom.

Metallic Bonds: Electrons Free to Move Two hydrogen atoms combine to form a hydrogen molecule, held together by the attraction of oppositely charged particles—positively charged protons in each nucleus and negatively charged electrons that surround these nuclei.

charge of the proton in the nucleus of each atom. In this situation the hydrogen atoms do not form ions, rather the force that holds these atoms together arises from the attraction of oppositely charged particles— positively charged protons in the nuclei and negatively charged electrons that surround these nuclei. Metallic bonding Metallic bonding is the result of each atom contributing its valence electrons to a common pool of electrons that are free to move throughout the entire metallic structure. The attraction between the “sea” of negatively charged electrons and the positive ions produces the metallic bonds that give metals their unique properties.

The central core of each metallic atom, which has an overall positive charge, consists of the nucleus and inner electrons.

We have described the extremes in chemical bonding—complete transfer of electrons and perfect sharing of electrons. As you may suspect, many chemical bonds are actually hybrids that exhibit some degree of electron sharing and some degree of electron transfer. Bonds can be found with almost every possible combination of covalent and ionic character. For example, silicate minerals are composed of silicon and oxygen atoms that are joined together with other elements by bonds that display characteristics of both ionic and covalent bonds.

are made entirely of metal atoms packed tightly together in an orderly way. The bonding that holds these atoms together results from each atom contributing its valence electrons to a common pool of electrons, which freely move throughout the entire metallic structure. The contribution of one or more valence electrons leaves an array of positive ions immersed in a “sea” of valence electrons, The attraction between this “sea” of negatively charged electrons and the positive ions produces the metallic bonds that give metals their unique properties. Metals are good conductors of electricity because the valence electrons are free to move from one atom to another. Metals are also malleable, which means they can be hammered into thin sheets, and ductile, which means they can be drawn into thin wires. By contrast, ionic and covalent solids tend to be brittle, and fracture when stress is applied. Consider the difference between dropping a metal frying pan and a ceramic plate onto a concrete floor.

are free to move throughout the structure, surrounds the metallic atoms. 1. What is the difference between an atom and an negative ion? 3. Briefly distinguish among ionic, covalent, and metallic bonding and the role that electrons play in each.

Describe three mechanisms that generate minerals and rocks. Minerals form through a wide variety of processes and in many different environments. We will examine three ways minerals can form: precipitation of mineral matter from a solution, crystallization of molten rock by cooling, and mineral matter deposition as a result of biological processes. Because most rocks are aggregates of minerals, they also form by these same processes. In Chapter 8 we will examine the ways existing minerals can be altered to form new minerals through the process of metamorphism.

Mining salt in Bolivia’s Salar de Uyuni, the largest known reserve of lithium chloride in the world. Lithium is in great demand because it is used to manufacture batteries for cell phones, computers, and electric and hybrid automobiles. Perhaps the most familiar way in which minerals grow is from an aqueous (water) solution containing dissolved material matter (ions). As long as the solution is not saturated, the motion of the dissolved ions keeps them from joining together. Two factors—a drop in temperature and water lost through evaporation—cause the solution to become closer to reaching saturation. Once saturation is reached, the ions begin to bond, forming crystalline solids (called salts) that precipitate from (settle out of) the solution. The Great Salt Lake in Utah and Bolivia’s great salt flat, Salar de Uyuni, provide good examples of this process at work. Because they are located in arid regions with high evaporation rates, these water bodies regularly precipitate the minerals halite, sylvite, and gypsum, as well as other soluble salts, called evaporite deposits. Worldwide, extensive evaporite deposits, some exceeding hundreds of meters in thickness, provide evidence of ancient seas that have long since evaporated (see Minerals can also precipitate from slowly moving groundwater filling in fractures and voids in rocks and sediments. One interesting example, called a geode, is a somewhat spherically shaped object with inwardprojecting crystals that were gradually deposited by groundwater. Geodes sometimes contain spectacular crystals of quartz, calcite, or other less common minerals.

Geodes like this one form when silica dissolved in groundwater precipitates to form quartz crystals that grow within cavities in rocks.

Gold has been treasured since long before recorded history for its beauty.

In 1970, South Africa dominated global gold production—accounting for 79% of production throughout the world.

Although its nickname is the “Silver State,” Nevada accounts for about more than all other countries, except for China, Australia, and Russia.

Native gold Because gold does not easily react with other elements, it often occurs as a native element in nuggets found in stream deposits or as grains in igneous rocks.

About 50% of gold is used in jewelry. Another 40% is used for currency and investment, and about 10% is used in industry, including electronic devices such as cell phones and televisions. Gold is also used in gourmet foods and cocktails as a decorative ingredient. Because metallic gold is one of the least reactive materials, it has no taste, provides no nutritional value, and leaves the human body unaltered.

1. What is the chemical symbol for gold? 2. What is the term for the property of tenacity, which allows gold to be easily hammered into different shapes?

minerals calcite and aragonite. When the remains of these shells are buried, they become the major component of the sedimentary rock limestone. Limestone is a very common rock at Earth’s surface and is visible across Although most water-dwelling organisms produce hard parts made of calcium carbonate, some, such as diatoms and radiolarians, produce glasslike silica skeletons. During burial, this material forms microscopic silicon dioxide (quartz) crystals that are the main constituents of rocks such as chert and flint.

Some mineral properties, called diagnostic properties, are particularly useful in identifying an unknown mineral. The mineral halite, for example has a salty taste. Because so few minerals share this property, a salty taste is considered a diagnostic property of halite. Other properties of certain minerals vary among different specimens of the same mineral. These properties are referred to as ambiguous properties.

Of the many optical properties of minerals, their luster, their ability to transmit light, their color, and their streak are most frequently used for mineral identification. Color variations in minerals Some minerals, such as quartz, occur in a variety of colors. (Photo by reflected from the surface of a mineral is known as luster. Minerals that have the appearance of a metal, regardless of color, are said to have a a dull coating or tarnish when exposed to the atmosphere. Because they are not as shiny as samples with freshly broken surfaces, these samples are often said to exhibit a submetallic luster Most minerals have a nonmetallic luster and are described using various adjectives, such as vitreous or glassy. Other nonmetallic minerals are described as having a dull, or earthy, luster (a dull appearance like soil) or a pearly luster (such as a pearl or the inside of a clamshell). Still others exhibit a silky luster (like satin cloth) or a greasy luster (as though coated in oil).

Common crystal shapes of pyrite Although the color of a mineral is not always helpful in identification, the streak, which is the color of the powdered mineral, can be very useful.

a streak when rubbed across a streak plate. Quartz, for example, is harder than a porcelain streak plate and therefore leaves no streak.) Streak can also help distinguish between minerals with metallic luster and those with nonmetallic luster. Metallic minerals generally have a dense, dark streak, whereas minerals with nonmetallic luster typically have a light-colored streak.

Mineralogists use the term crystal shape, or habit, to refer to the common or characteristic shape of individual crystals or aggregates of crystals. Some minerals tend to grow equally in all three dimensions, whereas others tend to be elongated in one direction or flattened minerals have crystals that exhibit regular polygons that are helpful in their identification. For example, magnetite crystals sometimes occur as octahedrons, garnets often form dodecahedrons, and halite and fluorite crystals tend to grow as cubes or near-cubes. Minerals tend to have one common crystal shape, but a few, such as the pyrite have two or more characteristic crystal shapes.

Streak plate (6.5) Glass & knife blade (5.5) Mohs scale of hardness, with the hardnesses of some common objects. the Mohs relative hardness scale and an absolute hardness scale.

In the laboratory, common objects used to determine the hardness of a mineral can include a human fingernail, which has a hardness of about 2.5, a copper penny (3.5), and a piece of glass (5.5). The mineral gypsum, which has a hardness of 2, can be easily scratched with a fingernail. On the other hand, the mineral calcite, which has a hardness of 3, will scratch a fingernail but will not scratch glass. Quartz, one of the hardest common minerals, will easily scratch glass. Diamonds, hardest of all, scratch anything, including other diamonds.

In the crystal structure of many minerals, some atomic bonds are weaker than others. It is along these weak bonds that minerals tend to break when they are stressed. Cleavage (kleiben 5 carve) is the tendency of a mineral to break (cleave) along planes of weak bonding. Not all minerals have cleavage, but those that do can be identified by the relatively smooth, flat surfaces that are produced when the mineral is broken. The simplest type of cleavage is exhibited by the micas. Because these minerals have very weak bonds in one direction, they cleave to form thin, flat sheets. Some minerals have excellent cleavage in one, two, three, or more directions, whereas others exhibit fair or poor cleavage, and still others have no cleavage at all. When minerals break evenly in more than one direction, cleavage is described by the number of cleavage directions and the angle(s) at which they meet. Each cleavage surface that has a different orientation is counted as a different direction of cleavage. For example, some minerals cleave to form six-sided cubes. Because cubes are defined by three different sets of parallel planes that intersect at 90-degree angles, cleavage is described as three directions of cleavage that meet at 90 Do not confuse cleavage with crystal shape. When a mineral exhibits cleavage, it will break into pieces that all have the same geometry. By contrast, the smooth-sided quartz crystals have cleavage. If broken, they fracture into shapes that do not resemble one another or the original crystals.

Fracture not Example: Muscovite chemical bonds that are equally, or nearly equally, strong in all directions exhibit a property called fracture. When minerals fracture, most produce Fracture not uneven surfaces and are described as exhibiting irregular fracture (Figure erals, including quartz, can break into smooth, curved sur1 faces resembling broken glass. Such breaks are called conchoi2 other minerals exhibit fractures that produce splinters or fibers, referred to as splintery fracture and fibrous fracture, respectively.

ity describes a mineral’s Example: Fluorite resistance to breaking, bending, cutting, or other forms of deformation. As mentioned specific gravity of 2.65. By contrast, some metallic earlier, nonmetallic minerals such as quartz and halite minerals, such as pyrite, native copper, and magnetite, tend to be brittle and fracture or exhibit cleavage when are more than twice as dense and thus have more than struck. Minerals that are ionically bonded, such as fluorite twice the specific gravity of quartz. Galena, an ore from and halite, tend to be brittle and shatter into small pieces which lead is extracted, has a specific gravity of roughly when struck. By contrast, native metals, such as copper 7.5, whereas 24-karat gold has a specific gravity of and gold, are malleable, which means they can be hamapproximately 20. mered without breaking. In addition, minerals that can With a little practice, you can estimate the specific be cut into thin shavings, including gypsum and talc, are of a mineral by hefting it in your hand. Does described as sectile. Still others, notably the micas, are elastic and will bend and snap back to their original shape after stress is released.

Double refraction This sample of calcite exhibits double refraction. (Photo by Chip Clark/Fundamental this mineral feel about as “heavy” as similarly sized rocks you have handled? If the answer is “yes,” the specific gravity of the sample will likely be between 2.5 and 3.

Calcite reacting with a Clark/Fundamental Photos) In addition to the properties discussed thus far, some minerals can be recognized by other distinctive properties. For example, halite is ordinary salt, so it can be quickly identified through taste. Talc and graphite 2. Why is color not always a useful property in mineral identification? Give an example of a mineral that supports your answer. 3. What differentiates cleavage from fracture? 4. What is meant by a mineral’s tenacity? List three terms that describe tenacity. 5. Describe a simple chemical test that is useful in identifying the mineral calcite.

Distinguish between compositional and structural variations in minerals and provide one example of each. Many people associate the word crystal with delicate wine goblets or glassy objects with smooth sides and gem-like shapes. In geology, the term crystal or crystalline refers to any natural solid exhibits the characteristic crystal form associated with quartz—a six-sided prismatic shape with display well-defined faces. Both quartz samples are nonetheless crystalline.

The smooth faces and symmetry possessed by well-developed crystals are surface manifestations of the orderly packing of the atoms or ions that constitute a mineral’s internal structure. This highly ordered atomic arrangement within minerals can be illustrated by using spherically shaped atoms held together by ionic, covalent, or metallic bonds. The simplest crystal structures are those of native metals, such as gold and silver, which are composed of only one element. These materials consist of atoms packed together in a rather simple three-dimensional network that minimizes voids. Imagine a group of cannon balls stacked in layers such that the spheres in one layer nestle in the hollows between spheres in the adjacent layers.

Positive Ions 0 1 2 3 Relative sizes and charges of selected ions Ionic radii are usually expressed in angstroms (1 angstrom equals 10 -8 cm).

Steno’s Law Because some faces of a crystal may grow larger than others, two crystals of the same mineral may not have identical shapes. Nevertheless, the angles between equivalent faces are remarkably consistent.

In graphite the carbon atoms are bonded into sheets that are joined together by very weak electrical forces.

the same size, the shape of the wall is unaffected; only its composition changes. Consider the mineral olivine as an example of chemical variability. The chemical formula for olivine is (Mg,Fe)2SiO4 —which has the variable components magnesium and iron in parentheses. Magnesium (Mg21) and iron (Fe21) readily substitute for one another because they are nearly the same size and have the same electrical charge. At one extreme, olivine may contain magnesium without any iron or vice versa. Most samples of olivine, however, have some of both of these ions in their structure. Olivine has a range of combinations, from a variety called forsterite (Mg2SiO4) at one end to fayalite (Fe2SiO4) at the other. Nevertheless, all specimens of olivine have the same internal structure and exhibit very similar, but not identical, properties. For example, ironrich olivines have a higher density than magnesium-rich specimens, a reflection of the greater atomic weight of iron as compared to magnesium. In contrast to olivine, minerals such as quartz (SiO2) and fluorite (CaF2) tend to have chemical compositions that differ very little from their chemical formulas. However, even these minerals often contain tiny amounts of other less common elements, referred to as trace elements. Although trace elements have little effect on most mineral properties, they can significantly influence a mineral’s color.

It is possible for two minerals with exactly the same chemical composition to have different internal structures and, hence, different external forms. Minerals of this type are called polymorphs (poly 5 many, morph 5 form). Graphite and diamond are particularly good examples of polymorphism because, when pure, they are both made up exclusively of carbon atoms. Graphite is the soft gray mineral from which pencil “lead” is made, whereas diamond is the hardest-known mineral. The differences between these minerals can be attributed to the conditions under which they form. Diamonds form at depths that may exceed 200 kilometers (nearly 125 miles), where other hand, forms under comparatively low pressures and consists of sheets of carbon atoms that are widely spaced sheets in graphite easily slide past one another, graphite has a greasy feel and makes an excellent lubricant. Scientists have learned that by heating graphite under high confining pressures, they can generate synthetic diamonds. Because human-made diamonds often contain flaws, they are generally not gem quality, but due to their hardness, they have many industrial uses. Further, because diamonds form in environments of extreme pressure and temperature, they are somewhat unstable at Earth’s surface. Fortunately for jewelers, “diamonds are forever” because the rate at which diamonds change to their more stable form, graphite, is infinitesimally slow. The transformation of one polymorph to another is an example of a phase change. In nature, certain minerals go through phase changes as they move from one environment to another. For example, when a slab of ocean crust composed of olivine-rich basalt is carried to great depths by a subducting plate, olivine changes to a more compact, denser polymorph with the same structure as the mineral spinel. Recall that oceanic lithosphere sinks because it is colder and more dense than the underlying mantle. It follows, therefore, that during subduction, the transformation of olivine from its low- to high-density form would contribute to plate subduction. Stated another way, this phase change causes an increase in the overall density of the slab, thereby enhancing its rate of 1. Explain Steno’s Law in your own words. 2. Define polymorph and give an example.

Explain how minerals are classified and name the most abundant mineral group in Earth’s crust. More than 4000 minerals have been named, and several new ones are identified each year. Fortunately for students who are beginning to study minerals, no more than a few dozen are abundant. Collectively, these few make up most of the rocks of Earth’s crust and they are therefore often referred to as the rock-forming minerals. Although less abundant, many other minerals are used extensively in the manufacture of products and are called economic minerals. However, rock-forming minerals and economic minerals are not mutually exclusive groups. When found in large deposits, some rock-forming minerals are economically significant. One example is calcite, the primary component of the sedimentary rock limestone. Calcite has many uses, including the production of concrete. Chapter 23 provides an overview of the importance of Earth’s vast natural resources.

Minerals are placed into categories in much the same way that plants and animals are classified. Mineralogists use the term mineral species for a collection of specimens that exhibit similar internal structures and chemical compositions. Some common mineral species are quartz, calcite, galena, and pyrite. However, just as individual plants and animals within a species differ somewhat from one another, so do most specimens of the same mineral. Some mineral species are further subdivided into mineral varieties. For example, pure quartz (SiO2) is colorless and transparent. However, when small amounts of aluminum are incorporated into its atomic structure, quartz appears quite dark, in a variety called smoky quartz. Amethyst, another variety of quartz, owes its violet color to the presence of trace amounts of iron. Mineral species are assigned to mineral classes. Some important mineral classes are the silicates (SiO442), internal structures and, hence, similar properties. For example, minerals belonging to the carbonate class react chemically with acid—albeit to varying degrees—and many exhibit similar cleavage. Furthermore, minerals within the same class are often found together in the same rock. For example, halite (NaCl) and silvite (KCl) belong to the halide class and commonly occur together in evaporite deposits.

Calcium (Ca) Sodium (Na) Magnesium (Mg) 2.8% silicon are by far the most common elements in Earth’s crust. Furthermore, these two elements readily combine to form the basic “building block” for the most common mineral group, the silicates. More than 800 silicate minerals are known, and they account for more than 90 percent of Earth’s crust. Because other mineral groups are far less abundant in Earth’s crust than the silicates, they are often grouped together under the heading nonsilicates. Although not as common as silicates, some nonsilicate minerals are very important economically. They provide us with iron and aluminum to build automobiles, gypsum for plaster and drywall for home construction, and copper wire Common nonsilicate mineral groups include the carbonates, sulfates, and halides. In addition to their economic importance, these groups include minerals that are major constituents in sediments and sedimentary rocks.

Sketch the silicon–oxygen tetrahedron and explain how these fundamental building blocks join together to form other silicate structures. Every silicate mineral contains the two most abundant elements in Earth’s crust, oxygen and silicon. Further, most contain one or more of the other common elements. Together, these elements give rise to hundreds of silicate minerals with a wide variety of properties, including hard quartz, soft talc, sheetlike mica, fibrous asbestos, green olivine, and blood-red garnet.

The remaining 12 charge on each oxygen is available to bond with another positive ion, or with the silicon ion in an adjacent tetrahedron. It is important to note that the silicon–oxygen tetrahedron is the fundamental building block that all silicate minerals have in common.

Minerals with Three-Dimensional Frameworks In the most common silicate structure, all four oxygen ions are shared, producing a complex three-dimensional mineral group, the feldspars, have structures in which all of the oxygens are shared. The ratio of oxygen ions to silicon ions differs in each type of silicate structure. In independent tetrahedra (SiO4) there are four oxygen ions for every silicon ion. In single chains, the oxygen-to-silicon ratio is 3:1 (SiO3), and in three-dimensional frameworks, as found in quartz, the ratio is 2:1 (SiO2). As more oxygen ions are shared, the percentage of silicon in the structure increases. Silicate minerals are therefore described as having a low or high silicon content, based on their ratio of oxygen to silicon.

Positive ions (Mg2+, Fe2+) How independent tetrahedra bond with metallic ions The internal structure of the mineral olivine, which is composed of independent tetrahedra that are bonded together, with metallic ions (iron and magnesium) shown in green. This is an expanded view that does not show the bonds between the metallic ions and the tetrahedra.

Silicate minerals with three-dimensional structures have the highest silicon content, while those composed of independent tetrahedra have the lowest.

Five basic silicate (Ca 21). These positively charged ions bond with the unshared oxygen ions that occupy the corners of the silicate tetrahedra. As a general rule, the hybrid covalent bonds between silicon and oxygen are stronger than the ionic bonds that hold one silicate structure to the next. Consequently, properties such as cleavage and, to some extent, hardness are controlled by the nature of the silicate framework. Quartz (SiO2), which has only silicon–oxygen bonds, has great hardness and lacks cleavage, mainly because it has equally strong bonds in all directions. By contrast, the mineral talc (the source of talcum powder) has a sheet structure. Magnesium ions occur between the sheets and weakly join them together. The slippery feel of talcum powder is due to the silicate sheets sliding relative to one another, in much the same way that sheets of carbon atoms in graphite slide, giving this mineral its lubricating Recall that atoms of similar size can substitute freely for one another without altering a mineral’s structure. For example, in olivine, iron (Fe21) and magnesium (Mg21) substitute for each other. This also holds true for the third-most-common element in Earth’s crust, aluminum (Al31), which often substitutes for silicon (Si41) in the center of silicon–oxygen tetrahedra. Because most silicate structures will readily accommodate two or more different positive ions at a given bonding site, individual specimens of a particular mineral may contain varying amounts of certain elements. As a result, many silicate minerals form a mineral group that exhibits a range of compositions between two end members. Examples include the olivines, pyroxenes, amphiboles, micas, and feldspars.

1. Sketch the silicon–oxygen tetrahedron and label its parts. 2. What is the ratio of oxygen to silicon found in single tetrahedrons? How about framework structures? Which has the highest silicon 3. What differences in their silicate structures account for the slipperiness of talc and the hardness of quartz?

Compare and contrast the light (nonferromagnesian) silicates with the dark (ferromagnesian) silicates and list three minerals common to each group. are by far the most plentiful silicate group, comprising more than 50 percent of Earth’s crust. Quartz, the second-most-abundant mineral in the continental crust, is the only common mineral made completely of silicon and oxygen. Most silicate minerals form when molten rock cools and crystallizes. Cooling can occur at or near Earth’s surface (low temperature and pressure) or at great depths (high temperature and pressure). The environment during crystallization and the chemical composition of the molten rock determine, to a large degree, which minerals are produced. For example, the silicate mineral olivine crystallizes early, whereas quartz forms much later in the crystallization process. In addition, some silicate minerals form at Earth’s surface from the weathered products of other silicate minerals. Still others are formed under the extreme pressures associated with mountain building. Each silicate mineral, therefore, has a structure and a chemical composition that indicate the conditions under which it formed. By carefully examining the mineral constituents of rocks, geologists can usually determine the circumstances under which the rocks formed.

We will now examine some of the most common silicate minerals, which we divide into two major groups on the basis of their chemical makeup: the light silicates and the dark silicates.

Kaolinite Kaolinite is a common clay mineral formed by weathering of feldspar minerals. The dark (or ferromagnesian) silicates are minerals containing ions of iron (ferro 5 iron) and/or magnesium in their structure. Because of their iron content, ferromagnesian silicates are dark in color and have a greater specific gravity, between 3.2 and 3.6, than nonferromagnesian silicates. The most common dark silicate minerals are olivine, the pyroxenes, the amphiboles, dark mica (biotite), and garnet.

Olivine Group Olivine, a family of high-temperature silicate minerals, is black to olive green in color and has a Transparent olivine is occasionally used as a gemstone called peridot. Rather than develop large crystals, olivine commonly forms small, rounded crystals that give olivine-rich rocks a granular appearance. Olivine and related forms are typically found in basalt, a common igneous rock of the oceanic crust and volcanic areas on the continents, and are thought to constitute up to 50 percent of Earth’s upper man tle.

Well-formed garnet crystal Garnets come in a variety of colors and are commonly found 1. Apart from their difference in color, what is one main distinction between light and dark silicates? What accounts for this difference? muscovite and biotite have in common? How do they differ? 3. Is color a good way to distinguish between orthoclase and plagioclase feldspar? If not, what is a more effective means of distinguishing them?

lass bottles, like most other manufactured products, contain substances obtained from minerals extracted from Earth’s crust and oceans. The primary ingredient in commercially produced glass bottles is the mineral quartz. Glass also contains lesser amounts of the mineral calcite. (Photo by or brown. Based on what you know about how the mineral quartz is colored, what do glass manufacturers do to make bottles green and brown? bottles instead of the green bottles that were popular until the 1930s?

Thick bed of halite exposed in an underground mine Halite (salt) mine in Grand Saline, Texas. Note the person for scale. (Photo by Tom Bochsler) sulfide minerals include galena (lead), sphalerite (zinc), and chalcopyrite (copper). In addition, native elements—including gold, silver, and carbon (diamonds)— plus a host of other nonsilicate minerals—fluorite (flux in making steel), corundum (gemstone, abrasive), and uraninite (a uranium source)—are economically important (see GEOgraphics 3.1, p.82 and 3.2, p.101).

1. List six common nonsilicate mineral groups. What key ions or elements define each group? 2. What is the most common carbonate mineral? 3. List eight common nonsilicate minerals and their economic uses.

Aerial view of Yosemite valley which makes up a portion of the Sierra Nevada batholith, California. (Photo by Michael nderstanding the structure, composition, and internal workings of our planet requires a basic knowledge of igneous rocks. Igneous rocks and metamorphic Earth can be described as a huge mass of igneous and metamorphic rocks that is covered with a thin veneer of sedimentary rock and has a relatively small iron-rich core. Many prominent landforms are composed of igneous rocks, including volcanoes such as Mount Rainier and the large igneous bodies that make up the Sierra Nevada, the Black Hills, and the high peaks of the Adirondacks. Igneous rocks also make excellent building stones and are widely used as decorative materials, such as for monuments and household countertops.

List and describe the three major components of magma. Our discussion of the rock cycle in Chapter 1 explained that igneous rocks (ignis 5 fire) form as molten rock cools and solidifies. Considerable evidence supports the idea that the parent material for igneous rocks, called magma, is formed by partial melting that occurs at various levels within Earth’s crust and upper mantle to depths of about 250 kilometers (about 150 miles). Once formed, a magma body buoyantly rises toward the surface because it is less dense than the surrounding rocks. (When rock melts, it takes up more space and, hence, it becomes less dense than the surrounding solid rock.) Occasionally, molten rock reaches Earth’s surface, where it is called lava. Sometimes lava is emitted as fountains that are produced when escaping gases propel it from a magma chamber. On other occasions, lava is explosively ejected, producing dramatic steam and ash eruptions. However, not all eruptions are violent; many volcanoes emit quiet outpourings of fluid lava.

The liquid portion, called melt, is composed mainly of mobile ions of the eight most common elements found in Earth’s crust—silicon and oxygen, along with lesser amounts of aluminum, potassium, calcium, sodium, iron, and magnesium. The solid components (if any) in magma are crystals of silicate minerals. As a magma body cools, the size and number of crystals increase. During the last stage of cooling, a magma body is like a “crystalline mush” (resembling a bowl of very thick oatmeal) that contains only small amounts of melt. The gaseous components of magma, called volatiles, are materials that vaporize (form a gas) at surface pressures. The most common volatiles found in magma are water 4.1 Magma: Parent Material of Igneous Rock the immense pressure exerted by the overlying rocks. These gases tend to separate from the melt as it moves toward the surface (from a high- to a low-pressure environment). As the gases build up, they may eventually propel magma from the vent. When deeply buried magma bodies crystallize, the remaining volatiles collect as hot, water-rich fluids that migrate through the surrounding rocks. These hot fluids play an important role in metamorphism and will be considered in Chapter 8.

Igneous rock composed of interlocking crystals The largest crystals are about 1 centimeter in length.

To better understand how magma crystallizes, let us consider how a simple crystalline solid melts. Recall that, in any crystalline solid, the ions are arranged in a closely packed regular pattern. However, they are not without some motion; they exhibit a restricted vibration about fixed points. As the temperature rises, ions vibrate more rapidly and consequently collide with ever-increasing vigor with their neighbors. Thus, heating causes the ions to occupy more space, which in turn causes the solid to expand. When the ions are vibrating rapidly enough to overcome the force of their chemical bonds, melting occurs. At this stage, the ions are able to slide past one another, and the orderly crystalline structure disintegrates. Thus, melting converts a solid consisting of tight, uniformly packed ions into a liquid composed of unordered ions moving randomly about. In the process called crystallization, cooling reverses the events of melting. As the temperature of the liquid drops, ions pack more closely together as their rate of movement slows. When they are cooled sufficiently, the forces of the chemical bonds will again confine the ions to an orderly crystalline arrangement. When a magma body cools, the silicon and oxygen atoms link together first to form silicon–oxygen tetrahedra, the basic building blocks of the silicate minerals (see crystallize at depth or at Earth’s surface.

its surroundings, the tetrahedra join with each other and with other ions to form embryonic crystal nuclei. Slowly each nucleus grows as ions lose their mobility and join the crystalline network. The minerals that form the earliest have space to grow and tend to have better-developed crystal faces than do the ones that form later and occupy the remaining spaces. Eventually all of the melt is transformed into a solid mass of interlocking silicate minerals that we call an igneous rock.

Igneous rocks form in two basic settings. Molten rock may crystallize within Earth’s crust over a range of depths, or it may solidify at Earth’s surface .

Intrusive versus extrusive igneous rocks (https://goo.gl/ igneous rocks form. When magma solidifies on Earth’s surface, extrusive igneous rocks form.

When magma crystallizes at depth, it forms intrusive igneous rocks, also known as plutonic rocks—after Pluto, the god of the underworld in classical mythology. These rocks are observed at the surface in locations where uplifting and erosion have stripped away the overlying rocks. Exposures of intrusive igneous rocks occur National Park, California. Igneous rocks that form when molten rock solidifies at the surface are classified as extrusive igneous rocks. They are also called volcanic rocks—after Vulcan, the Roman fire god. Extrusive igneous rocks form when lava solidifies or when volcanic debris falls to Earth’s surface. Extrusive igneous rocks are abundant in western portions of the Americas, where they make up the volcanic peaks of the Cascade Range and the Andes Mountains. In addition, many oceanic Aleutian Islands, are composed almost entirely of extrusive igneous rocks. The nature of volcanic activity will be addressed in more detail in Chapter 5.

1. What is magma? How does magma differ from 2. List and describe the three components of 3. Describe the process of crystallization. 4. Compare and contrast extrusive and intrusive igneous rocks.

Increasing potassium and sodium Increasing iron, magnesium and calcium the light (or nonferromagnesian) silicates contain greater amounts of potassium, sodium, and calcium rather than iron and magnesium. The light silicate minerals, including quartz, muscovite mica, and the most abundant mineral group, the feldspars, are richer in silica than the dark silicates.

Granitic (Felsic) Versus Basaltic Despite their great compositional diversity, igneous rocks (and the magmas from which they form) can be one end of the continuum are rocks composed almost entirely of light-colored silicates—quartz and potassium feldspar. Igneous rocks in which these are the dominant Geologists also refer to granitic rocks as being felsic, a term derived from feldspar and silica (quartz). In addition to quartz and feldspar, most granitic rocks contain about 10 percent dark silicate minerals, usually biotite mica and amphibole. Granitic rocks are rich in silica (about 70 percent) and are major constituents of the continental crust.

Rocks that contain at least 45 percent dark silicate minerals and calcium-rich plagioclase feldspar (but no mafic (from magnesium and ferrum, the Latin name for iron). Because of their iron content, mafic rocks are typically darker and denser than granitic rocks. Basaltic rocks make up the ocean floor as well as many of the volcanic islands located within the ocean basins. Basalt also forms extensive lava flows on the continents.

between granitic and basaltic rocks are said to have an andesitic composition, or intermediate composition, after the common volcanic rock andesite. Intermediate rocks contain at least 25 percent dark silicate minerals, mainly amphibole, pyroxene, and biotite mica, with the other dominant mineral being plagioclase feldspar. This important category of igneous rocks is often associated with volcanic activity that is typically confined to the seaward margins of the continents and on volcanic island arcs such as the Aleutian chain.

Granitic (felsic) versus basaltic (mafic) compositions Inset images are photomicrographs that show the interlocking crystals that make up granite and basalt, respectively.

igneous rock composed of lightcolored silicates—quartz and potassium feldspar. 4.5). The percentage of silica in igneous rocks varies in a systematic manner that parallels the abundance of other elements. For example, rocks that are relatively low in silica contain large amounts of iron, magnesium, and calcium. By contrast, rocks high in silica contain very little iron, magnesium, or calcium but are enriched with sodium and potassium. Consequently, the chemical makeup of an igneous rock can be inferred directly from its Feldspar silica content. Further, the amount of silica present in magma strongly influences its behavior. Granitic magma, which has a high silica content, is quite viscous (“thick”) and may erupt at temperatures as hand, basaltic magmas are low in Pyroxene silica and are generally more fluid. Basaltic magmas also erupt at higher temperatures than granitic igneous rock containing substantial magmas—usually at temperatures amounts of dark colored silicates and plagioclase feldspar.

Another important igneous rock, peridotite, contains mostly olivine and pyroxene and thus falls on the opposite side of the compositional spectrum from composed almost entirely of ferromagnesian minerals, its chemical composition is referred to as ultramafic. Although ultramafic rocks are rare at Earth’s surface, peridotite is the main constituent of the upper mantle.

Identify and describe the six major igneous textures. The term texture is used to describe the overall appearance of a rock based on the size, shape, and arrangement of its mineral grains—not how it feels to touch. Texture is an important property because it reveals a great deal about the environment in which the rock formed. Geologists can make inferences about a rock’s origin based on careful observations of grain size and other characteristics of the rock.

Produced by the consolidation of fragments that may include ash, once molten blobs, or large angular blocks that were ejected during an explosive volcanic eruption.

Three factors influence the textures of igneous rocks: r The rate at which molten rock cools r The amount of silica present in the magma r The amount of dissolved gases in the magma Among these, the rate of cooling tends to be the kilometers beneath Earth’s surface remains insulated from lower surface temperatures by the surrounding rock and thus will cool very slowly over a period of perhaps tens of thousands to millions of years. Initially, relatively few crystal nuclei form. Slow cooling permits ions to migrate freely until they eventually join one of the existing crystals. Consequently, slow cooling promotes the growth of fewer but larger crystals.

Composed of crystals that are too small for the individual minerals to be identified without a microscope.

On the other hand, when cooling occurs rapidly— for example, in a thin lava flow—the ions quickly lose their mobility and readily combine to form crystals. This results in the development of numerous embryonic nuclei, all of which compete for the available ions. The result is a solid mass of many tiny intergrown crystals.

Phaneritic (Coarse-Grained) Texture When large masses of magma slowly crystallize at great depth, they form igneous rocks that exhibit a coarse-grained texture described as phaneritic (phaner 5 visible). Coarse-grained rocks consist of a mass of intergrown crystals that are roughly equal in size and large enough to distinguish the individual minerals without often use a small magnifying lens to aid in identifying minerals in a phaneritic rock.

Vesicular texture The larger image shows a lava flow on Hawaii’s Kilauea volcano. The inset photo is a close-up showing the vesicular texture of hardened lava. Vesicles are small holes left by require thousands or even millions of years to solidify. Because different minerals crystallize under different environmental conditions (temperatures and pressure), it is possible for crystals of one mineral to become quite large before others even begin to form. If molten rock containing some large crystals moves to a different environment—for example, by erupting at the surface—the remaining liquid portion of the lava cools more quickly. The resulting rock, which has large crystals embedded in a matrix of smaller crystals, is said to have a porphyritic texture. The large crystals in porphyritic rocks are referred to as phenocrysts (pheno 5 show, cryst 5 crystal), whereas the matrix of smaller crystals is called termed a porphyry. Vesicular Texture Common features of many extrusive rocks are the voids left by gas bubbles that escape as lava solidifies. These nearly spherical openings are called vesicles, and the rocks that contain them are said to have a vesicular texture. Rocks that exhibit a vesicular texture often form in the upper zone of a lava flow, where cooling occurs rapidly enough to preserve the openings produced by the expanding gas bubbles. Another common vesicular rock, called pumice, forms Glassy Texture During some volcanic eruptions, molten rock is ejected into the atmosphere, where it is quenched (very quickly cooled) to become a solid. Rapid cooling of this type may generate rocks having a glassy texture. Glass results when unordered ions are “frozen in place” before they are able to unite into an orderly crystalline Obsidian, a common type of natural glass, is similar in appearance to dark chunks of manufactured glass. Because of its excellent conchoidal fracture and ability to hold a sharp, hard edge, obsidian was a prized material from which Native AmeriObsidian arrowhead Native cans chipped arrowheads and cutting Americans made tools. arrowheads and Obsidian flows, typically a cutting tools from few hundred feet thick, provide obsidian, a natuevidence that rapid cooling is not ral glass. (Photo by the only mechanism that produces Jeffrey Scovil) a glassy texture. Magmas with high silica content tend to form long, chainlike structures (polymers) before crystallization is complete. These structures, in turn, impede ionic transport and increase the magma’s viscosity. (Viscosity is a measure of a fluid’s resistance to flow.) So, granitic magma, which is rich in silica, may be extruded as an extremely viscous mass that eventually solidifies to form obsidian. By contrast, basaltic magma, which is low in silica, forms very fluid lavas that, upon cooling, usually generate fine-grained crystalline rocks. However, when a basaltic lava flow enters the ocean, its surface is quenched rapidly enough to form a thin, glassy skin.

Pyroclastic rocks are the product of explosive eruptions These volcanic fragments may eventually consolidate to become rocks displaying a pyroclastic texture. (Photo by Richard Roscoe/Getty Images) pegmatites, may form. Rocks of this type, in which most of the crystals are larger than 1 centimeter in diameter, are described as having a pegmatitic texture. Most pegmatites occur as small masses or thin veins within or around the margins of large intrusive igneous bodies. Pegmatites form late in the crystallization of a magma, when water and other materials, such as carbon dioxide, chlorine, and fluorine, make up an unusually high percentage of the melt. Because ion igneous rocks is formed from the consolidation of individual rock fragments ejected during explosive volcanic eruptions. The ejected particles might be very fine ash, molten blobs, or large angular blocks torn from the walls of a vent during an eruption. Igneous rocks composed of these rock fragments are said to have a pyroclastic texture, or fragmental texture tuff, is composed of fine fragments of glass that remained hot enough to fuse together. Other pyroclastic rocks are composed of fragments that solidified before impact and became cemented together at some later time. Because pyroclastic rocks are made of individual particles or fragments rather than interlocking crystals, their textures often resemble those exhibited by sedimentary rocks rather than those associated with igneous rocks.

Under special conditions, exceptionally coarse-grained igneous rocks, called Pegmatitic texture This granite pegmatite, found in the inner gorge of the Grand Canyon, is composed mainly of quartz and feldspar. (Photo by Joanne hese two types of hardened lava, called Pele’s hair and Pele’s tears, are commonly generated during lava fountaining that occurs at Kilauea volcano. They are named after Pele, the Hawaiian goddess of fire and volcanoes. Pele’s hair consists of goldish strands that are created when tiny blobs of lava are stretched by strong winds. When lava droplets cool quickly, they form Pele’s tears, which are sometimes connected to strands of Pele’s hair.

Pele’s tears Pele’s hair migration is enhanced in these fluid-rich environments, the crystals that form are abnormally large. Thus, the large crystals in pegmatites do not result from inordinately long cooling histories; rather, they are the consequence of a fluid-rich environment that enhances crystallization. The composition of most pegmatites is similar to that of granite. Thus, pegmatites contain large crystals of quartz, feldspar, and muscovite. However, some contain significant quantities of relatively rare and hence valuable elements—gold, tungsten, beryllium, and the rare earth elements that are used in modern high-technology devices, including cell phones and hybrid autos.

1. Define texture. 2. How does the rate of cooling influence crystal size? What other factors influence the texture of igneous rocks? 3. List the six major igneous rock textures. 4. Explain how the crystals in pegmatites are able to grow so large. 5. What does a porphyritic texture indicate about the cooling history of an igneous rock?

Distinguish among the common igneous rocks based on texture and mineral Geologists classify igneous rocks on the basis of their texture and mineral composition. The various igneous textures described in the previous section result mainly from different cooling histories, whereas the mineral composition of an igneous rock depends on the chemical makeup of its parent magma. Because igneous rocks are classified on the basis of both mineral composition and texture, some rocks having similar mineral constituents but exhibiting different textures are given different names.

Rocks contain information about the processes that produced them This massive granitic monolith (El Capitan) Park, California, was once a molten mass deep within Earth.

Rhyolite is the fine-grained equivalent of granite and, like granite, is composed essentially of accounts for its color, which is usually buff to pink or occasionally light gray. Rhyolite is fine-grained and frequently contains glass fragments and voids, indicating that it cooled rapidly in a surface, or near-surface, environment. In contrast to granite, which is widely distributed as large intrusive masses, rhyolite deposits are less common and generally less voluminous. The thick rhyolite lava flows and extensive ash deposits in and around Yellowstone National Park are well-known exceptions to this generalization.

Basalt is a very dark green to black, finegrained rock composed primarily of pyroxene and calcium-rich plagioclase feldspar, with lesser amounts is porphyritic, basalt commonly contains small, lightcolored feldspar phenocrysts or green, glassy-appearing olivine grains embedded in a dark groundmass. Basalt is the most common extrusive igneous rock. Many volcanic islands, such as the Hawaiian Islands and Iceland, are composed mainly of basalt (Figure 4.16). Further, the upper layers of the oceanic crust consist of basalt. In the United States, large portions of central Oregon and Washington were the sites of extensive basaltic outpourings (discussed in detail in Chapter 5). At some locations, these once-fluid basaltic flows have accumulated to a combined thicknesses approaching 3 kilometers (nearly 2 miles).

Gabbro is the intrusive equivalent of basalt to black in color and composed primarily of pyroxene and calcium-rich plagioclase feldspar. Although gabbro is uncommon in the continental crust, it makes up a significant percentage of oceanic crust.

To geologists, granite is an intrusive igneous rock with a rather precise mineral composition. However, the term granite is commonly used to describe a group of related rocks that are rich in quartz and feldspar. We will follow the latter convention here.

Where is granite found? This map shows the distribution of exposed granitic rocks in the United States, Canada, and Mexico. Granitic rocks labeled batholiths along the west coast are mainly Mesozoic in age. Those in the north central United States and the Canadian Shield are intermixed with metamorphic rocks and are Precambrian, Mountains are mostly of Paleozoic age.

Locations of granite outcrops 1. Coast Range batholith, British Columbia 2. Canadian Shield, Ontario, Canada 3. Cadillac Mountain, Acadia National Park, Maine New Hampshire 5. Stone Mountain, Georgia 6. Mount Lemmon from Catalina Highway, Tuscon, Arizona 7. Joshua Tree National Park, California William Helsel What are the uses of granite? Granite is widely used as a building material for countertops, floor tiles, building stones, and memorials.

Polished granite is popular for countertops because it is durable as well as aesthetically pleasing. However, in the stone trade the name “granite” is applied to almost every coarse-grained igneous rock. “Black granite”, for example, is usually the rock gabbro.

Granite is used in large construction projects as a structural element and decorative facing or veneer. The Arlington Memorial Bridge, constructed mainly of concrete, is covered by a decorative granite veneer.

Granite is commonly used for memorials and gravestones because of its resistance to Monument commemorates the December 26, 1776 battle in which the Continental Army defeated the British forces in Trenton, New Jersey.

Granite was originally quarried using handsaws and explosives to blast away slabs of rock. Today, saws with diamond chips imbedded in steel wires and saw blades are used.

Welded tuff, a pyroclastic igneous rock Outcrop of welded tuff Alamos, New Mexico. Tuff is composed mainly of ash-sized particles and may contain larger fragments of pumice or other volcanic rocks. (Photo by Marli 1. List the two criteria by which igneous rocks are 2. How are granite and rhyolite different? In what way are they similar?

Summarize the major processes that generate magma from solid rock. Based on evidence from the study of earthquake waves, we know that Earth’s crust and mantle are composed primarily of solid, not molten, rock. Although the outer core is fluid, this iron-rich material is very dense and remains deep within Earth. So where does magma come from? Most magma originates in Earth’s uppermost mantle. The greatest quantities are produced at divergent plate boundaries, in association with seafloor spreading, with lesser amounts forming at subduction zones, where oceanic lithosphere descends into the mantle. Magma also can be generated when crustal rocks are heated sufficiently to melt.

melting temperature. When confining pressure drops sufficiently, decompression melting is triggered. Decompression melting occurs wherever hot, solid mantle rock ascends, thereby moving into regions of lower pressure. Recall from Chapter 2 that tensional forces along spreading centers promote upwelling where plates diverge. This process is responsible for generating magma along oceanic ridges (divergent plate boundaries) where plates are rifting apart. Below the ridge crest, hot mantle rock rises and melts, generating a magma that replaces the material that shifted horizontally away from the ridge axis. Decompression melting also occurs when ascending mantle plumes reach the uppermost mantle. If this rising magma reaches the surface, it will trigger an episode of hot-spot volcanism.

Workers in underground mines know that temperatures increase as they descend deeper below Earth’s surface. kilometer in the upper crust. This increase in temperature with depth is known as the geothermal gradient. As is compared to the melting point curve for the mantle rock Addition of Water An important factor affecting the peridotite, the temperature at which peridotite melts is melting temperature of rock is its water content. Water higher than the geothermal gradient. Thus, under normal and other volatiles act as salt does to melt ice. That is, conditions, the mantle is solid. However, tectonic processes trigger melting though various means, including reducing the melting point (temperature) of mantle rock.

Melting curve for the mantle rock Why the mantle is mainly solid This diagram shows the geothermal gradient (the increase in temperature with depth) for the crust and upper mantle. Also illustrated is the melting point curve for the mantle rock peridotite.

As soon as mantle-derived basaltic magma forms, it will buoyantly rise toward the surface. In continental settings, basaltic magma often “ponds” beneath crustal rocks, which have a lower density and are already near their melting temperature. The hot basaltic magma may heat the overlying crustal rocks sufficiently to generate a secondary, silica-rich magma. If these low-density, silica-rich magmas reach the surface, they tend to produce explosive eruptions that we associate with converLithosphere gent plate boundaries. Crustal rocks can also melt during mantle rocks continental collisions that result in the these events, the crust is greatly thickened, and some melting As an oceanic plate descends into the mantle, crustal rocks are buried to depths where the temperaContinental water and other volatiles are driven from the subducting tures are elevated sufficiently to cause partial melting. volcanic arc crustal rocks into the mantle above. The felsic (granitic) magmas produced in this manner usually solidify before reaching the surface, so volcaTrench nism is not typically associated with these collisiontype mountain belts. In summary, magma can be generated three ways: perature) can result in decompression melting; (2) the Continental crust introduction of water can lower the melting temperature Suducting oce of hot mantle rock sufficiently to generate magma; and (3) heating of crustal rocks above their melting temperaosp ture produces magma.

rock melts rises toward the surface 1. What is the geothermal gradient? Describe how the geothermal gradient compares with the melting temperatures of the mantle rock peridotite at various depths. 2. Explain the process of decompression melting.

Water driven from oceanic crust causes partial melting of mantle rock to generate basaltic magma 3. What role do water and other volatiles play in the formation of magma? 4. Name two plate tectonic settings in which you would expect magma to be generated.

Describe how magmatic differentiation can generate a magma body that has a mineralogy (chemical composition) that is different from its parent magma. Geologists have observed that, over time, a volcano may extrude lavas that vary in composition. Data of this type led them to examine the possibility that magma might change (evolve), and thus one magma body could become the parent to a variety of igneous rocks. To explore this idea, twentieth century.

Recall that ice freezes at a specific temperature, whereas basaltic magma cools, minerals tend to crystallize in a systematic fashion, based on their melting temperatures. the ferromagnesian mineral olivine. Further cooling generates calcium-rich plagioclase feldspar as well as pyroxene, and so forth down the diagram. During this crystallization process, the composition of the remaining liquid portion of the magma also continually changes. For example, at the stage when about one-third of the magma has solidified, the remaining molten material will be nearly depleted in iron, magnesium, and calcium because these elements are major constituents of the minerals that form earliest in the process.

Potassium feldspar Muscovite mica Bowen’s reaction series This diagram shows the sequence in which minerals crystallize from a mafic magma. Compare this figure to the mineral composition of the rock Note that each rock group consists of minerals that crystallize in the same temperature range.

Crystal settling results in a change in the composition magma evolves as the earliest-formed minerals (those richer in iron, magnesium, and calcium) crystallize and settle to the bottom of the magma chamber, leaving the remaining melt richer in sodium, potassium, and silica (SiO2).

body causes crystals of olivine, pyroxene, and calcium-rich plagioclase to form and settle out, or crystallize along the magma body’s cool model approximates what can happen in nature comes from analysis of igneous rocks. In particular, scientists know that minerals that form in the same general temperature regime depicted in Bowen’s reaction series are found together in the same igneous rocks. For example, notice in and muscovite, which are located in the same region of Bowen’s diagram, are typically found together as major constituents of the intrusive igneous rock granite.

Bowen demonstrated that minerals crystallize from magma in a systematic fashion. But how do Bowen’s findings account for the great diversity of igneous rocks? It has been shown that, at one or more stages during the The Palisades Sill, as seen Palisades form impressive cliffs along the west side of the Hudson River for more than 80 kilometers (50 miles). This structure, which is visible from Manhattan, formed when magma was injected between layers of sandstone and shale. (Terese Loeb with silica, and should a subsequent eruption occur, the rocks generated will be more silica-rich and closer to the felsic end of the compositional range than the initial magma.

Magma mixing This is one way the composition of a magma body can change.

Bowen successfully demonstrated that through magmatic differentiation, a single parent magma can generate several mineralogically different igneous rocks. However, more recent work indicates that magmatic differentiation involving crystal settling cannot, by itself, account for the entire compositional spectrum of igneous rocks. Once a magma body forms, the incorporation of foreign material can also change its composition. For example, in near-surface environments where rocks are brittle, the magma pushing upward can cause numerous fractures in the overlying rock. The force of the injected magma is often sufficient to dislodge and incorporate the surrounding host rock. Melting of these *Recent studies indicate that the Palisades Sill was produced by multiple injections of magma and does not represent a simple case of crystal settling. However, it is nonetheless an instructional example of that process.

blocks, a process called assimilation, changes the overall chemical composition of the magma body. Another means by which the composition of magma can be altered is called magma mixing. Magma mixing may occur during the ascent of two chemically distinct magma bodies as the more buoyant mass overtakes the more slowly rising body (Figure 4.25). Once they are joined, convective flow stirs the two magmas, generating a single mass that has an intermediate composition. As magma rises through Earth’s brittle upper crust, it may dislodge and incorporate the surrounding host rocks. Melting of these blocks, a process called assimilation, changes the overall composition of the rising magma body.

Assimilation of the host rock by a magma body The composition of magma changes when the molten mass incorporates pieces of surrounding host rock, in a process called 1. Define Bowen’s reaction series. 2. How does the crystallization and settling of the earliest formed minerals affect the composition of the remaining magma? 3. Compare the processes of assimilation and magma mixing.

Partial melting of a hypothetical rock composed of the minerals on Bowen’s reaction series yields two products.

If partial melting of mantle rocks generates most basaltic magmas, what is the source of the magma that crystallizes to form andesitic (intermediate) and granitic (felsic) an intermediate rocks? Recall that silica-rich magmas erupt mainly along to felsic the continental margins. This is strong evidence that continental crust, which is thicker and has a lower density than oceanic crust, must play a role in generating these more highly evolved magmas. One way andesitic magma can form is when a rising mantle-derived basaltic magma undergoes magmatic differentiation as it slowly makes its way through the continental crust. Recall from our discussion of Bowen’s reaction series that as basaltic magma solidifies, the An unmelted residue having silica-poor ferromagnesian minerals crystallize first. a mafic composition. If these iron-rich components are separated from the 4.8 Intrusive Igneous Activity liquid by crystal settling, the remaining melt will have an Andesitic magmas can also form when rising basaltic magmas assimilate crustal rocks that tend to be silica rich. Partial melting of basaltic rocks is yet another way in which at least some andesitic magmas are thought to be produced. Although granitic magmas can be formed through magmatic differentiation of andesitic magmas, most granitic magmas probably form when hot basaltic magma ponds (becomes trapped because of its greater density) below continental crust. When the heat from the hot basaltic magma partially melts the overlying crustal rocks, which are silica rich and have a much lower melting temperature, the result can be the production of large quantities of granitic magmas. This process is thought to have been responsible for the volcanic activity in and around Yellowstone National Park in the distant past.

Partial melting of continental crust generates magma with a granitic composition. Basaltic magma ponds beneath less dense crustal Basaltic magma buoyantly rises through lithospheric 1. Briefly describe why partial melting results in a magma having a composition different from the rock from which it was derived.

Partial melting of peridotite generates basaltic magma. 2. How are most basaltic magmas thought to have 3. What is the process that is thought to generate most granitic magmas?

Compare and contrast these intrusive igneous structures: dikes, sills, batholiths, stocks, and laccoliths. Although volcanic eruptions can be violent and spectacular events, most magma is emplaced and crystallizes at depth, without fanfare. Therefore, understanding the igneous processes that occur deep underground is as important to geologists as studying volcanic events.

When magma rises through the crust, it forcefully displaces preexisting crustal rocks, termed host rock, or country rock. The structures that result from the emplacement of magma into preexisting rocks are called intrusions, or plutons. Because all intrusions form far below Earth’s surface, they are studied primarily after uplifting and erosion (covered in later chapters) have exposed them. The challenge lies in reconstructing the events that generated these structures in vastly different conditions deep underground, millions of years ago. Intrusions are known to occur in a great variety of sizes and shapes. Some of the most common types are tabular (tabula 5 table) shape, whereas others are best described as massive (blob shaped). Also, observe that some of these bodies cut across existing structures, such as sedimentary strata, whereas others form when magma is injected between sedimentary layers. Because of these differences, intrusive igneous bodies are generally classified according to their shape, as either tabular or massive, and by their orientation with respect to the host rock. Igneous bodies are said to be discordant (discordare 5 to disagree) if they cut across existing structures and concordant (concordare 5 to agree) if they inject parallel to features such as sedimentary strata.

Emplacement of Batholiths How did massive granitic batholiths come to reside within sedimentary and metamorphic rocks that are only moderately deformed? What happened to the rock that was displaced by these huge igneous masses? (Geologists call this the “room problem.”) How do magma bodies make their way through several kilometers of solid rock? Geologists continue to study and debate these questions. We know that magma rises because it is less dense than the surrounding rock, much as a cork held at the bottom of a container of water will rise when it is released. In the upper mantle and lower crust, where temperatures and pressures are high, rock is ductile (able to flow). In this setting, buoyant magma bodies 4.8 Intrusive Igneous Activity some of the host rock that was displaced will fill in the space left by the magma body as it passes.* As a magma body nears the surface, it encounters relatively cool, brittle country rock that is not easily pushed aside. Further upward movement may be accomplished by a process called stoping, in which blocks of the roof overlying a hot, rising mass become 4.24). Evidence supporting stoping is found in plutons that contain suspended blocks of country rock called xenoliths (xenos 5 a stranger, lithos 5 stone) . Magma may also melt and assimilate some of the overlying host rock. However, this process is greatly limited by the available thermal energy contained in the magma body. When plutons are emplaced near the surface, the room problem may be solved by “lifting the roof” that overlies the intrusive body.

* An analogous situation occurs when a can of oil-based paint is left in storage. The oily component of the paint is less dense than the pigments used for coloration; thus, oil collects into drops that slowly migrate upward, while the heavier pigments settle to the bottom.

Mountains of Utah produced the first clear evidence that igneous intrusions can lift the sedimentary strata they penetrate. Gilbert named the igneous intrusions he observed laccoliths, which he envisioned as igneous rock forcibly injected between sedimentary strata, so as to arch the beds above while leaving those below relatively flat. It is now known that the five major peaks of the Henry Mountains are not laccoliths but stocks. However, these central magma bodies are the source material for branching offshoots that are true laccoliths, as Gilbert defined them. Numerous other granitic laccoliths have since been Mountains located north of St. George, Utah. Others are found in the La Sal Mountains near Arches National Park and in the Abajo Mountains directly to the south.

hiprock, New Mexico, is an igneous structure that rises more than 510 meters (1700 feet) above the It consists of rock that accumulated in the vent of a volcano that has since been eliminated by erosion. (Photo by Michael Collier) 1. What is meant by the term country rock? 2. Describe dikes and sills, using the appropriate terms from the following list: massive, discordant, tabular, and concordant. 3. Distinguish among batholiths, stocks, and laccoliths in terms of size and shape.

of igneous activity may not be obvious at first glance. However, because volcanoes extrude molten rock that formed at great depth, they provide our only means of directly observing processes that occur many kilometers below Earth’s surface. Furthermore, Earth’s atmosphere and oceans have evolved from gases emitted during volcanic eruptions. Either of these facts is reason enough for igneous activity to warrant our attention.

Explain why some volcanic eruptions are explosive and others are quiescent. Volcanic activity is commonly perceived as a process that produces a picturesque, cone-shaped structure that periodically erupts in a violent manner. However, many eruptions are not explosive. What determines the manner in which volcanoes erupt?

Sinabung explosively North Sumatra province, The source material for volcanic eruptions is magma, molten rock that usually contains some solid crystalline material and varying amounts of dissolved gas. Erupted magma is called lava. The primary factors that affect the behavior of magma are its temperature and composition and, to a lesser extent, the amount of dissolved gases it contains. To varying degrees, these factors determine a magma’s mobility, or viscosity (viscos = sticky). The more viscous the material, the greater its resistance to flow. For example, syrup is more viscous, and thus more resistant to flow, than water.

The effect of temperature on viscosity is easily seen. Just as heating syrup makes it more fluid (less Composition Another significant factor influencing volcanic behavior is the chemical composition of the magma. Recall that a major difference among various igneous rocks is their silica (SiO2) content (Table 5.1). Magmas that produce mafic rocks such as basalt contain about 50 percent silica, whereas magmas that produce felsic rocks (granite and its extrusive equivalent, rhyolite) contain more than 70 percent silica. Intermediate rock types—andesite and diorite—contain about 60 percent content: The more silica in magma, the greater its viscosity. Silica impedes the flow of magma because silicate structures begin to link together into long chains early in the crystallization process. Consequently, felsic (rhyolitic) lavas are very viscous and tend to form comparatively short, thick flows. By contrast, mafic (basaltic) lavas, which contain less silica, are relatively fluid and have been known to travel 300 kilometers (180 miles) or more before congealing.

DThe gaseous components in magma, mainly dissolved water vapor, also affect the mobility of magma. Other factors being equal, water vapor dissolved in magma tends to increase fluidity because it reduces formation of long silicate chains by breaking silicon–oxygen bonds. It follows, therefore, that the loss of gases renders magma (lava) more viscous. Gases also give magmas their explosive character.

You learned in Chapter 4 that most magma is generated by partial melting of the rock peridotite in Earth’s upper mantle, and it tends to have a basaltic composition. Newly formed basaltic magma, which is less dense than the surrounding rock, slowly rises toward the surface. In some settings, high-temperature basaltic magmas reach Earth’s surface, where they produce highly fluid lavas. This most commonly occurs on the ocean floor, in association with seafloor spreading. In continental settings, however, the density of crustal rocks is less than that of the ascending material, causing the magma to pond at the crust–mantle boundary. Heat from the hot magma is often sufficient to partially melt the overlying crustal rocks, generating a less-dense, silica-rich magma, which then continues the journey toward Earth’s surface.

Shield volcanoes, basalt plateaus, cinder cones and rise months or even years before an eruption. The injection of a fresh supply of hot molten rock heats and remobilizes the semi-liquid magma chamber. In addition, swelling of the magma chamber fractures the rock above, allowing the fluid magma to move upward along the newly formed openings, often generating outpourings of lava for weeks, months, or possibly years. The eruption of Kilauea that began in 1983 has been ongoing ever since.

Gases readily escape hot fluid basaltic flows, producing lava fountains. Although often spectacular, these features generally do not cause great loss of life or property.

Eruption column generated by viscous, silica-rich magma Steam and ash eruption column Indonesia, February 7, of fiery ash can be seen racing down the volcanoes slope in the foreground.

usually harmless and generally not associated with major explosive events that cause great loss of life and property. At the other extreme, highly viscous magmas expel fragmented lava at nearly supersonic speeds, creating buoyant plumes consisting mainly of volcanic ash and gases called eruption columns. Eruption columns can rise perhaps 40 kilometers (25 miles) into the atmosphere. Therefore, volcanoes associated with highly viscous magmas are the most destructive to property and human life. Because silica-rich magmas are sticky (viscous), a significant portion of the gaseous materials remain dissolved until the magma nears Earth’s surface, at which time tiny bubbles begin to form and grow. When the pressure exerted by the expanding magma body exceeds the strength of the overlying rock, fracturing occurs. As magma moves up the fractures, a further drop in confining pressure causes even more gas bubbles to form and grow. This chain reaction may generate an explosive event in which magma is literally blown into fragments (ash and pumice) that are carried to great heights by the St. Helens, the collapse of a volcano’s flank can greatly reduce the pressure on the magma below, triggering an explosive eruption (see GEOgraphics 5.1).

Eruptions of highly viscous lavas may produce explosive clouds of hot ash and gases called eruption columns.

When magma in the uppermost portion of the magma chamber is forcefully ejected by the escaping gases, the confining pressure on the molten rock directly below also drops suddenly. Thus, rather than a single “bang,” volcanic eruptions are really a series of explosions that can last for days. Following explosive eruptions, degassed lava may slowly ooze out of the vent to form rhyolitic flows or domeshaped lava bodies that grow over the vent.

List and describe the three categories of materials extruded during volcanic Volcanoes erupt lava, large volumes of gas, and pyroclastic materials (broken rock, lava “bombs,” and ash). In this section we will examine each of these materials.

Eruption of Mount St. Helens On Sunday, May 18, 1980, the most destructive volcanic eruption to occur in North America in recorded history transformed a picturesque volcano into a decapitated remnant. Despite the fact that most residents of the area heeded evacuation warnings the event claimed 57 human lives.

Sears (Willis) Tower 1450 feet Helen’s, leaving a gaping hole. In a brief moment, a prominent volcano was lowered by 1350 feet.

Volcanologist David Johnston, monitoring the volcano from 6 miles away on the morning of May 18, 1980, transmitted the message “Vancouver! Vancouver! This is it!” before being killed by the blast.

During the days following the historic eruption, fine volcanic ash was carried around Earth by strong upper-air winds.

Accumulation of magma over several months caused a large bulge to form on the volcano’s north flank.

Eruption Stages An earthquake caused the collapse of the north flank of the volcano, which triggered a lateral blast that destroyed a 400 square-kilometer area.

Within seconds of the lateral blast, an enormous vertical eruption sent a column of volcanic ash to an altitude of 18 kilometers (11 miles).

Briefly describe the sequence of events that culminated in the May 18, 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens. Beds National Monument, California.

molten lava below continues to advance in a conduit called a lava tube. Some lava tubes exhibit extraordinary dimensions. Kazumura Cave, located on the southeastern slope of Hawaii’s Mauna Loa volcano, is a lava The collapsed section of the roof of a lava tunnel results in a skylight. (Photo great distances from its source, lava tubes are important features of fluid lava flows.

put occurs along oceanic ridges (divergent plate boundaries). When outpourings of lava occur on the ocean floor, the flow’s outer skin quickly freezes (solidifies) to form basaltic glass. However, the interior lava is able to move forward by breaking through the hardened surface. This process occurs over and over, as molten basalt is extruded—like toothpaste from a tightly squeezed tube. The result is a lava flow composed of numerous tube-like structures called pillow lavas, stacked one atop the other. Pillow lavas are useful when reconstructing geologic history because their presence indicates that the lava flow formed below the surface of a water body.

Pillow lava that formed off the coast of In contrast to fluid basaltic magmas that can travel many kilometers, viscous andesitic and rhyolitic magmas tend to generate relatively short prominent flows—a few hundred meters to a few kilometers long. Their upper surface consists largely of massive, detached blocks—hence the name block lava. Although similar to aa flows, these lavas consist of blocks with slightly curved, smooth surfaces rather than the rough, sharp, spiny surfaces typical of aa flows.

Pillow lavas form on the ocean floor and have elongated shapes, resembling toothpaste coming out of a tube.

Types of pyroclastic materials Pyroclastic materials are also commonly referred to as tephra.

More than 64 mm (2.5 inches) 30 mm 1 in.

When volcanoes erupt energetically, they eject pulverized rock, lava, and glass fragments from the vent. The particles produced are called pyroclastic mate*The term volcanic dust is used for fine volcanic ash less than 0.063 mm (0.0025 inch). rials (pyro = fire, clast = fragment) and are also referred to as tephra. These called welded tuff. Sheets of this material, as well as ash fragments range in size from very fine dust and sanddeposits that later consolidate, cover vast portions of the sized volcanic ash (less than 2 millimeters) to pieces western United States. that weigh several tons. Somewhat larger pyroclasts that range in size from Ash and dust particles are produced when gas-rich small beads to walnuts are known as lapilli (“little viscous magma erupts explosively. As magma moves stones”). These ejecta are commonly called cinders up in the vent, the gases rapidly expand, generating a (2–64 millimeters [0.08–2.5 inches]). Particles larger melt that resembles the froth that flows from a bottle than 64 millimeters (2.5 inches) in diameter are of champagne. As the hot gases expand explosively, the called blocks when they are made of hardened lava froth is blown into very fine glassy fragments. When the and bombs when they are ejected as incandescent hot ash falls, the glassy shards often fuse to form a rock from the vent during an eruption of the Japanese So far we have distinguished various pyroclastic materials based largely on the sizes of the fragments. Some materials are also identified by their texture and composition. In particular, scoria is the name applied to vesicular ejecta produced from basaltic fragments are generally found in the size range of lapilli and resemble cinders and clinkers produced by furnaces used to smelt iron. When magmas with intermediate (andesitic) or felsic (rhyolitic) compositions erupt explosively, they emit ash and the vesicular in color and less dense than scoria, and many pumice fragments have so many vesicles that they are light enough to float.

Common vesicular rocks Scoria and pumice are volcanic rocks that exhibit a vesicular texture. Vesicles are small holes left by escaping gas bubbles.

Label a diagram that illustrates the basic features of a typical volcanic cone. The popular image of a volcano is a solitary, graceful, snowcapped cone, such as Mount Hood in Oregon or Japan’s Fujiyama. These picturesque, conical mountains are produced by volcanic activity that occurred intermittently over thousands, or even hundreds of thousands, of years. However, many volcanoes do not fit this image. Cinder cones are quite small and form during a single eruptive phase that lasts a few days to a few years. Alaska’s Valley of Ten Thousand Smokes is a flattopped ash deposit that blanketed a river valley to a depth of 200 meters (650 feet). This event St. Helens eruption. Volcanic landforms come in a wide variety of shapes and sizes, and each volcano has a unique eruptive history. Nevertheless, volcanologists have been able to classify volcanic landforms and determine their eruptive patterns. In this section we will consider the general anatomy of an idealized volcanic cone. We will follow this discussion by exploring the three major types of volcanic cones—shield volcanoes, cinder cones, and composite volcanoes—as well as their associated hazards. Volcanic activity frequently begins when a fissure (crack) develops in Earth’s crust as magma moves forcefully toward the surface. As the gas-rich magma moves up through a fissure, its path is usually localized into a somewhat circular conduit that terminates at a surface opening called a vent. The cone-shaped structure we call a volcanic cone is often created by successive eruptions of lava, pyroclastic material, or frequently a combination of both, often separated by long periods of inactivity. Located at the summit of most volcanic cones is a somewhat funnel-shaped depression, called a crater (crater = a bowl). Volcanoes built primarily of pyroclastic materials typically have craters that form by gradual accumulation of volcanic debris on the surrounding rim. Other craters form during explosive eruptions, as the rapidly ejected particles erode the crater walls. Craters also form when the summit area of a volcano collapses following an eruption. Some volcanoes have very large circular depressions, called calderas, that have diameters greater than 1 kilometer (0.6 mile) and in rare cases can exceed 50 kilometers (30 miles). The formation of various types of calderas will be considered later in this chapter. During early stages of growth, most volcanic discharges come from a central summit vent. As a volcano matures, material also tends to be emitted from fissures that develop along the flanks (sides) or at the base of the volcano. Continued activity from a flank eruption may produce one or more small parasitic cones Mount Etna, for example, has more than 200 secondary vents, some of which have built parasitic cones. Many of these vents, however, emit only gases and are appropriately called fumaroles (fumus = smoke).

Compare the structure of a “typical” composite cone to that of a shield volcano and a cinder cone.

1. Distinguish among a conduit, a vent, and a crater. 2. How is a crater different from a caldera? 3. What is a parasitic cone, and where does it form? 4. What is emitted from a fumarole?

Summarize the characteristics of shield volcanoes and provide one example. broad, slightly domed structure that resembles a warrior’s shield. Most shield volcanoes begin on the ocean floor as seamounts (submarine volcanoes), a few of which grow large enough to form volcanic islands. In fact, many small- to modest-sized oceanic islands are either a single shield volcano or, more often, the coalescence of two or more shields built on massive amounts of pillow lavas. Examples include the Hawaiian Islands, the Canary Islands, Iceland, the Galapagos Islands, and Easter Island. Although less common, some shield volcanoes form on continental crust. Included in this group are Nyamuragira, Africa’s most active volcano, and Newberry volcano in Oregon.

Mauna Loa, Earth’s largest volcano, is one of five shield volcanoes that collectively make up Shield volcanoes are built primarily of fluid basaltic lava flows and contain only a small percentage of pyroclastic materials.

Comparing scales of different types of volcanoes Loa, Hawaii, the largest shield volcano in the Hawaiian chain. Note size Rainier, Washington, a large composite cone. Washington. Note how it dwarfs a typical cinder Crater, Arizona, a typical steep-sided cinder cone.

Shield volcano Mauna Loa, Hawaii to its summit, Mauna Loa is over 9 kilometers (6 miles) high, exceeding the elevation of Mount Everest. The volume of material composing Mauna Loa is roughly 200 times greater than that of a large composite cone such as Mount Rainier. As with Hawaii’s other shield volcanoes, the flanks of Mauna Loa have gentle slopes of only a few degrees. This low angle is due to the very hot, fluid lava that traveled “fast and far” from the vent. In addition, most of the lava (perhaps 80 percent) flowed through a well-developed system of lava tubes. Another feature common to active Calderas on shield volcanoes usually form when the roof above the magma chamber collapses. This occurs after the magma reservoir empties, either following a large eruption or as magma migrates to the flank of a volcano to feed a fissure eruption.

Composite cone Mt. Rainier, Washington Cinder cone Sunset Crater, Arizona shield volcanoes in the world. Kilauea, located in the shadow of Mauna Loa, has experienced more than 50 eruptions since record keeping began in 1823. Several months before each eruptive phase, Kilauea inflates as magma gradually migrates upward and accumulates in a central reservoir located a few kilometers below the summit. For up to 24 hours before an eruption, swarms of small earthquakes warn of the impending activity. Most of the recent activity on Kilauea has occurred along the flanks of the volcano, in a region called the East Rift Zone . The longest and largest rift eruption ever recorded on Kilauea began in 1983 and continues to this day, with no signs of abating (see GEOgraphics 5.2).

Although the shield volcanoes of Hawaii are commonly regarded as “typical” shield volcanoes, other ocean island volcanoes exhibit significant differences. The basaltic shields that comprise the Canary Islands, for example, have been active for as long as 20 million years, compared to most Hawaiian volcanoes that tend to have life spans of about 1 million years. Further, Canary Islands volcanoes tend to eject more pyroclastic material than do Hawaiian eruptions. Despite their differences, most large oceanic shields have similar origins. They form above a long-lived, rising plume of hot mantle rock, called a mantle plume, described in more detail in Section 5.9. As the hot plume ascends through the mantle, the confining pressure drops, triggering partial melting and basaltic magma. This partial melting results in volcanic activity on the ocean floor, producing piles of pillow lavas that evolve into seamounts. Eventually, a few of these structures grow large enough to emerge as volcanic islands.

Volcanic islands continue to grow as long as they are located over a mantle plume, which provides them with a magma source. However, as the lithospheric plate moves away from the zone of melting, volcanic activity ceases. As the lithosphere cools and contracts, the overlying island gradually subsides. Most of the smallest volcanic islands ultimately sink below sea level as plate motion carries them further from the magma 1. Describe the composition and viscosity of the lava associated with shield volcanoes. 2. Are pyroclastic materials a significant component of shield volcanoes? 3. Where do most shield volcanoes form—on the ocean floor or on the continents? 4. Where are the best-known shield volcanoes in the United States? Name some examples in other parts of the world.

Describe the formation, size, and composition of cinder cones. As the name suggests, cinder cones (also called scoria cones) are built from ejected lava fragments that begin to harden in flight to produce the vesicular rock scoria. These pyroclastic fragments range in size from fine ash to bombs that may exceed 1 meter (3 feet) in diameter. However, most of the volume of a cinder cone consists of pea- to walnut-sized fragments that are markedly vesicular and have a black to reddish-brown color. In addition, this pyroclastic material tends to have basaltic composition.

Kilauea’s most recent eruptive phase began along a 6-kilometer ( 4 mile) fissure where a 100-meter (300-foot) high “curtain of fire” formed as red-hot basaltic lava was ejected skyward.

One of many fluid pahoehoe flows that have moved down the flanks of Kilauea since 1983.

The most recent eruption of Kilauea began on January 3, 1983 as a fissure eruption along the East Rift Zone in an area southeast of the summit caldera. These lava fountains quickly built a cinder-and-spatter cone called Puu Oo that produced abundant lava that flowed down the volcano’s slope toward the sea.

In 1986 the eruption shifted eastward to new vent that built a small shield volcano called Kupainanaha. Lava tubes fed flows that extended about 12 kilometers (7 miles) to the sea. These flows buried most of the homes in the village of Kalapana under 15-25 meters (50-80 feet) of lava. It also destroyed a section of the Chain of Craters Road, buried Royal Gardens subdivision, and engulfed the famous Black Sand Beach at Kaimu.

4 miles 6 kilometers Oo in 1992 when lava flowed nearly continuously to the ocean. By 2011, the eruption had added over 500 acres of land to the island, destroyed over 200 structures and buried 14 kilometers (9 miles) of the only major highway through that part of the island. Kilauea volcano continues its activity in two locations. An eruption that began in 2008 in Halemaumau crater, which resides within the summit caldera, remains active. At night, the molten lava lake churns energetically and appears to be spewing fire. Lava continues to flow from the flanks of Puu Oo. The most recent flow began on June 27, 2014 and is slowly advancing toward the town of Pahoa and has the potential to engulf both the town and Highway 130.

At night Halemaumau crater, continues to thrill visitors with the vivid glow that illuminates the plume of gases rising from its molten churning lava lake.

What is the name of the area on Kilauea where the 1983 eruption began? Cinder cones Cinder cones are built from ejected lava fragments (mostly cinders and bombs) and are relatively small—usually less than 300 meters (1000 feet)—in height.

Parícutin, a wellknown cinder cone Parangaricutiro was engulfed by aa lava from Parícutin. The church steeple remains. (Photos An aa flow emanating from the base of the cone buried much of the village of San Juan Parangaricutiro, leaving only remnants of the village’s church.

List the characteristics of composite volcanoes and describe how they form. Earth’s most picturesque yet potentially dangerous volcanoes are composite volcanoes, also page 169). This active zone consists of a chain of continental volcanoes distributed along the west Classic composite cones are large, nearly symmetrical structures consisting of alternating layers of explosively few composite cones, notably Italy’s Etna and Stromboli, display very persistent eruption activity, and molten lava has been observed in their summit craters for decades.

Stromboli is so well known for eruptions that eject incandescent blobs of lava that it has been called the “Lighthouse of the Mediterranean.” Mount Etna has erupted, on average, once every 2 years since 1979. Just as shield volcanoes owe their shape to fluid basaltic lavas, composite cones reflect the viscous nature of the material from which they are made. In general, composite cones are the product of silica-rich magma having an andesitic composition. However, many composite cones also emit various amounts of fluid basaltic lava and, occasionally, pyroclastic material having a felsic (rhyolitic) composition. The silica-rich magmas typical of composite cones generate thick, viscous lavas that travel less than a few kilometers. Composite cones are also noted for generating explosive eruptions that eject huge quantities of pyroclastic material. cones. This classic profile, which adorns calendars and postcards, is partially a result of the way viscous lavas and pyroclastic ejected materials contribute to the cone’s growth. Coarse fragments ejected from the summit crater tend to accumulate near their source and contribute to the steep slopes around the summit. Finer ejected materials, on the other hand, are deposited as a thin layer over a large area that acts to flatten the flank of the cone. In addition, during the early stages of growth, lavas tend to be more abundant and flow greater distances from the vent than they do later in the volcano’s history, which contributes to the cone’s broad base. As a composite volcano matures, the shorter flows that come from the central vent serve to armor and strengthen the summit area. Consequently, steep slopes exceeding 40 degrees are possible. Two of the most perfect cones—Mount Mount Fujiyama, a classic composite volcano Japan’s Fujiyama exhibits the classic form of a composite cone—a steep summit and gently Getty Images, Inc-Liaison) the classic form we expect of composite cones, with steep summits and gently sloping flanks. Despite the symmetrical forms of many composite cones, most have complex histories. Many composite volcanoes have secondary vents on their flanks that have produced cinder cones or even much larger volcanic structures. Huge mounds of volcanic debris surrounding these structures provide evidence that large sections of these volcanoes slid downslope as massive landslides. Some develop amphitheater-shaped depressions at their summits as a result of explosive lateral eruptions—as occurred during the 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens. Often, so much rebuilding has occurred since these eruptions that no trace of these amphitheater-shaped scars remain. Others, such as Crater Lake, have been truncated by the collapse of 1. What name is given to the region having the greatest concentration of composite volcanoes? 2. Describe the materials that compose composite 3. How do the composition and viscosity of lava flows differ between composite volcanoes and shield volcanoes?

Discuss the major geologic hazards associated with volcanoes. Roughly 1500 of Earth’s known volcanoes have erupted at least once, and some several times, in the past 10,000 years. Based on historical records and studies of active volcanoes, 70 volcanic eruptions can be expected each year, and 1 large-volume eruption is likely to occur every decade. Large-magnitude eruptions account for the vast majority of human fatalities. For example, the 1902 eruption of Mount Pelée killed 28,000 people—nearly the entire population of the nearby Today, an estimated 500 million people from Japan and Indonesia, and from Italy to Oregon, live near active volcanoes. They face a number of volcanic hazards, such as destructive pyroclastic flows, molten lava flows, mudflows called lahars, and falling ash and volcanic bombs.

Some of the most destructive forces of nature are pyroclastic flows, which consist of hot gases infused with incandescent ash and larger lava fragments. Also referred to as nuée ardentes (glowing avalanches), these fiery flows can race down steep volcanic slopes at speeds exceeding 100 kilometers (60 miles) per hour. Pyroclastic flows have two components: a low-density cloud of hot expanding gases containing fine ash particles and a ground-hugging portion composed of pumice and other vesicular pyroclastic material.

Driven by Gravity Pyroclastic flows are propelled by the force of gravity and tend to move in a manner similar to snow avalanches. They are mobilized by expanding volcanic gases released from the lava fragments and by the expansion of heated air that is overtaken and trapped in the moving front. These gases reduce friction between ash and pumice fragments, which gravity propels downslope in a nearly frictionless environment. This is why some pyroclastic flow deposits are found many miles from their source. Occasionally, powerful hot blasts that carry small amounts of ash separate from the main body of a pyroclastic flow. These low-density clouds, called surges, can be deadly but seldom have sufficient force to Mount Ontake killed 47 hikers and injured 69 more. Pyroclastic flows may originate in a variety of volcanic settings. Some occur when a powerful eruption blasts pyroclastic material out of the side of a volcano. More frequently, however, pyroclastic flows are generated by the collapse of tall eruption columns during an explosive event. When gravity eventually overcomes the initial upward thrust provided by the escaping gases, the ejected materials begin to fall, sending massive amounts of incandescent blocks, ash, and pumice cascading downslope.

Destruction of St. appeared shortly after the eruption of Mount Pelée in 1902. (Reproduced from the collection of the Library of the eruption. Many vessels were anchored offshore when this photo was taken, as was the case on the day of the eruption. (Photo by prisoner protected in a dungeon—and a few people on ships in the harbor were spared. Scientists arrived on the scene within days and found that although St. Pierre was mantled by only a thin layer of volcanic debris, masonry walls nearly 1 meter (3 feet) thick had been knocked over like dominoes, large trees had been uprooted, and cannons had been torn from their mounts.

One well-documented event of historic proportions was the c.e. 79 eruption of the Italian volcano we now call Mount Vesuvius. For centuries prior to this eruption, Vesuvius had been dormant, with vineyards adorning its sunny slopes. Yet in less than 24 hours, the entire city of Pompeii (near Naples) and a few thousand of its residents were entombed beneath a layer of volcanic ash and pumice. The city and the victims of the eruption remained buried for nearly 17 centuries. The excavation of Pompeii gave archaeologists a superb By reconciling historic records with detailed scientific studies of the region, volcanologists reconstructed the sequence of events. During the first day of the eruption, a rain of ash and pumice accumulated at a rate of 12 to 15 centimeters (5 to 6 inches) per hour, causing most of the roofs in Pompeii to eventually give way. Then, suddenly, a surge of searing hot ash and gas swept rapidly down the flanks of Vesuvius. This deadly pyroclastic flow killed those who had somehow managed to survive the initial ash and pumice fall. Their remains were quickly buried by falling ash, and subsequent rainfall caused the ash to harden. Over the centuries, the remains decomposed, creating cavities that were discovered by nineteenth-century excavators. Casts were then produced by pouring plaster of Paris into than two dozen explosive eruptions since c.e. 79, the most recent occurring in 1944. Today, Vesuvius towers over the Naples skyline, a region occupied by roughly 3 million people. Such an image should prompt us to consider how volcanic crises might be managed in the future.

Lahars: Mudflows on Active In addition to violent eruptions, large composite cones may generate a type of fluid mudflow known by its Indonesian name, lahar. These destructive flows occur when volcanic debris becomes saturated with water and rapidly moves down steep volcanic slopes, generally following stream valleys. Some lahars are triggered when magma nears the surface of a glacially clad volcano, causing large volumes of ice and snow to melt. Others are generated when heavy rains saturate weathered volcanic deposits. Thus, lahars may occur even when a volcano is not erupting.

Lahars, mudflows that originate on volcanic down the Toutle River, which flows westward from Mount St. Helens, following the May 18, the muddy consistency of lahar deposits.

Close-up view of bridge. When Mount St. Helens erupted in 1980, several lahars were generated. These flows and accompanying floodwaters raced down nearby river valleys at speeds exceeding 30 kilometers (20 miles) per hour. These raging rivers of mud destroyed or severely damaged nearly all the homes and bridges along their paths. Fortunately, the area was not densely populated. In 1985, deadly lahars were produced during a small eruption of Nevado del Ruiz, a 5300-meter (17,400-foot) volcano in the Andes Mountains of Colombia. Hot pyroclastic material melted ice and snow that capped the mountain (nevado means “snow” in Spanish) and sent torrents of ash and debris down three major river valleys that flank the volcano. Reaching speeds of 100 kilometers (60 miles) per hour, these mudflows tragically claimed 25,000 lives. Many consider Mount Rainier, Washington, to be America’s most dangerous volcano because, like Nevado del Ruiz, it has a thick, year-round mantle of snow and glacial ice. Adding to the risk, more than 100,000 people live in the valleys around Rainier, and many homes are built on deposits left by lahars that flowed down the volcano perhaps just a period of heavier-than-average rainfall, may produce lahars that could be similarly destructive.

Eruption column AFLO/Nippon News/Corbis Ash and other pyroclastic materials can collapse roofs, or completely cover buildings.

Emission of sulfur dioxide Lava flows can destroy homes, roads, and other structures in their paths.

Volcanic hazards In addition to generating destructive pyroclastic flows and lahars, volcanoes can be hazardous to human health and property in many other dioxide, pollute the air—and when mixed with rainwater, can destroy vegetation and reduce the quality of groundwater. Despite the known risks, millions of people live in close proximity to active volcanoes.

One hazard associated with volcanoes is their ability to generate tsunamis. Although usually caused by strong earthquakes, these destructive sea waves sometimes result from powerful volcanic explosions or the sudden collapse of flanks of volcanoes into the ocean. In 1883, a volcanic eruption on the Indonesian island Krakatau literally tore the island apart and generated a tsunami that claimed an estimated 36,000 lives. Volcanic Ash and Aviation During the past 15 years, at least 80 commercial jets have been damaged by inadvertently flying into clouds of volcanic ash. For example, in 1989, a Boeing 747 carrying more than 300 passengers All four of the engines stalled when they became clogged with ash. Fortunately, the pilots were able to restart the More recently, the 2010 eruption of Iceland’s Eyjafjallajökull volcano sent ash high into the atmosphere. The thick plume of ash drifted over Europe, causing airlines to cancel thousands of flights, leaving hundreds of thousands of travelers stranded. Several weeks passed before air travel resumed its normal schedule.

This huge eruption also endangered people and property all across Europe. Crop failure occurred in parts of Western Europe, and thousands of residents than 140,000 cardiopulmonary fatalities in Europe, as well as thousands of deaths elsewhere in the world.

Volcanic eruptions can eject dust-sized particles of volcanic ash and sulfur dioxide gas high into the atmosphere. The ash particles reflect sunlight back to space, producing temporary atmospheric cooling. The 1783 Laki eruption in Iceland appears to have affected atmospheric circulation around the globe. Drought conditions prevailed in the Nile River Valley and India, while the winter of 1784 brought the longest period of belowzero temperatures in New England’s history. Other eruptions that have produced significant effects on climate worldwide include the eruption of Indonesia’s Mount Tambora in 1815, which produced the “year without a summer” (1816), and the eruption of El Chichón in Mexico in 1982. El Chichón’s eruption, although small, emitted an unusually large quantity of sulfur dioxide that reacted with water vapor in the atmosphere to produce a dense cloud of tiny sulfuric acid droplets. These particles, called aerosols, take several years to settle out of the atmosphere. Like fine ash, these aerosols lower the mean temperature of the atmosphere by reflecting solar radiation back to space.

1. Describe pyroclastic flows and explain why they are capable of traveling great distances. 2. What is a lahar? 3. List at least three volcanic hazards besides pyroclastic flows and lahars.

List volcanic landforms other than shield, cinder, and composite volcanoes and describe their formation. Recall that calderas are large steep-sided depressions with diameters exceeding 1 kilometer (0.6 miles) that have a somewhat circular form. Similar depressions less than 1 kilometer across are called collapse pits, or craters. Most calderas are formed by one of the following processes: (1) the collapse of the summit of a large composite volcano following an explosive eruption of silica-rich pumice and ash fragments (Crater Lake–type calderas); (2) the collapse of the top of a shield volcano caused by subterranean drainage from a central magma chamber (Hawaiiantype calderas); and (3) the collapse of a large area, caused by the discharge of Magma chamber colossal volumes of silica-rich pumice Newly formed caldera fills and ash along ring with rain and groundwater. fractures (Yellowstone-type calderas).

An explosive eruption partially empties a shallow magma chamber.

Summit of volcano enhancing the Subsequent eruptions produce the cinder cone called Wizard Island.

Lake, Oregon, is situated in a caldera approximately 10 kilometers (6 miles) wide and 1175 meters (more than 3800 feet) deep. This caldera formed about 7000 years ago, when a composite Mazama violently Crater Lake extruded 50 to 70 cubic kilometers of pyroclastic material . With the loss of support, 1500 meters (nearly 1 mile) of the summit Michael Collier of this once-prominent cone collapsed, producing a caldera that eventually Close-up view of filled with rainwater. Later, volcanic activity built a small Wizard Island. cinder cone in the caldera. Today this cone, called Wizard Island, provides a mute reminder of past activity.

Historic and destructive Hawaiian-Type Calderas Unlike Crater Lake–type calderas, many calderas form gradually because of the loss of lava from a shallow magma chamber underlying the volcano’s summit. For example, Hawaii’s active shield volcanoes, Mauna Loa and Kilauea, both have large calderas at their summits. Kilauea’s measures 3.3 by 4.4 kilometers (about 2 by 3 miles) and is 150 meters (500 feet) deep. The walls are almost vertical, and as a result, the caldera looks like a vast, nearly flat-bottomed pit. Kilauea’s caldera formed by gradual subsidence as magma slowly drained laterally from the underlying magma chamber, leaving the summit unsupported. 

Kilauea’s caldera measures 3.3 by 4.4 kilometers (about 2 by 3 miles) and is 150 meters (500 feet) deep. More recent flows are dark, while the older flows are pale because the iron in the lava oxidizes into “rust.” Halemáumáu, the pit crater in the southwestern part of the caldera, was active as recently as 2012.

more magma accumulates, the pressure within the magma chamber begins to exceed the pressure exerted by the weight of the overlying rocks (Figure 5.24). An eruption occurs when the gas-rich magma raises the overlying crust enough to create vertical fractures extending to the surface. Magma surges upward along these cracks, forming a ring-shaped eruption. With a loss of support, the roof of the magma chamber collapses. Caldera-forming eruptions are of colossal proportions, ejecting huge volumes of pyroclastic materials, mainly in the form of ash and pumice fragments. Typically, these materials form pyroclastic flows that sweep across the his image was obtained during the 1991 This was the largest eruption to affect a densely populated area in recent times. Timely forecasts of the event by scientists were credited with saving at least 5,000 lives. (Alberto Garcia/CORBIS) pumice-laden cloud that is racing toward the move down steep mountain slopes?

landscape, destroying most living things in their paths. Upon coming to rest, the hot fragments of ash and pumice fuse together, forming a welded tuff that closely resembles a solidified lava flow. Despite the immense size of these calderas, the eruptions that cause them are brief, lasting hours to perhaps a few days. Large calderas tend to exhibit a complex eruptive hisYellowstone tory. In the Yellowstone region, for example, three calderaOld forming episodes are known to have occurred over the r im l d er a (630,000 years ago) was followed by episodic outpourings of degassed rhyolitic and basaltic lavas. Geologic evidence suggests that a magma reservoir still exists beneath Yel0 10 Miles 0 5 10 Kilometers lowstone; thus, another caldera-forming eruption is likely—but not necessarily imminent. ash 1980 caldera-forming eruptions is a slow upheaval of the floor of the caldera that produces a central elevated region called a resurgent dome (see Mesa Falls shield volcanoes or composite cones, Yellowstoneash bed (1.3 mya) type depressions are so large and poorly defined that many remained undetected until high-quality Huckleberry Ridge and satellite images became available. Other ash bed (2.1 mya) Lava Creek ash bed are California’s Long Valley caldera; LaGarita caldera, (0.64 mya) located in the San Juan Mountains of southern Colorado; Mexico. These and similar calderas found elsewhere around the globe are among the largest volcanic structures on Earth, hence the name “supervolcanoes.” Volcanologists compare eruptions, separated by relatively regular intervals of about 700,000 years, their destructive force to that of the impact of a small asteroid. Fortunately, no Yellowstonewere responsible for the ash layers shown. The largest of these eruptions was 6000 times greater than the 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens. type eruptions have occurred in historic times. Hot Springs 1. The emplacement of silica-rich magma causes the layers of rock above to bulge and crack, producing a set of ring fractures.

Basaltic fissure eruptions Lava fountaining from a fissure and formation of fluid lava flows called flood basalts. The lower photo shows flood basalt flows near Idaho Falls.

State has cut a canyon about 300 meters (1000 feet) deep into the flood basalts of the Columbia Plateau.

Lava domes are produced when highly viscous magma slowly rises over a period of months or years.

New Mexico, is a volcanic neck that stands about 520 meters (1700 feet) high. It consists of igneous rock that crystallized in the vent of a volcano that has long since been eroded.

Shiprock, New Mexico is a volcanic neck composed of igneous rock which solidified in the conduit of a volcano. victims were journalists and film makers who ventured too close to the volcano in order to obtain photographs and document the event.

In most volcanic eruptions, lava is fed through short conduits that connect shallow magma chambers to vents located at the surface. When a volcano becomes inactive, congealed magma often becomes preserved in the feeding conduit of the volcano as a crudely cylindrical mass. However, all volcanoes succumb to forces of weathering and erosion. As erosion progresses, the rock occupying the volcanic conduit, which is highly resistant to weathering, may remain standing above the surrounding terrain Mexico, is a widely recognized and spectacular example of these structures, which geologists call volcanic necks (or plugs). More than 510 meters (1700 feet) high, Shiprock is taller than most skyscrapers and is One rare type of conduit, called a pipe, carries magma that originated in the mantle at depths that may exceed 150 kilometers (93 miles). The gas-laden magmas that migrate through pipes travel rapidly enough to remain essentially unaltered during their ascent.

The best-known volcanic pipes are the diamondbearing kimberlite pipes of South Africa. The rocks filling these pipes originated at great depths, where pressure is sufficiently high to generate diamonds and other minerals formed under high pressure. The process of transporting essentially unaltered magma (along with diamond inclusions) through 150 kilometers (100 miles) of solid rock is exceptional—and accounts for the scarcity of natural diamonds. Geologists consider pipes to be “windows” into Earth that allow us to view rocks that normally form only at great depths.

1. Describe the formation of Crater Lake. Compare it to the calderas found on shield volcanoes such as Kilauea. 2. In addition to composite volcanoes, what other volcanic landform can generate a pyroclastic flow? Plateau differ from eruptions that create large composite volcanoes? 4. Contrast the composition of a typical lava dome and a typical fissure eruption. Mexico, and how did it form?

Explain how the global distribution of volcanic activity is related to plate tectonics. Geologists have known for decades that the global distribution of most of Earth’s volcanoes is not random. Most active volcanoes on land are located along the margins of the ocean basins—notably within the circum-Pacific belt known as the Ring of Fire. These volcanoes consist mainly of composite cones that emit volatile-rich magma that has an andesitic (intermediate) composition and occasionally produce awe-inspiring eruptions. Another group of volcanoes includes the innumerable seamounts that form along the crest of the mid-ocean ridges. At these depths (1 to 3 kilometers below sea level), the pressures are so intense that the gases emitted quickly dissolve in the seawater and never reach the surface. There are some volcanic structures, however, that appear to be somewhat randomly distributed around the globe. These volcanic structures comprise most of the Prior to the development of the theory of plate tectonics, geologists did not have an acceptable explanation for the distribution of Earth’s volcanoes. Recall that most magma originates in rocks from Earth’s upper mantle that is essentially solid, not molten. The basic connection between plate tectonics and volcanism is that plate motions provide the mechanisms by which mantle rocks undergo partial melting to generate magma.

Sandwich Is. Deception Is. Ring of Fire Most of Earth’s major volcanoes are located in a zone around the Pacific called the Ring of Fire. Another large group of active volcanoes lie undiscovered along the mid-ocean ridge system.

Volcanism associated with convergent plate boundaries may also develop where slabs of oceanic lithosphere are subducted under continental lithosphere to produce a that generate these mantle-derived magmas are essentially the same as those that create volcanic island arcs. The most significant difference is that continental crust is much thicker and is composed of rocks having higher silica content than oceanic crust. Hence, a mantle-derived magma changes chemically as it rises by assimilating silica-rich crustal rocks. At the same time, extensive magmatic differentiation occurs. (Recall from Chapter 4 that magmatic differentiation is the formation of secondary magmas from parent magma.) Stated another way, the magma generated in the mantle may change from a fluid basaltic magma to a silica-rich andesitic or rhyolitic magma as it moves up through the continental crust. The Ring of Fire, a belt of explosive volcanoes, surrounds the Pacific basin where oceanic lithosphere is of the Cascade Range in the northwestern United States, Shasta, are examples of volcanoes generated at a convergent plate boundary.

Cascade Range volcanoes Subduction of the Juan de Fuca plate along the Cascadia subduction zone produced the Cascade volcanoes.

Water driven from plate The greatest volume of magma (perhaps 60 percent of Earth’s total yearly output) is produced along the oceanic ridge system in association with seafloor spreading plates are continually being pulled apart, the solid yet mobile mantle responds by ascending to fill the rift. You learned in Chapter 4 that as hot rock rises, it experiences a decrease in confining pressure and undergoes decompression melting without the addition of heat. Partial melting of mantle rock at spreading centers produces basaltic magma. Because this newly formed magma is less dense than the mantle rock from which it was derived, it rises and collects in reservoirs located just below the ridge crest. This activity continuously adds new basaltic rock to plate margins, temporarily welding them together, only to have them break again as spreading continues. Along some ridge segments, outpourings of pillow lavas build numerous Although most spreading centers are located along the axis of an oceanic ridge, some are not. In particular, 2.15, page 49). Vast outpourings of fluid basaltic lavas as well as several active composite volcanoes are found in this region of the globe.

Intraplate volcanism that involves mantle plumes is also thought to be responsible for some massive eruptions of felsic (rhyolitic) pyroclastic material that occurred in a continental setting. The best know of these hot-spot eruptions are the three caldera-forming eruptions that occurred in the Yellowstone region.

1. Are volcanoes in the Ring of Fire generally described as quiescent or violent? Name an example that supports your answer. 2. How is magma generated along convergent plate 3. Volcanism at divergent plate boundaries is most often associated with which rock type? What causes rocks to melt in these settings? 4. What is the source of magma for most intraplate 5. Which type of plate boundary generates the greatest quantity of magma?

Because of plate movement, volcanic activity from the rising tail of the plume generates a linear chain of smaller volcanic structures.

Rapid decompression melting of the plume head produces extensive outpourings of flood basalts over a relatively short time span.

Hot spot Volcanic trail List and describe the techniques used to monitor potentially dangerous volcanoes.

Why monitor volcanoes? Volcano monitoring has two primary goals. It provides basic scientific data that helps geologists understand the structure and dynamics of a specific volcano as well as volcanoes in general. Equally important, volcanic monitoring is critical for hazard assessment because millions of people live and work on or near volcanoes. In this role, monitoring addresses questions like, “When will an impending eruption occur?” Monitoring volcanoes using infrared cameras Remote-sensing cameras on satellites have greatly enhanced our ability to monitor volcanoes. Infrared (heat) sensors produce false-color images of volcanoes that show hot objects in warm colors and cold objects in cool colors. This image shows an eruption of Mount St. Augustine volcano, Alaska, that occurred on March 27, 1986.

False color satellite image of Mount St. Augustine that shows the hottest material, the volcanic crater, on the north flank of the volcano appears bright red, while the coldest snow covered areas of the cone on the east flank of the cone and several lahars (mudflows) are shown as dark lobes.

Volcanologists utilize several volcano monitoring techniques, with most of the efforts aimed at detecting the movement of magma from a subterranean reservoir (typically several kilometers deep) toward the surface. The three most noticeable changes in a volcanic landscape caused by the migration of magma are (1) changes in the pattern of earthquakes produced by the movement of magma; (2) magma entering a near-surface magma chamber, which leads to inflation of the volcano; and his image shows the Buddhist monastery Taung Kalat, located in central Myanmar (Burma). The monastery sits high on a sheersided rock made mainly of magmas that solidified in the conduit of an ancient volcano. The volcano has since been worn away. (Photo by Dreamstime) structure do you think is shown in this photo? have been associated with a composite volcano or cinder cone? Explain how you arrived at your answer.

(3) changes in the amount and/or composition of gases released from a volcano. Almost one-third of all volcanoes that have erupted in historic times are now monitored using seismographs, instruments that detect earthquake tremors. In general, a sharp increase in seismic unrest followed by a period of relative quiet has been shown to be a precursor of many volcanic eruptions. However, some large volcanic structures have exhibited lengthy periods of seismic unrest. For example, in 1981, a strong increase in seismicity The activity lasted 13 years and culminated with an eruption in 1994. Occasionally, a large earthquake triggers a volcanic eruption, or at least disturbs the volcano’s plumbing. Hawaii’s Kilauea, for example, began to erupt after the strong Kalapana earthN quake (magnitude 7.2) of 1975. The development of remote-sensing devices has greatly enhanced our ability to monitor volcanoes. These instruments and techniques are particularly useful for monitoring eruptions in progress. Photographic images and infrared (heat) sensors can detect lava flows and volcanic columns rising from a volcano. Furthermore, satellites can detect ground deformation as well as monitor sulfur dioxide emissions. Because accessibility to many volcanoes is limited, remote-sensing devices, including lasers, Global deflation of a volcano as magma moves within. Inflation often precedes an eruption phase by a few months, or longer.

horizontal and vertical ground motions on Mount from a fumarole. The analysis of volcanic gases is used in the long-term study of volcanic systems.

gas emissions has been shown to precede an eruption. the roof of a volcano rises as new magma accumulates in its interior—a phenomenon that precedes many volcanic Three Sisters volcanoes in 2000 was first detected using images obtained from satellites. Volcanologists also frequently monitor volcanoes in volcanoes show an increase in sulfur dioxide emissions months or years prior to an eruption. The overriding goal of all monitoring is to discover precursors that may warn of an impending or imminent must observe a volcano over an extended period of time in order to recognize significant changes from its “resting Unfortunately, accurately predicting the timing and the potential hazard of a volcanic eruption still eludes scientists. This is perhaps best demonstrated by the February 2015 eruption of Sinabung volcano in Sumatra, Indonesia. This deadly eruption claimed at least 16 lives and occurred just days after authorities gave the “all-clear” for residents to return to their homes on Sinabung’s slopes.

Weathering processes helped shape the rock formations Majchrowicz/AGE Fotostock) is constantly changing. Rock is disintegrated and decomposed, moved to lower elevations by gravity, and carried away by water, wind, or ice. In this manner, Earth’s physical landscape is sculpted. This chapter focuses on the first step of this never-ending process—weathering. It looks at what causes solid rock to crumble and why the type and rate of weathering vary from place to place. Soil, an important product of the weathering process and a vital resource, is also examined.

Weathering involves the physical breakdown (disintegration) and chemical alteration (decomposition) of rock at or near Earth’s surface. Weathering goes on all around us, but it seems like such a slow and subtle process that it is easy to underestimate its importance. Yet weathering is a basic part of the rock cycle and thus a key process in the Earth system. Weathering is also important to humans—even to those of us who do not study geology. For example, many of the life-sustaining minerals and elements found in soil, and ultimately in the food we eat, were freed from solid rock of some of Earth’s most spectacular scenery. Of course, these same processes are also responsible for causing the deterioration of many of the structures we build.

There are two basic categories of weathering. Mechanical weathering is accomplished by physical forces that break rock into smaller and smaller pieces without changing the rock’s mineral composition. Chemical weathering involves a chemical transformation of rock into one or more new compounds. These two concepts can be illustrated by a large log. The log disintegrates when it is split into smaller and smaller pieces, whereas decomposition occurs when the log is set afire and burned. GEOgraphics 6.1 provides other examples of weathering. Why does rock weather? Simply, weathering is the response of Earth materials to a changing environment. For instance, after millions of years of uplift and erosion (the removal and transport of weathered rock material by water, wind, or ice), the rocks overlying a large, intrusive igneous body may be removed, exposing it at the surface. This mass of crystalline rock—formed deep below ground, where temperatures and pressures are high—is now subjected to a very different and comparatively hostile surface environment. In response, this rock mass will gradually change. This transformation of rock is what we call weathering. In the following sections we will examine the various types of mechanical and chemical weathering. Although we will consider these two categories separately, keep in mind that mechanical and chemical weathering processes usually work simultaneously in nature and reinforce each 1. What are the two basic categories of weathering? 2. How do the products of each category of weathering differ?

For many years, the conventional wisdom was that most frost wedging occurred in this way. However, research has shown that frost wedging can also occur in a different way.* It has long been known that when moist soils freeze, they expand, or frost heave, due to the growth of ice lenses. These masses of ice grow larger because they are supplied with water migrating from unfrozen areas as thin liquid films. As more water accumulates and freezes, the soil is heaved and pore spaces of rocks. Lenses of ice grow larger as they attract liquid water from surrounding pores. The growth of these ice masses gradually weakens the rock, causing it to fracture.

Another expansive force that can split rocks is created by the growth of salt crystals. Rocky shorelines and arid regions are common settings for this process. It begins when sea spray from breaking waves or salty groundwater penetrates crevices and pore spaces in rock. As this water evaporates, salt crystals form. As these crystals gradually grow larger, they weaken the rock by pushing apart the surrounding grains or enlarging tiny cracks. This same process can also contribute to the crumbling of roadways where salt is spread to melt snow and ice in winter. The salt dissolves in water and seeps into cracks that quite likely originated from frost action. When the water evaporates, the growth of salt crystals further breaks the pavement.

When large masses of igneous rock, particularly granite, are exposed at Earth’s surface by erosion, concentric slabs begin to break loose. The process that generates these onion-like layers is called sheeting. It takes place, at least in part, due to the great reduction in pressure that occurs as the overlying rock is eroded what happens: As the overburden is removed, the outer parts of the granitic mass expand more than the rock below and separate from the rock body. Continued weathering eventually causes the slabs to separate and *Bernard Hallet, “Why Do Freezing Rocks Break?” Science 314(17): 1092–1093, November 2006. peel off, creating an exfoliation dome (ex = off, folium = leaf). Excellent examples of exfoliation domes are Frost wedging Cap in Yosemite National Park. when human activities reduce the confining pressure, similar to what occurs during unloading. For example, in deep mines, large rock slabs have been known to explode off the Slightly tilted sedimentary beds walls of newly cut tunnels. In quarries, fractures occur parallel to the floor when large blocks of rock are of snow Although many fracTalus slope composed of tures are created by expanangular rock fragments sion, others are produced by contraction during the crystallization of magma, and still others are produced by tectonic forces during mountain building.

Joints aid weathering Aerial view of nearly parallel joints near Moab, Utah. (Photo by Michael Collier) Fractures produced by these activities generally form a definite pattern and are called joints. Joints are important rock structures that allow water to penetrate to depth and start the process of weathering long before the rock is exposed.

Plants can break rock Root wedging near Boulder, Colorado. (Photo by Kristin Piljay) 1. When a rock is mechanically weathered, how does its surface area change? How does this influence chemical weathering? 2. Explain how water can cause mechanical 3. Describe how an exfoliation dome forms. 4. How do joints promote weathering? 5. How does biological activity contribute to his is a close-up view of a massive granite feature in the Sierra Nevada of California. (Photo by Marli Miller) granite are separating from this rock mass. Describe the process that caused this to occur. process? What term describes the domelike feature that results?

Discuss the role of water in each of three chemical weathering processes. In the preceding discussion of mechanical weathering, you learned that breaking rock into smaller pieces aids chemical weathering by increasing the surface area available for chemical attack. It should also be pointed out that chemical weathering contributes to mechanical weathering by weakening the outer portions of some rocks, which, in turn, makes them more susceptible to being broken by mechanical weathering processes. Chemical weathering involves the complex processes that break down rock components and internal structures of minerals. Such processes convert the constituents to new minerals or release them to the surrounding environment. During this transformation, the original rock decomposes into substances that are stable in the surface environment. Consequently, the products of chemical weathering will remain essentially unchanged as long as they remain in an environment similar to the one in which they formed. Water is by far the most important agent of chemical weathering. Pure water alone is a good solvent, and small amounts of dissolved materials result in increased chemical activity for weathering solutions. The major processes of chemical weathering are dissolution, oxidation, and hydrolysis. Water plays a leading role in each.

Perhaps the easiest type of decomposition to envision is the process of dissolution. Just as sugar dissolves in water, so too do certain minerals. One of the most water-soluble minerals is halite (common salt), which, as you may recall, is composed of sodium and chloride ions. Halite readily dissolves in water because, although this compound maintains overall electrical neutrality, the individual ions retain their respective charges. Moreover, the surrounding water molecules are polar—that is, the oxygen end of the molecule has a small residual negative charge; the hydrogen end has a small positive charge. As the water molecules come in contact with halite, their negative ends approach sodium ions, and their positive ends cluster about chloride ions. This disrupts the attractive forces in the halite crystal and releases the ions to the water solution. Although most minerals are, for all practical purposes, insoluble in pure water, the presence of even a small amount of acid dramatically increases the corrosive force of water—thus causing dissolution. (An acidic nature, acids are produced by a number of processes. For example, carbonic acid is created when carbon dioxide in the atmosphere dissolves in raindrops. As acidic rainwater soaks into the ground, carbon dioxide in the soil may increase the acidity of the weathering solution. Various organic acids are also released into the soil as organisms Water molecules are polar because both hydrogen atoms bond to the same side of an oxygen atom. Thus, the hydrogen side of the molecule is slightly positive, and the oxygen side is slightly negative.

The soluble ions from reactions of this type are retained in our underground water supply. These dissolved ions are responsible for the so-called hard water found in many locales. Hard water is considered undesirable because the active ions react with soap to produce an insoluble material that renders soap nearly useless in removing dirt. To solve this problem, a water softener can be used to remove these ions, generally by replacing them with others that do not chemically react with soap.

Halite crystals consist of ions that are attracted to polar water molecules.

During this process, the insoluble calcium carbonate is transformed into soluble products. In nature, over periods of thousands of years, large quantities of limestone are dissolved and carried away by underground water. This activity is largely responsible for the formation of limestone caverns. Monuments and buildings made of limestone or marble are also subjected to the corrosive work of acids, particularly in urban and industrial areas that have smoggy, polluted air.

*Note that oxidation is a term that refers to any chemical reaction in which a compound or radical loses electrons. The element oxygen is not necessarily Acidic waters create caves The dissolving power of carbonic acid plays an important role in creating limestone caverns. This image shows the Chinese Theater area in MacDonald/AGE Fotostock) hazard, particularly in humid areas where abundant rainfall infiltrates spoil banks (waste material left after coal or other minerals are removed). This socalled acid mine drainage eventually makes its way to streams, killing aquatic organisms and degrading aquatic habitats .

The most common mineral group, the silicates, is decomposed primarily by the process of hydrolysis (hydro 5 water, lysis 5 a loosening), which basically is the reaction of any substance with water. Ideally, the hydrolysis of a mineral could take place in pure water as some of the and replaces other positive ions found in the crystal lattice. With the introduction of hydrogen ions into the crystalline structure, the original orderly arrangement of atoms is destroyed, and the mineral decomposes.

Weathering attacks a face on one side minerals make up most of Earth’s crust and that these minerals are essentially composed of only eight elements. When chemically weathered, these silicate minerals yield sodium, calcium, potassium, and magnesium ions that form soluble products, which may be removed from groundwater. The element iron combines with oxygen, producing relatively insoluble iron oxides, most notably hematite and limonite, which give soil a reddish-brown or yellowish color. Under most conditions, the three remaining elements—aluminum, silicon, and oxygen—join with water to produce residual clay minerals. However, even the highly insoluble clay minerals are very slowly removed by subsurface water.

Many rock outcrops have a rounded appearance. This occurs because chemical weathering works inward angular masses of jointed rock change through time. The process is aptly called spheroidal weathering.

Tree National Park, California Because weathering attacks edges from two sides and corners from three sides, these areas wear down faster than a single flat surface. Gradually, sharp edges and corners become smooth and rounded. Eventually an angular block may evolve into a nearly spherical boulder. Once this occurs, the boulder’s shape does not change, but the spherical mass continues to get his sample of granite is rich in potassium feldspar and quartz. There are minor quantities of biotite and hornblende.

were to undergo chemical weathering, how would its minerals change? Describe the products you would expect to result from each of the minerals in the 1. How is carbonic acid formed in nature? 2. What occurs when carbonic acid reacts with calcite-rich rocks such as limestone? 3. What products result when carbonic acid reacts with potassium feldspar? 4. List several minerals that are especially susceptible to oxidation and list two common products of oxidation.

minerals decompose? If not, which mineral would likely be most resistant and remain relatively intact?

5. Explain how angular masses of rock often become spherical boulders. Summarize the factors that influence the type and rate of rock weathering.

We have already seen how mechanical weathering affects the rate of weathering. When rock is broken into smaller pieces, the amount of surface area exposed to chemical weathering increases. Other important factors that influence the type and rate of rock weathering include rock characteristics and climate.

Rock type influences weathering An examination of headstones in the same cemetery shows that the rate of chemical weathering is influenced by rock type.

This granite headstone was erected in 1868. The inscription is still fresh looking. Rock characteristics encompass all of the chemical traits of rocks, including mineral composition and solubility. In addition, any physical features, such as joints, can be important because they influence the ability of water to penetrate rock. The variations in weathering rates due to the mineral constituents can be demonstrated by comparing old headstones made from different rock types. Headstones of granite, which is composed of silicate minerals, are relatively resistant This monument is composed of marble, contrast, marble headstones a calcite-rich metamorphic rock. The show signs of extensive chemiheadstone was erected in 1872, four cal alteration over a relatively years after the granite stone. The inscription is nearly illegible. short period. We can see this by composed of calcite (calcium carbonate), which readily dissolves even in a weakly acidic solution. The silicates, the most abundant mineral group, chemically weather in essentially the same order in which they crystallize. By examining Bowen’s 125), you can see that olivine crystallizes first and is therefore least resistant to chemical weathering, whereas quartz, which crystallizes last, is the most resistant.

Climatic factors, particularly temperature and precipitation, are crucial to the rate of rock weathering. For example, the frequency of freeze–thaw cycles greatly affects the amount of frost wedging, an important type of mechanical weathering. Temperature and moisture also exert a strong influence on rates of chemical weathering and determine the kind and amount of vegetation present. Regions with lush vegetation often have a thick mantle of soil rich in decayed organic matter from which chemically active fluids such as carbonic acid and humic acids are The optimum environment for chemical weathering is a combination of warm temperatures and abundant moisture. In polar regions, chemical weathering is ineffective because frigid temperatures keep the available moisture locked up as ice, whereas in arid regions, there is insufficient moisture to promote rapid chemical Human activities often produce pollutants that alter the composition of the atmosphere. Such changes can, in turn, influence the rate of chemical weathering. One well-known example is acid rain.

Masses of rock do not weather uniformly. Take a moment to look back at 168). The durable volcanic neck protrudes high above photo of Joshua Tree National Park shows an additional example of this phenomenon, called differential weathering. The results vary in scale from the rough, uneven Bisti Badlands. Differential weathering and subsequent erosion are responsible for creating many unusual, often spectacular rock formations and landforms. Many factors influence Monuments to weathering This example of differential Bisti Badlands. When weathering accentuates differences in rocks, spectacular landforms are sometimes created. (Photo by Michael Collier) (http://goo.gl/MGqs7b) the different rates of rock weathering. Among the most important are variations in rock composition. More resistant rock protrudes as ridges or pinnacles, or as steeper weathered so differently. 2. How does climate influence weathering?

Weathering is a key process in the formation of soil. Along with air and water, soil is one of our most indispensable resources. Also like air and water, soil is often taken for granted. The following quote helps put this vital layer in perspective: Science, in recent years, has focused more and more on the Earth as a planet, one that for all we know is unique—where a thin blanket of air, a thinner film of water, and the thinnest veneer of soil combine to support a web of life of wondrous diversity in continuous change.* Soil has accurately been called “the bridge between life and the inanimate world.” All life—the entire biosphere—owes its existence to a dozen or so elements that must ultimately come from Earth’s crust. Once weathering and other processes create soil, plants carry out the intermediary role of assimilating the necessary elements and making them available to animals, including humans.

When Earth is viewed as a system, as discussed in Chapter 1, soil is considered an interface—a common boundary where different parts of a system interact. This is an appropriate designation because soil forms he rounded boulders in this image gradually formed in place from a rock mass that had many fractures. Initially the rocks had sharp corners and edges.

transformed angular blocks of bedrock into rounded boulders. where the geosphere, the atmosphere, the hydrosphere, and the biosphere meet. Soil is a material that develops in response to complex environmental interactions among different parts of the Earth system. Over time, soil gradually evolves to a state of equilibrium, or balance, with the environment. Soil is dynamic and sensitive to almost every aspect of its surroundings. Thus, when environmental changes occur, such as changes in climate, vegetative cover, and animal (including human) activity, the soil responds. Any such change gradually alters soil characteristics until a new balance is reached. Although thinly distributed over the land surface, soil functions as a fundamental interface, providing an excellent example of the integration among many parts of the Earth system.

What is soil? The pie chart depicts the composition (by volume) of a soil in good condition for plant growth. Although percentages vary, each soil is composed of mineral and organic matter, water, and air. (Photo by i love images/gardening/Alamy Images) and spheroidal. Soil structure is important because it influences how easily a soil can be cultivated as well as how susceptible a soil is to erosion. Soil structure also affects a soil’s porosity and permeability (the ease with which water can penetrate). This in turn influences the movement of nutrients to plant roots. Prismatic and blocky peds usually allow for moderate water infiltration, whereas platy and spheroidal structures are characterized by slower infiltration rates.

1. Explain why soil is considered an interface in the Earth system. 2. How is regolith different from soil? 3. Why is texture an important soil property? name the soil that consists of 60 percent sand, 30 percent silt, and 10 percent clay.

List and briefly discuss five controls of soil formation. Soil is the product of the complex interplay of several factors, including parent material, climate, plants and animals, time, and topography. Although all these factors are interdependent, their roles will be examined separately.

No soil development because of very steep slope However, soil scientists have come to understand that other factors, especially climate, are more important. In fact, similar soils often develop from different parent materials, and dissimilar soils can develop from the same parent material. Such discoveries reinforce the importance of other soil-forming factors.

Climate is considered to be the most influential control of soil formation. Temperature and precipitation are the elements that exert the strongest impact. As noted earlier in this chapter, variations in temperature and precipitation determine whether chemical or mechanical weathering will predominate and also greatly influence the rate and depth of weathering. For instance, a hot, wet climate may produce a thick layer of chemically weathered soil in the same amount of time that a cold, dry climate produces a thin mantle of mechanically weathered debris. Also, the amount of precipitation influences the degree to which various materials are removed from the soil by percolating water (a process called leaching), thereby affecting soil fertility. Finally, climatic conditions are an important control on the types and numbers of plant and animal life present.

Plants and animals play a vital role in soil formation. The types and abundance of organisms strongly influence the physical and chemical properties Residual soil of a soil. In fact, for is developed on bedrock well-developed soils in many regions, the significance of natural vegetation on soil type is frequently implied in the names used by soil scientists, such as prairie soil, forest soil, and tundra soil. Plants and animals furnish organic matter to the Thicker soil soil. Certain bog soils are develops on flat terrain composed almost entirely of organic matter, whereas desert soils might contain as little as a small fraction of 1 percent. Although the quantity of organic matter varies Thinner soil on steep slope substantially among soils, it is a rare soil because of erosion that completely lacks it.

Meager desert rainfall means reduced rates of weathering and relatively meager vegetation. Desert soils are typically thin and lack much organic matter.

In the northern coniferous forest, the organic litter is high in acid resin, which contributes to an accumulation of acid in the soil. As a result, acid leaching is an important soil-forming process.

The primary source of organic matter in soil is plants, although animals and an infinite number of microorganisms also contribute. Decomposed organic matter supplies important nutrients to plants, as well as to animals and microorganisms living in the soil. Consequently, soil fertility is in part related to the amount of organic matter present. Furthermore, the decay of plant and animal remains causes the formation of various organic acids. These complex acids hasten the weathering process. Organic matter also has a high water-holding ability and thus aids water retention in a Microorganisms, including fungi, bacteria, and single-celled protozoa, play an active role in the decay of plant and animal remains. The end product is humus, a material that no longer resembles the plants and animals from which it is formed. In addition, certain microorganisms aid soil fertility by converting atmospheric nitrogen into soil nitrogen. Earthworms and other burrowing animals mix the mineral and organic portions of a soil. Earthworms, for example, feed on organic matter and thoroughly mix soils in which they live, often moving and enriching many tons per acre each year. Burrows and holes also aid the passage of water and air through the soil.

Soils that develop in well-drained prairie regions typically have a humus-rich surface horizon that is rich in calcium and magnesium. Fertility is usually excellent.

material strongly influences soil characteristics. As weathering processes continue, the influence of parent material on soil is overshadowed by other soil-forming factors, especially climate. The time required for various soils to evolve cannot be listed because the soil-forming processes act at varying rates under different circumstances. However, as a rule, the longer a soil has been forming, the thicker it becomes and the less it resembles the parent material.

The lay of the land can vary greatly over short distances. Variations in topography can lead to the development of a variety of localized soil types. Many of the differences exist because the length and steepness of slopes significantly affect the amount of erosion and the water content of soil. On steep slopes, soils are often poorly developed. Due to rapid runoff, the quantity of water soaking in is slight; as a result, the soil’s moisture content may not be sufficient for vigorous plant growth. Further, because of accelerated erosion on steep slopes, the soils are thin or In contrast, poorly drained and waterlogged soils found in bottomlands have a much different character. Such soils are usually thick and dark. The dark color results from the large quantity of organic matter that accumulates because saturated conditions retard the decay of vegetation. The optimum terrain for soil development is a flat-to-undulating upland surface. Here we find good drainage, minimum erosion, and sufficient infiltration of water into the soil.

Slope orientation, or the direction a slope is facing, is another consideration. In the midlatitudes of the Northern Hemisphere, a south-facing slope receives a great deal more sunlight than a north-facing slope. In fact, a steep north-facing slope may receive no direct sunlight at all. The difference in the amount of solar radiation received causes differences in soil temperature and moisture, which in turn influence the nature of the vegetation and the character of the soil. Although this section deals separately with each of the soil-forming factors, remember that all of them work together to form soil. No single factor is responsible for a soil’s character; rather, it is the combined influence of parent material, climate, plants and animals, time, and topography that determines this 1. List the five basic controls of soil formation. Which factor is most influential in soil formation? 2. How might the direction a slope is facing influence soil formation?

Sketch, label, and describe an idealized soil profile. Explain the need for classifying The factors controlling soil formation vary greatly from place to place and from time to time, leading to an amazing variety of soil types.

Because soil-forming processes operate from the surface downward, soil composition, texture, structure, and color gradually evolve differently at varying depths. Soil horizons Idealized soil profile from a humid climate in the middle latitudes.

Partially altered parent material These vertical differences, which usually become more pronounced as time passes, divide the soil into zones or layers known as horizons. If you were to dig a pit in soil, you would see that its walls are layered. Such a vertical section through all of the soil horizons constitutes the soil to soils in temperate regions; not all soils have these five layers. The characteristics and extent of horizon development vary in different environments. Thus, different localities exhibit soil profiles that can contrast greatly with one another: consist mainly of mineral matter. The upper portion loose leaves and other organic debris that are still recognizable. By contrast, the lower portion of the is teeming with microscopic life, including bacteria, fungi, algae, and insects. All these organisms contribute oxygen, carbon dioxide, and organic acids to the developing soil. the topsoil. little organic material. As water percolates downward through this zone, finer particles are carried away.

This washing out of fine soil components is termed eluviation. Water percolating downward also dissolves soluble inorganic soil components and carries them to deeper zones. This depletion of soluble materials from the upper soil is termed leaching. as the zone of accumulation. The accumulation of the fine clay particles enhances this horizon’s ability to hold water. In extreme cases, clay accumulation can form a very compact, impermeable layer called solum, or “true soil.” It is in the solum that soilforming processes are active and that living roots and other plant and animal life are largely confined. is undergoing changes that will eventually transform it into soil, it has not yet crossed the threshold that separates regolith from soil. The characteristics and extent of development can vary greatly among soils in different environments (Figure 6.21). The boundaries between soil horizons may be sharp, or the horizons may blend gradually from one to another. Consequently, a well-developed soil profile indicates that environmental conditions have been relatively stable over an extended time span and that the soil is mature. By contrast, some soils lack horizons altogether. Such soils are called immature because soil building has been going on for only a short time. Immature soils are also characteristic of steep slopes, where erosion continually strips away the soil, preventing full development.

his thick red soil is exposed somewhere in the United States and is either a gelisol, a mollisol, or determine the likely soil order shown in this image. Explain your choice. location of the soil—Alaska, Illinois, or Hawaii?

Moderately weathered soils formed under boreal forests or broadleaf deciduous forests, rich in iron and aluminum. Clay particles accumulate in a subsurface layer due to leaching in moist environments. Fertile, productive soils because they are neither too wet nor too dry. Soils that develop in dry places with insufficient water to remove soluble minerals; may have calcium carbonate, gypsum, or salt accumulation in subsoil; low organic content.

Young soils with limited development and exhibiting properties of the parent material. Productivity ranges from very high for some forming on recent river deposits to very low for those forming on shifting sand or rocky slopes. Young soils with little profile development, found in regions with permafrost. Low temperatures and frozen conditions for much of the year; slow soil-forming processes.

Organic soils found in any climate where organic debris accumulates to form a bog soil. Dark, partially decomposed organic material commonly referred to as peat. Weakly developed young soils showing the beginning (inception) of profile development. Most common in humid climates but found from the arctic to the tropics. Native vegetation is most often forest.

Dark, soft soils developed under grass vegetation, generally found in prairie areas. Humus-rich surface horizon that is rich in calcium and magnesium; excellent fertility. Also found in hardwood forests with significant earthworm activity. Climatic range is boreal or alpine to tropical. Dry seasons are normal. Soils formed on old land surfaces unless parent materials were strongly weathered before they were deposited. Generally found in the tropics and subtropical regions. Rich in iron and aluminum oxides, oxisols are heavily leached and hence are poor soils for cultivation.

Soils found only in humid regions on sandy material. Common in northern coniferous forests and cool humid forests. Beneath the dark upper horizon of weathered organic material lies a light-colored leached horizon, the distinctive property of this soil. Soils representing the products of long periods of weathering. Percolating water concentrates clay particles in the lower horizons. Restricted to humid climates in the temperate regions and the tropics, where the growing season is long. Abundant water and a long frost-free period contribute to extensive leaching and poor fertility.

the chapter. (Natural Resources Conservation Service/USDA) Soil orders Rocky land Shifting sand 6.8 The Impact of Human Activities on Soil soil characteristics. There are 6 hierarchical categories of classification, ranging from order, the broadest category, to series, the most specific category. The system recognizes 12 soil orders and more than 19,000 soil series. The names of the classification units are mostly combinations of Latin or Greek descriptive terms. For example, soils of the order aridosol (from the Latin aridus 5 dry and solum 5 soil) are characteristically dry soils in arid regions. Soils in the order inceptisol (from Latin inceptum 5 beginning and solum 5 soil) are soils with only the beginning, or inception, of profile Brief descriptions of the 12 basic soil orders are worldwide distribution pattern of the Soil Taxonomy’s 12 soil orders. Like many other classification systems, the Soil Taxonomy is not suitable for every purpose. It is especially useful for agricultural and related land-use purposes, but it is not a useful system for engineers who are preparing evaluations of potential construction sites.

Explain the detrimental impact of human activities on soil and list several ways to combat soil erosion. Soils are just a tiny fraction of all Earth materials, yet they are vital. Soils are necessary for the growth of rooted plants and thus are a basic foundation of the human life-support system. Because soil forms very slowly, it must be considered a nonrenewable resource. Just as human ingenuity can increase the agricultural productivity of soils through fertilization and irrigation, soils can be damaged or destroyed by careless activities. Despite their role in providing food, fiber, and other basic materials, soils are among our most abused resources.

Over the past few decades, the destruction of tropical forests has become a serious environmental issue. Each year millions of acres are cleared for agriculture and logging. This clearing results in soil degradation, loss of biodiversity, and climate change. Thick red-orange soils (oxisols) are common in the end product of extreme chemical weathering. Because lush tropical rain forests are associated with these soils, many people assume that they are fertile and have great potential for agriculture. However, just the opposite is true: Oxisols are among the poorest soils for farming. How can this be? Rain forest soils develop under conditions of high temperature and heavy rainfall and are therefore severely leached. Not only does leaching remove the soluble materials such as calcium carbonate, but the great quantities of percolating rainwater also remove much of the silica, and as a result, insoluble oxides of iron and aluminum become concentrated in the soil. Iron oxides give the soil its distinctive color. Because bacterial activity is high in the wet tropics, organic matter quickly breaks down, and rain forest soils contain very little humus. Moreover, leaching destroys fertility because most plant nutrients in the soil are removed by the large volume of downwardpercolating water. Despite the dense and luxuriant rain forest vegetation, the soil itself contains few available Most nutrients that support the rain forest are locked up in the trees themselves. As vegetation dies and decomposes, the roots of the rain forest trees quickly absorb the nutrients before they are leached from the soil. The nutrients are continuously recycled as trees die and decompose. Therefore, when forests are cleared to provide land for farming or to harvest timber, most of the nutrients are removed as well. What remains is a soil that contains little to nourish planted crops. Rain forest clearing not only removes plant nutrients but also accelerates soil erosion. The roots of rain forest vegetation anchor the soil, and leaves and branches provide a canopy that protects the ground by deflecting the full force of the frequent heavy rains. When the protective vegetation is gone, soil erosion increases.

The removal of vegetation also exposes the ground to strong direct sunlight. When baked by the Sun, these tropical soils can harden to a bricklike consistency and become practically impenetrable to water and crop roots. In just a few years, a freshly cleared area may no longer be cultivable.

Raindrops may strike the surface at velocities approaching 35 km per hour. When a drop strikes an exposed surface, soil particles may splash as high as one meter and land more than a meter away from the point of raindrop impact.

Nevertheless, although the loss of fertile topsoil may not be obvious to the untrained eye, it is a significant and growing problem as human activities expand and disturb more and more of Earth’s surface. Soil erosion is a natural process; it is part of the constant recycling of Earth materials that we call the rock cycle. Once soil forms, erosional forces, especially water and wind, move soil components from one place to another. Every time it rains, raindrops strike the land with surprising force. Each drop acts like a tiny bomb, blasting movable soil particles out of their positions in the soil mass. Then, water flowing across the surface carries away the dislodged soil particles. Because the soil is moved by thin sheets of water, this process is termed sheet erosion. After the water flows as a thin, unconfined sheet for a relatively short distance, threads of current typically develop, and tiny channels called rills begin to form. Still deeper cuts in the soil, known as gullies, are created as rills enlarge. When normal farm cultivation cannot eliminate the channels, we know the rills have grown large enough to be called gullies. Although most dislodged soil particles move only a short distance during each rainfall, substantial quantities eventually leave the fields and make their way downslope to a stream. Once in the stream channel, these soil particles, which can now be called sediment, are transported downstream and eventually deposited.

Rates of Erosion We know that soil erosion is the ultimate fate of practically all soils. In the past, erosion Severe sheet and rill erosion on an Iowa farm following heavy rains.

Gully erosion on unprotected soil on a Wisconsin farm. Just one millimeter of soil from a single acre amounts to about 5 tons.

Corn and hay have been planted in strips that follow the contours of the hillside. This pattern reduces soil loss because it slows the rate of water runoff. Soil erosion by water also occurs on gentle slopes.

crops are planted parallel to the contours of the slope. This pattern reduces soil loss by slowing runoff. Strips of grass or cover crops such as hay slow runoff even more and act to promote water infiltration and trap sediment. Creating grassed waterways is another common practice. Natural drainageways are shaped to form smooth, shallow channels and then planted with grass. The grass prevents the formation of gullies and traps soil washed from cropland. Frequently crop residues are also left on fields. This debris protects the surface from both water and wind erosion. To protect fields from excessive wind erosion, rows of trees and shrubs are planted as windbreaks to slow the wind and deflect it upward.

1. Why are soils in tropical rain forests not well suited for farming? 2. Place these phenomena related to soil erosion in the proper sequence: sheet erosion, gullies, raindrop impact, rills, stream. 3. Explain how human activities have affected the rate of soil erosion. 4. What are two detrimental effects of soil erosion, aside from the loss of topsoil? 5. Briefly describe three ways to control soil erosion.

The grassed waterway prevents the formation of gullies and traps soil washed from cropland.

Reducing erosion by water Grassed waterway on a Pennsylvania farm. (Photo courtesy Bob Nichols/NRCS/USDA) These flat expanses are susceptible to wind erosion, especially when the fields are bare. The rows of trees slow and deflect the wind, which decreases the loss of top soil.

Dakota’s Badlands National Park. (Photo by Dennis MacDonald/ provides the background you need to understand the origin of sedimentary rocks. Recall that weathering of existing rocks begins the process. Next, gravity and agents of erosion such as running water, wind, and glacial ice remove the products of weathering and carry them to a new location, where they are deposited. Usually the particles are broken down further during this transport phase. Following deposition, this material, which is now called sediment, becomes lithified (turned to rock). It is from sedimentary rocks that geologists reconstruct many details of Earth’s history. Because sediments are deposited in a variety of settings at the surface, the rock layers that they many possibilities. Many sedimentary rocks are associated with important energy and mineral resources and are therefore important economically as well.

Explain the importance of sedimentary rocks and summarize the part of the rock cycle that pertains to sediments and sedimentary rocks. List the three categories of sedimentary rocks.

Deposition of solid particles produces many different features—glacial ridges, dunes, floodplains, deltas. Ultimately much sediment reaches the ocean floor.

Chemical and decompose and disintegrate rock.

Soluble products of chemical weathering become dissolved in groundwater and and uranium—are derived from sedimentary rocks. So are major sources of iron, aluminum, manganese, and phosphate fertilizer, plus numerous materials that are essential to the construction industry, such as cement and aggregate. Sediments and sedimentary rocks are also the primary reservoir of groundwater. Thus, having an understanding of this group of rocks and the processes that form and modify them is basic to locating and maintaining supplies of many important resources.

Like other rocks, the sedimentary rocks that we see around us and use in so many different ways have their of the rock cycle that occurs near Earth’s surface—the part that pertains to sediments and sedimentary rocks.

When material dissolved in water precipitates, it is the source of such features as reefs and deposits rich in shells.

The big picture This is an outline of the portion of the rock cycle that pertains to the formation of sedimentary rocks. (https:// rapidly moving river moves large quantities of sand and gravel. As the floodwaters recede, particles are temporarily deposited, only to be moved again by a subsequent flood. r Deposition of solid particles occurs when wind and water currents slow down and as glacial ice melts. The word sedimentary actually refers to this process. It is derived from the Latin sedimentum, which means “to settle,” a reference to solid material settling out of a fluid (water or air). The mud on the floor of a lake, a delta at the mouth of a river, a gravel bar in a stream bed, the particles in a desert sand dune, and even household dust are examples. r The deposition of material dissolved in water is not related to the strength of water currents. Rather, ions in solution are removed when chemical or temperature changes cause material to crystallize and precipitate (solidify out of a liquid solution) or when organisms remove dissolved material to build hard parts such as shells. r As deposition continues, older sediments are buried beneath younger layers and gradually converted to sedimentary rock (lithified) by compaction and cementation. This and other changes are referred to as diagenesis (dia = change; genesis = origin), a collective term for all the changes (short of metamorphism, discussed in Chapter 8) that take place in texture, composition, and other physical properties after sediments are deposited. Because there are a variety of ways that the products of weathering are transported, deposited, and transformed into solid rock, geologists recognize three categories of sedimentary rocks. As this overview reminds us, sediment has two principal sources. First, it may be an accumulation of material that originates and is transported as solid particles derived from both mechanical and chemical weathering. Deposits of this type are termed detrital, and the sedimentary rocks they form are called detrital sedimentary rocks. The second major source of sediment is soluble material produced largely by chemical weathering. When these ions in solution are precipitated by either inorganic or biological processes, the material is known as chemical sediment, and the rocks formed from it are called chemical sedimentary rocks. The third category is organic sedimentary rocks, which form from the carbon-rich remains of organisms. The primary example is coal. This black combustible rock consists of organic carbon from the remains of plants that died and accumulated on the floor of a swamp. The bits and pieces of undecayed plant material that constitute the “sediments” in coal are quite unlike the weathering products that make up detrital and chemical sedimentary 1. How does the volume of sedimentary rocks in Earth’s crust compare to the volume of igneous and metamorphic rocks? 2. List two ways in which sedimentary rocks are 3. Outline the steps that would transform an exposure of granite in the mountains into various sedimentary rocks. 4. List and briefly describe the differences among the three basic sedimentary rock categories.

presents the size categories for particles making up detrital rocks. Particle size is not only a convenient method of dividing detrital rocks; the sizes of the component grains also provide useful information about environments of deposition. Currents of water or air sort the particles by size; the stronger the current, the larger the particle size that can be carried. Gravels, for example, are moved by swiftly flowing rivers as well as by landslides and glaciers. Less energy is required to transport sand; thus, it is common to such features as windblown dunes and some river deposits and beaches. Very little energy is needed to transport clay, so it settles very slowly. Accumulation of these tiny particles is generally associated with the quiet water of a lake, lagoon, swamp, or certain marine In order of increasing particle size, common detrital sedimentary rocks include shale, sandstone, and conglomerate or breccia. We will now look at each type and how it forms.

Shale is a sedimentary rock consisting of silt- and clay-size particles (Figure 7.4). These fine-grained detrital rocks account for well over half of all sedimentary rocks. The particles in these rocks are so small that they cannot be readily identified without great magnification, and this makes shale more difficult to study and analyze than most other sedimentary rocks.

Shale crumbles easily This image was taken in the Grand Canyon. Hikers soon notice that the trail is usually gentler when layers of shale are encountered.

Shale, Mudstone, or Siltstone? It is common to apply the term shale to all fine-grained sedimentary rocks, especially in a nontechnical context. However, be aware that there is a more restricted use of the term. In this narrower usage, shale must exhibit the ability to split into thin layers along well-developed, closely spaced planes. This property is termed fissility (fissilis = that which can be cleft or split). If the rock breaks into chunks or blocks, the name mudstone is applied. Another fine-grained sedimentary rock that, like mudstone, is often grouped with shale but implies, siltstone is composed largely of silt-size particles and contains less clay-size material than shale and mudstone.

Gentle Slopes Although shale is far more common than other sedimentary rocks, it does not usually attract as much notice as other, less abundant, members of this group. The reason is that shale does not form prominent outcrops, as sandstone and limestone often do. Rather, shale crumbles easily and usually forms a cover of soil that hides the unweathered rock below. This is illustrated nicely in the Grand Canyon, where the gentler slopes of weathered shale are quite inconspicuous and overgrown with vegetation, in sharp contrast with the bold cliffs produced by more durable rocks. Although shale beds may not form striking cliffs and prominent outcrops, some deposits have economic value. Certain shales are quarried to obtain raw material for pottery, brick, tile, and china. Moreover, when mixed with limestone, shale is used to make Portland cement. In the future, one type of shale, called oil shale, may become a valuable energy resource. Oil shale potential is discussed in Chapter 23.

Sandstone is the name given to rocks in which sand-size grains predominate. After shale, sandstone is the next most abundant sedimentary rock, accounting for approximately 20 percent of the entire group. Sandstones form in a variety of environments and often contain significant clues about their origin, including sorting, particle shape, and composition.

Sorting All the particles in sandstone are not necessarily identical in size. Sorting refers to the degree of similarity in particle size in a sedimentary rock. For example, if all the grains in a sample of sandstone are Close up * The relationship between impermeable beds and the occurrence and movement of groundwater is examined in Chapter 17. Shale beds can be cap rocks in oil traps and are discussed in Chapter 23.

Sorting and particle shape Sorting refers to the range of particle sizes present in a rock. Geologists describe a particle’s shape in terms of its angularity (the degree to which edges and corners are rounded) and sphericity (how close the shape is to a sphere).

Sand dunes consist of well-sorted sediment represents a vast area of ancient sand dunes that once covered an area These modern dunes are Huey/Alamy Images) as dunes similar to these in Colorado’s Great Sand Dunes National Park. The sand is well sorted because all of the particles are practically the same size.

weathering and transport and was probably deposited close to the source area of the rock particles. the feldspars and ferromagnesians. Because quartz is very durable, it is usually the mineral that survives a long trip in a turbulent environment. To summarize, the origin and history of sandstone can often be deduced by examining the sorting, roundness, and mineral composition of its constituent grains. Knowing this information allows us to infer that a well-sorted, quartzrich sandstone consisting of highly rounded grains must be the result of a great deal of transport. Such a rock, in fact, may represent several cycles of weathering, transport, and deposition. We may also conclude that a sandstone containing significant amounts of feldspar and angular grains of ferromagnesian minerals underwent little chemical is the predominant mineral in most sandstones. Such 7.6). When a sandstone contains appreciable quantities of feldspar (25 percent or more), the rock is called arkose. In addition to feldspar, arkose usually contains quartz and sparkling bits of mica. The mineral composition of arkose indicates that the grains were derived from granitic source rocks. The particles are generally poorly sorted and angular, which suggests short-distance transport, minimal chemical weathering in a relatively dry climate, and rapid deposition and burial. Along with quartz and feldspar, this dark-colored rock contains abundant rock fragments and matrix—finergrained material in which the fragments are embedded. More than 15 percent of graywacke’s volume is matrix. The poor sorting and angular grains characteristic of graywacke suggest that the particles were transported only a relatively short distance from their source area and were then rapidly deposited. Before the sediment could be reworked and sorted further, it was buried by additional layers of material. Graywacke is frequently associated with submarine deposits made by dense sedimentchoked torrents called turbidity currents.

Conglomerate consists largely of rounded gravel-size can range in size from large boulders to particles as small as peas. The particles are often large enough to be identified as distinctive rock types; thus, they can be valuable in identifying the source areas of sediments. More often than not, conglomerates are poorly sorted because the openings between the large gravel particles contain sand or mud. Gravels accumulate in a variety of environments and usually indicate the existence of steep slopes or very turbulent currents. The coarse particles in a conglomerate an igneous mass. Name the likely rock type. great deal of chemical weathering? Explain.

may reflect the action of energetic mountain streams or result from strong wave activity along a rapidly eroding coast. Some glacial and landslide deposits also contain plentiful gravel. If the large particles are angular rather than rounded, the rock is called breccia. Because large particles abrade and become rounded very rapidly during transport, the pebbles and cobbles in a breccia indicate that they did not travel far from their source area before they were deposited. Thus, as with many other sedimentary rocks, conglomerates and breccias contain clues to their history. Their particle sizes reveal the strength of the currents that transported them, whereas the degree of rounding indicates how far the particles traveled. The fragments within a sample identify the source rocks that supplied them.

1. What minerals are most abundant in detrital sedimentary rocks? In which rocks do these minerals predominate? 2. What is the primary basis for distinguishing among detrital rocks? 3. Describe how sediments become sorted. What would cause sediments to be poorly sorted?

Breccia The gravel-size sediments in this rock are sharp and Explain the processes involved in the formation of chemical sedimentary rocks and describe several examples.

In contrast to detrital rocks, which form from the solid products of weathering, chemical sediments derive from ions that are carried in solution to lakes and seas. This material does not remain dissolved in the water indefinitely, however. Some of it precipitates to form chemical sediments. These become rocks such as limestone, chert, and rock salt. This precipitation of material occurs in two ways. Inorganic (in = not, organicus = life) processes such as evaporation and chemical activity can produce chemical sediments. Organic (life) processes of water-dwelling organisms also form chemical sediments, said to be of biochemical origin. One example of a deposit resulting from inorganic chemical processes is the dripstone that decorates many caves. Another is the salt left behind as a body of seawater evaporates. In contrast, many water-dwelling animals and plants extract dissolved mineral matter to form shells and other hard parts. After the organisms die, their skeletons collect by the millions on the floor of a lake or an ocean as biochemical sediment.

Delicate calcite crystals forming in a drop of water at the tip of soda straw stalactite. The formation of crystals is triggered when some carbon dioxide escapes from the water drop.

Cave deposits An example of a chemical sedimentary rock with an inorganic Photography/Alamy Images; inset photo by Dante Fenolio/Science chiefly of the mineral calcite (CaCO3) and forms either by inorganic means or as a result of biochemical processes. Regardless of origin, the mineral composition of all limestone is similar, yet many different types exist. This is true because limestones are produced under a variety of conditions. Forms that have a marine biochemical origin are by far the most common.

Carbonate reefs Large quantities of biochemical limestone are created by reef-building organisms.

This image in Guadalupe Mountains National Park, Texas, shows a small portion of an ancient (Permian-age) reef complex that once formed a 600-kilometer loop around the margin of the Delaware Basin.

View of a group of plankton called coccolithophores from a scanning electron microscope. Individual plates shaped like hubcaps are only three one-thousandths of a millimeter in diameter; so tiny they could pass through the eye of a needle.

Coquina and Chalk Although a great deal of limestone is produced by biological processes, this origin is not always evident because shells and skeletons may undergo considerable change before becoming lithified into rock. However, one easily identified biochemical limestone is coquina, a coarse rock composed of poorly cemented shells and shell Another less obvious but nevertheless familiar example is chalk, a soft, porous rock made up almost entirely of the hard parts of microscopic marine organisms. Among the most famous chalk deposits are those exposed along the southeast coast of England. Inorganic Limestones Limestones having an inorganic origin form when chemical changes or high water temperatures increase the water’s concentration of calcium carbonate to the point that it precipitates. Travertine, the type of limestone commonly seen in is deposited in caves, groundwater is the source of the calcium carbonate. As water droplets become exposed to the air in a cavern, some of the carbon dioxide dissolved in the water escapes, causing calcium carbonate to precipitate. Another variety of inorganic limestone is oolitic limestone, a rock composed of small spherical grains called ooids. Ooids form in shallow marine waters as tiny “seed” particles (commonly small shell fragments) are moved back and forth with currents. As the grains are rolled about in the warm water, which is supersaturated with calcium carbonate, they become coated with layer upon layer of the chemical precipitate.

Small spherical grains called ooids are formed by chemical precipitation of calcium carbonate around a tiny nucleus and are the raw material for oolitic limestone.

Closely related to limestone is dolostone, a rock composed of the calcium-magnesium carbonate mineral dolomite [CaMg(CO3)2]. Although dolostone and limestone sometimes closely resemble one another, they can be easily distinguished by observing their reaction to dilute hydrochloric acid. When a drop of acid is placed on limestone, the reaction (fizzing) is obvious. However, unless dolostone is powdered, it does not visibly react to the acid.

Dolostone’s origins remain a subject of discussion among geologists. No marine organisms produce hard parts of dolomite, and the chemical precipitation of dolomite from seawater occurs only under conditions of unusual water chemistry in certain near-shore sites. Yet dolostone is abundant in many ancient sedimentary rock successions. It appears that significant quantities of dolostone are produced when magnesium-rich waters circulate through limestone and convert calcite to dolomite when some calcium ions are replaced by magnesium ions (a process called dolomitization). However, not all dolostones appear to be formed by such a process, and their origin remains uncertain.

Chert is a name used for a number of very compact and hard rocks made of microcrystalline quartz (SiO2). It can vary in color from nearly white to black; chert often appears gray, brown, or brownish gray and can even appear red or greenish. Color variations are shows some varieties. One well-known form is flint, whose dark color results from the organic matter it contains. Jasper, a red variety, gets its bright color from iron oxide. Petrified wood is chert that is made when silica-rich material such as volcanic ash buries trees. Groundwater rich in dissolved silica from the ash penetrates the wood. As the dissolved silica precipitates, it gradually replaces the wood. The shape and structures such as growth rings are often preserved. Like glass, most chert has a conchoidal fracture. Its hardness, ease of chipping, and ability to hold a sharp edge made chert a favorite of Native Americans for fashioning points for spears and arrows. Because of chert’s durability and extensive use, arrowheads are found in many parts of Chert deposits are commonly found in one of two situations: as layered deposits referred to as bedded cherts and as somewhat spherical masses called nodules, which vary in diameter from a few millimeters (pea size) to a few centimeters. Most water-dwelling organisms that produce hard parts make them of calcium carbonate. But some, such as diatoms and radiolarians, produce glasslike silica skeletons. These tiny organisms are able to extract silica even though seawater contains only tiny quantities. It is from their remains that most bedded cherts are believed to originate. Some bedded cherts occur in association with lava flows and layers of volcanic National Park. It was formed by the following process: Rainwater became acidic when it absorbed carbon dioxide in the air. As the water seeped beneath the surface, it dissolved calcite in the limestone bedrock. Eventually, Yellowstone’s underground plumbing returned the water, now saturated with calcium carbonate, to the surface as a hot spring. When the water emerged, some carbon dioxide escaped into the air, triggering the deposition of the rock seen here. (Photo by Ross inorganic origin? in this chapter provides another example?

Solar salt Seawater is one important source of common salt. In this process, seawater is held in shallow ponds, while solar energy evaporates the water. The nearly pure salt deposits that eventually form are essentially artificial evaporite deposits. (Photo by Geof Krib/Alamy Images) ash. For these occurrences, it is probable that the silica was derived from the decomposition of the volcanic ash and not from biochemical sources. Chert nodules are sometimes referred to as secondary cherts or replacement cherts, and they most often occur within beds of limestone. They form when silica, originally deposited in one place, dissolves, migrates, and then chemically precipitates elsewhere, replacing older material.

In the geologic past, many areas that are now dry land were basins, submerged under shallow arms of a sea that had only narrow connections to the open ocean. Under these conditions, seawater continually moved into the bay to replace water lost by evaporation. Eventually the waters of the bay became saturated, and salt deposition began. Such deposits are called evaporites. Minerals commonly precipitated in this fashion include halite (sodium chloride, NaCl), which is the importance. Halite is familiar to everyone as the common salt used in cooking and seasoning foods. Of course it has many other uses, from melting ice on roads to making hydrochloric acid, and it has been considered important enough that people have sought, traded, and fought over it for much of human history. Gypsum is the basic ingredient in plaster of Paris. This material is used most extensively in the construction industry for wallboard (drywall) and interior plaster. When a body of seawater evaporates, the minerals that precipitate do so in a sequence that is determined by their solubility. Less soluble minerals precipitate first, and more soluble minerals precipitate later, as salinity increases. For example, gypsum precipitates when about 80 percent of the seawater has evaporated, and halite crystallizes when 90 percent of the water has been removed. During the last stages of this process, potassium and magnesium salts precipitate. One of these last-formed salts, the mineral sylvite, is mined as a significant source of potassium (“potash”) for fertilizer. On a smaller scale, evaporite deposits can be seen Bonneville Salt Flats. Following rains or periods of snowmelt in the mountains, streams flow from the surrounding mountains into an enclosed basin. As the water evaporates, salt flats form when dissolved materials are precipitated as a white crust on the ground .

This extensive evaporite deposit is a 30,000-acre expanse of hard white salt that in places is nearly 2 meters thick.

Outline the successive stages in the formation of coal. Coal is different from other sedimentary rocks. Unlike limestone and chert, which are calcite and silica rich, coal is made of organic matter. Close examination of coal under a magnifying glass often reveals plant structures such as leaves, bark, and wood that have been chemically altered but are still identifiable. This supports the conclusion that coal is the end product of large amounts of plant material, buried for millions of years. The formation of coal involves these stages: 1. Accumulation of plant remains. The initial stage in coal formation is the accumulation of large quantities of plant remains. Such accumulations result from special conditions because dead plants readily decompose when exposed to the atmosphere or other oxygen-rich environments. One important environment that allows for the buildup of plant material is a swamp. Stagnant swamp water is oxygen deficient, so complete decay (oxidation) of the plant material is not possible. Instead, the plants are attacked by certain bacteria that partly decompose the organic material and liberate oxygen and hydrogen. As these elements escape, the percentage of carbon in the plant matter gradually increases. The bacteria are not able to finish the job of decomposition because their growth is impeded by acids liberated from the plants. 2. Formation of peat and lignite. The partial decomposition of plant remains in an oxygen-poor swamp creates a layer of peat, a soft brown material in which plant structures are still easily recognized. With shallow burial, peat slowly changes to lignite, a soft brown coal. Burial increases the temperature of sediments as well as the pressure on them. 3. Formation of bituminous coal. The higher temperatures bring about chemical reactions within the plant materials and yield water and organic gases (volatiles). As the load increases from more sediment on top of the developing coal, the water and volatiles are pressed out, and the proportion of fixed carbon (the remaining solid combustible material) increases. The greater the carbon content, the greater the coal’s energy ranking as a fuel. During burial, the coal also becomes increasingly compact. For example, deeper burial transforms lignite into a harder, more compacted black rock called bituminous coal.

Greater burial (Soft brown coal) 4. Formation of anthracite coal. Lignite and bituminous coals are sedimentary rocks. However, when sedimentary layers are subjected to the folding and deformation associated with mountain building, the heat and pressure cause a further loss of volatiles and water, thus increasing the concentration of fixed carbon. This metamorphoses bituminous coal into anthracite, a very hard, shiny, black metamorphic rock (see Chapter 8). Although anthracite is a cleanburning fuel, only a relatively small amount is mined. Anthracite is not widespread and is more difficult and expensive to extract than the relatively flat-lying layers of bituminous coal.

Coal is a major energy resource. Its role as a fuel and some of the problems associated with burning coal are discussed in Chapter 23.

Turning Sediment into Sedimentary Rock: Diagenesis and Lithification Describe the processes that convert sediment into sedimentary rock and other changes associated with burial.

metamorphic rock. The term diagenesis (dia = change, genesis = origin) is a collective term for all the chemical, physical, and biological changes that take place after sediments are deposited and during and after lithification.

Water filled pore spaces Loosely packed clay size particles upper few kilometers of Earth’s crust at temperatures threshold, metamorphism is said to occur. One example of diagenetic change is recrystallization, the development of more stable minerals from less stable ones. For example, the mineral aragonite is the less stable form of calcium carbonate (CaCO3). Aragonite is secreted by many marine organisms to form shells and other hard parts, such as the skeletal structures produced by corals. In some environments, large quantities of these solid materials accumulate as sediment. As burial takes place, aragonite recrystallizes to the more stable form of calcium carbonate, calcite, the main constituent in the sedimentary rock Another example of diagenesis is provided in the preceding discussion of coal. It involves the chemical alteration of organic matter in an oxygen-poor environment. Instead of completely decaying, as would occur in the presence of oxygen, the organic matter is slowly transformed into solid carbon.

Diagenesis includes lithification, the processes by which unconsolidated sediments are transformed into solid sedimentary rocks (lithos = stone, fic = making). Basic lithification processes include compaction and cementation.

Compaction The most common physical diagenetic change is compaction. As described earlier, as sediment accumulates, the weight of overlying material compresses the deeper sediments. The deeper a sediment is buried, the more it is compacted and the firmer it becomes. As the grains are pressed closer and closer, there is considerable reduction in pore space. For example, when clays are buried beneath several thousand meters of material, the volume of the clay layer may be reduced by as much as 40 percent. As pore space decreases, much of the water that was trapped in the sediments is driven out. Because sands and other coarse sediments are less compressible, compaction is most significant as a lithification process in fine-grained sedimentary rocks like shale.

Cementation The most important process by which sediments are converted to sedimentary rock is cementation. This change involves the crystallization of minerals among the individual sediment grains. Groundwater carries ions in solution. Gradually, the crystallization of new minerals from these ions takes place in the pore spaces, cementing the clasts together. Just as the amount of pore space is reduced during compaction, the addition of cement to a sedimentary deposit reduces its porosity as well. Calcite, silica, and iron oxide are the most common cements. It is often a relatively simple matter to identify the cementing material. Calcite cement will effervesce in contact with dilute hydrochloric acid. Silica is the hardest cement and thus produces the hardest sedimentary rocks. An orange or dark-red color in a sedimentary rock means that iron oxide is present. Most sedimentary rocks are lithified by means of compaction and/or cementation. However, some, like the evaporites, initially form as solid masses of intergrown crystals rather than beginning as accumulations of separate particles that later become solid. Other crystalline sedimentary rocks do not begin that way but are transformed into masses of interlocking crystals sometime after the sediment is deposited. For example, with time and burial, loose sediment consisting of delicate calcium carbonate–rich skeletal debris may be recrystallized into a relatively dense crystalline limestone. Because crystals grow until they fill all the available space, crystalline sedimentary rocks often lack pore spaces. Unless the rocks later develop joints and fractures, they will be relatively impermeable to fluids such as water and oil.

Nonclastic: Fine to coarse crystalline Nonclastic: Fine to coarse crystalline the particles recrystallized when they were consolidated into limestone or chert. Nonclastic rocks consist of intergrown crystals, and some may resemble igneous rocks, which are also crystalline. The two rock types are usually easy to distinguish because the minerals contained in nonclastic sedimentary rocks are quite unlike those found in most igneous rocks. For example, rock salt, rock gypsum, and some forms of limestone consist of intergrown crystals, but the minerals within these rocks (halite, gypsum, and calcite) are seldom associated with igneous rocks.

Distinguish among three broad categories of sedimentary environments and provide an example of each. List several sedimentary structures and explain why these features are useful to geologists.

Sedimentary rocks are important to interpreting Earth’s history. By understanding the conditions under which sedimentary rocks form, geologists can often deduce the history of a rock, including information about the origin of its component particles, the method of sediment transport, and the nature of the place where the grains eventually came to rest—that is, the environment of deposition. An environment of deposition, or sedimentary environment, is a geographic setting where sediment is accumulating. Each site is characterized by a particular combination of geologic processes and environmental conditions. Some sediments, such as the chemical sediments that precipitate in water bodies, are solely products of their sedimentary environment. That is, their component minerals originated and were deposited in the same place. Other sediments originate far from the site where they accumulate. These materials are transported great distances from their source by some combination of gravity, water, wind, and ice. At any given time, the geographic setting and environmental conditions of a sedimentary environment determine the nature of the sediments that accumulate. Geologists carefully study the sediments in present-day depositional environments because the features they find can also be observed in ancient sedimentary rocks. Geologists apply a thorough knowledge of presentday conditions to reconstruct the ancient environments and geographic relationships of an area at the time a particular set of sedimentary layers were deposited. This process is an excellent example of applying a fundamental principle of modern geology: “The present is the key to the past.”* Such analyses often lead to the creation of maps depicting the past geographic distribution of land and sea, mountains and river valleys, deserts and glaciers, and other environments of deposition.

Sedimentary environments are commonly placed into one of three broad categories: continental, marine, or transitional (shoreline). Each category includes many specific associated with each category. Realize that this is just a sampling of the great diversity of depositional environments. Chapters 16 through 20 examine many of these environments in greater detail. Each of these three categories is an *For more on this idea, see Section 1.2 in Chapter 1.

Park These tilted sedimentary strata are part of the Creek. The strata here record changing environments during the Mesozoic era. (Photo by Michael Collier) (http://goo.gl/eeryMM) area where sediment accumulates and where organisms live and die. Each produces a characteristic sedimentary rock or assemblage that reflects prevailing conditions.

Continental Environments Continental environments are dominated by the erosion and deposition associated with streams. In some cold regions, moving masses of glacial ice replace running water as the dominant process. In arid regions (as well as some coastal settings), wind takes on greater importance. Clearly, the nature of the sediments deposited in continental environments is strongly influenced by climate. Streams are the dominant agent of landscape alteration, eroding more land and transporting and depositing more sediment than any other process. In addition to channel deposits, large quantities of sediment are dropped when floodwaters periodically inundate broad, flat valley floors (called floodplains). Where rapid streams emerge from a mountainous area onto a flatter surface, a distinctive cone-shaped accumulation of sediment known as an alluvial fan forms. In frigid, high-latitude or high-altitude settings, glaciers pick up and transport huge volumes of sediment. Materials deposited directly from ice are typically unsorted mixtures of particles that range in size from fine clay to huge boulders. Water from melting glaciers transports and redeposits some of this glacial sediment, creating stratified, sorted accumulations.

Sand dunes consist of well-sorted sand grains deposited by the wind. Caves that develop in limestone are sites where calcium carbonate is deposited as dripstone. Beaches that form where wave activity is strong, consist mainly of pebbles and cobbles.

Beaches, bars, and spits along low-lying coasts and in sheltered coves are typically composed of well-sorted sand and/or shell fragments.

Tidal flats and lagoons are areas where fine clay particles or carbonate-rich muds Sedimentary environments Each environment is characterized by certain physical, chemical, and biological conditions. Because sediments contain clues about the environment in which they were deposited, sedimentary rocks are important in the interpretation of Earth history.

Deep marine environments adjacent to the continental slope often contain material that was transported by dense underwater currents of suspended sediment. Each layer has coarser particles at the bottom and finer material on top.

Shallow marine environments are sites where sand, clay, and carbonate-rich muds are often deposited. Ripple marks caused by wave activity may be present.

Inland seas and lakes in arid environments where evaporation exceeds precipitation, produce evaporite deposits such as rock salt and gypsum.

Alluvial fans consist of coarse sediments that are deposited when mountain streams reach flat lowlands.

Glacial deposits often consist of a poorly-sorted mixture of many different sediment sizes ranging from clay to boulders.

Swamps and bogs are quiet-water environments where mud and decayed plant material Streams in mountainous areas erode and deposit a wide variety of sediment, while those in lowlands transport and deposit mostly mud (silt and clay) and sand.

Coral reefs are massive limestone structures that form in warm, shallow clear seas and consist of material secreted by corals and other marine life.

Landslides produce an unsorted jumble of many sediment sizes. The work of wind and its resulting deposits are referred to as eolian, after Aeolus, the Greek god of wind. Unlike glacial deposits, eolian sediments are well sorted. Wind can lift fine dust high into the atmosphere and transport it great distances. Where winds are strong and the surface is not anchored by vegetation, sand is transported closer to the ground, where it accumulates in dunes. Deserts and coasts are common sites for this type of deposition. In addition to being areas where dunes sometimes develop, desert basins are sites where shallow playa lakes occasionally form following heavy rains or periods of snowmelt in adjacent mountains. They rapidly dry up, sometimes leaving behind evaporites and other characteristic deposits. Figures 19.9 and 19.10 on page 581 illustrate such an environment. In humid regions, lakes are more enduring features, and their quiet waters are excellent sediment traps. Small deltas, beaches, and bars form along the lakeshore, with finer sediments coming to rest on the lake floor.

Transitional Environments The shoreline is the transition zone between marine and continental Island (looking toward the south). To the left (east) of the island is the Atlantic Ocean. The sheltered waters of Pamlico Sound are on the right, the side of the island facing the mainland. Assume that the sediments accumulating in the area are primarily detrital. (Photo by environments. Here we find the familiar deposits of sand or gravel called beaches. Mud-covered tidal flats are alternately covered with shallow sheets of water and then exposed to air as tides rise and fall. Along and near the shore, the work of waves and currents distributes sand, creating spits, bars, and barrier islands. Offshore bars and reefs create lagoons. The quieter waters in these sheltered areas are another site of deposition in the transition zone. Deltas are among the most significant deposits associated with transitional environments. The complex accumulations of sediment build outward into the sea when rivers experience an abrupt loss of velocity and deposit their load of detrital material.

When we study a series of sedimentary layers, we can see the successive changes in environmental conditions that occurred at a particular place with the passage of time. Changes in past environments may also be seen when a single layer of sedimentary rock is traced laterally. This is true because at any one time, many different depositional environments can exist over a broad area. For example, when sand is accumulating in a beach environment, finer muds are often being deposited in quieter offshore waters. Still farther out, perhaps in a zone where biological activity is high and land-derived sediments are scarce, the deposits consist largely of the calcite-rich remains of small organisms. In this example, different sediments are accumulating adjacent to one another at the same time. Different parts of each layer possess a distinctive set of characteristics that reflect the conditions in a particular environment. The term facies is used to describe such sets of sediments. When a sedimentary layer is examined in cross section from one end to the other, each facies grades laterally into another that formed at the same time but that exhibits different characteristics. The merging of adjacent facies tends to be a gradual transition rather than a sharp boundary, but abrupt changes do sometimes occur.

In addition to variations in grain size, mineral composition, and texture, sediments exhibit a variety of structures that are often preserved when they change to sedimentary rock. Some, such as graded beds, are created when Lateral change When a sedimentary layer is traced laterally, we may find that it is made up of several different rock types. This occurs because many sedimentary environments can exist at the same time over a broad area. The term facies is used to describe such sets of sedimentary rocks. Each facies grades laterally into another that formed at the same time but in a different environment. (https://goo.gl/HOJsQ8) sediments are accumulating and are a reflection of the transporting medium. Others, such as mud cracks, form after the materials have been deposited and result from processes occurring in the environment. When present, sedimentary structures provide additional information that can be useful in interpreting Earth’s history. Sedimentary rocks form as layer upon layer of sediment accumulates in various depositional environments. These layers, called strata, or beds, are probably the single most common and characteristic feature of sedimentary rocks. Each stratum is unique. It may be a coarse sandstone, a fossil-rich limestone, a black shale, the chapter-opening photo and at Figures 7.1 and 7.5, Layers are called strata This outcrop of sedimentary strata illustrates the characteristic layering of this group of rocks. This exposure of sedimentary Shawangunk Mountains.

bedding planes within unit Cross-bedding Sand dunes typically exhibit thin layers inclined at an angle to the main bedding.

Fine particles settle out last Coarse particles settle out first characteristic of sand dunes, river deltas, and certain stream channel Graded beds are another special type of bedding. In this case, the particles within a single sedimentary layer gradually change from coarse at the bottom to fine at the top. Graded beds are most characteristic of rapid deposition from water containing sediment of varying sizes. When a current experiences a rapid energy loss, the largest particles settle first, followed by successively smaller grains. The deposition of a graded bed is most often associated with a turbidity current, a mass of sediment-choked water that is denser than clear water and that moves downslope along the bottom of a lake or an ocean. As geologists examine sedimentary rocks, they can indicate a high-energy environment such as a surf zone or rushing stream, where only coarse materials remain and finer particles are kept suspended. An arkose may signify a dry climate, where little chemical alteration of feldspar is possible. Carbonaceous shale is a sign of a low-energy, organic-rich environment, such as a swamp or lagoon. Other features found in some sedimentary rocks also give clues to past environments. Ripple marks are such a feature. Ripple marks are small waves of sand that develop on the surface of a sediment layer through ridges form at right angles to the direction of motion. If the ripple marks were formed by air or water moving in essentially one direction, their form will be asymmetrical. These current ripple marks will have steeper sides in the downcurrent direction and more gradual slopes on the upcurrent side. Ripple marks produced by a stream flowing across a sandy channel and by wind blowing over a sand dune are two common examples of current ripples. When present in solid rock, they may be used to determine the direction of movement of ancient wind or water currents. Other ripple marks have a symmetrical form. These features, called oscillation ripple marks, result from the back-and-forth movement of surface waves in a shallow near-shore environment. and dry. When exposed to air, wet mud dries out and shrinks, producing cracks. Mud cracks are associated with environments such as tidal flats, shallow lakes, and desert basins.

Fossils, the remains or traces of prehistoric life, are important inclusions in sediment and sedimentary rocks. They are important tools for interpreting the geologic past. Knowing the nature of the life-forms that existed at a particular time helps researchers understand past environmental conditions. In addition, fossils are important time indicators and play a key role in correlating rocks of similar ages that are from different places. Fossils are discussed further in Chapter 9.

1. What are the three broad categories of sedimentary environments? List a specific example associated with each category (see 2. Why might a single layer exhibit different types of sedimentary rock? What term applies to the different parts of such a layer? 3. What is the single most characteristic feature of sedimentary rocks? 4. What is the difference between cross-bedding and graded bedding? 5. How might mud cracks and ripple marks be useful clues about the geologic past?

Relate weathering processes and sedimentary rocks to the carbon cycle. To illustrate the movement of material and energy among the spheres of the Earth system, let us take a brief look at the carbon cycle. Most carbon is bonded chemically to other elements to form compounds such as carbon dioxide, calcium carbonate, and the hydrocarbons found in coal and petroleum. Carbon is also the basic building block of life, as it readily combines with hydrogen and oxygen to form the fundamental organic compounds that compose living things.

Certainly one of the most active parts of the carbon cycle is the movement of carbon from the atmosphere to the biosphere and back again. In the atmosphere, carbon carbon dioxide is significant because it is a greenhouse gas, which means it is an efficient absorber of energy emitted by Earth and thus influences the heating of the atmosphere, a process described in more detail in Chapter 21. Because many of the processes that operate on Earth involve carbon dioxide, this gas is constantly moving into and out of the atmosphere. Through the process of photosynthesis, plants absorb carbon dioxide from the atmosphere to produce the essential organic compounds needed for growth. Animals that consume these plants (or consume other animals that eat plants) use these organic compounds as a source of energy and, through the process of respiration, return carbon dioxide atmosphere via respiration.) Further, when plants die and decay or are burned, this biomass is oxidized, and carbon dioxide is returned to the atmosphere. Not all dead plant material decays immediately back of carbonate Photosynthesis rock Burning and decay of by vegetation by land of fossil Burial of and respiration of marine sediment. Over long spans of geologic time, considerable biomass is buried with sediment. Under the right conditions, some of these carbon-rich deposits are converted to fossil fuels—coal, petroleum, or natural gas. Some of the fuels are eventually recovered (mined or pumped from a well) and burned to generate electricity and fuel our transportation system. One result of fossil-fuel combustion is the release of huge quantities of carbon dioxide back into the atmosphere. Carbon also moves from the geosphere and hydrosphere to the atmosphere and back again. For example, volcanic activity early in Earth’s history is thought to be the source of much of our atmospheric carbon dioxide. One way that carbon dioxide makes its way back to the hydrosphere and then to the solid Earth is by which then attacks the rocks that compose Earth’s crust. One product of this chemical weathering of solid rock is groundwater and streams to the ocean. Water-dwelling organisms extract this dissolved material to produce hard parts of calcium carbonate (CaCO3). When the organisms die, these skeletal remains settle to the ocean floor as biochemical sediment and become sedimentary rock. In fact, the crust is by far Earth’s largest depository of carbon, where it is a constituent of a variety of rocks, the most abundant being limestone. Eventually the limestone may be exposed at Earth’s surface, where chemical weathering will cause the carbon stored in the rock to be released to the atmosphere as carbon dioxide. In summary, carbon moves among all four of Earth’s major spheres. It is essential to every living thing in the biosphere. In the atmosphere, carbon dioxide is an important greenhouse gas. In the hydrosphere, carbon dioxide is dissolved in lakes, rivers, and the ocean. In the geosphere, carbon is contained in carbonate sediments and sedimentary rocks and is stored as organic matter dispersed through sedimentary rocks and as deposits of coal and petroleum.

Sediment and sedimentary rock 1. Describe how chemical weathering and the formation of biochemical sediment remove carbon from the atmosphere and store it in the 2. Provide an example by which carbon moves from the geosphere to the atmosphere.

Metamorphic rocks of Pemaquid Point, Bristol, Maine. (Photo by George Oze Photography/SuperStock) he folded and metamorphosed rocks shown in the chapter opening photo were once flat-lying sedimentary strata. Compressional forces of unimaginable magnitude, combined with temperatures hundreds of degrees above surface conditions, prevailed for perhaps thousands or millions of years to produce the deformation displayed by these rocks. Under such extreme conditions, solid rock responds by folding, fracturing, and often flowing. This chapter looks at the tectonic forces that forge metamorphic rocks and how these rocks change in appearance, mineralogy, and sometimes overall chemical composition.

Compare and contrast the environments that produce metamorphic, sedimentary, and igneous rocks. Unlike some igneous and sedimentary processes that occur in surface or near-surface environments, metamorphism most often occurs deep within Earth, beyond our direct observation. Notwithstanding this significant obstacle, geologists have developed techniques that allow them to learn about the conditions under which metamorphic rocks form. In turn, the study of metamorphic rocks provides important insights into how tectonic processes operate to alter the structure and composition of Earth’s crust.

Recall from the discussion of the rock cycle in Chapter 1 that metamorphism is the transformation of one rock type into another rock type. Metamorphic rocks are produced from preexisting sedimentary and igneous rocks, as well as from other metamorphic rocks. Thus, every metamorphic rock has a parent rock—the rock from which it was formed. which means to “change form,” is a process that transforms the mineralogy, texture, and sometimes the chemical composition of the parent rock. The mineralogy (mineral constituents of a rock) changes because the rock is subjected to new conditions, usually elevated temperatures and pressures, which are significantly different from those in which it initially formed. For example, clay minerals, which are the most common minerals in sedimentary rocks, are stable only at Earth’s surface. Metamorphic Versus Sedimentary and Igneous Environments (Kaolinite is one example of a clay mineral; refer to clay minerals are buried to Surface conditions a depth where temperatures they are transformed into converted to the minerals chlorite and/or muscovite mica. (Chlorite is Increasing temperature a mica-like mineral formed and pressure by the metamorphism of dark iron- and magnesiumrich silicate minerals.) Under more extreme conditions, chlorite becomes biotite mica. Metamorphism also alters Metamorphism occurs over a range of temperatures a rock’s texture, producing larger crystals and sometimes that lie between those experienced during the formaa distinct layered or banded appearance. The degree to which a parent rock changes during and temperatures approaching those at which rocks metamorphism is called its metamorphic grade, and it ing metamorphism, the rock remains essentially solid. If complete melting occurs, the rock has entered the example, in low-grade metamorphic environments, the realm of igneous activity, as discussed in Chapter 4. common sedimentary rock shale becomes the more comPressure also plays an important role in metamorpact metamorphic rock slate. During this transformation, phism. Although confining pressure acts to compact the clay minerals in shale are transformed into tiny chlosediment to form sedimentary rocks, the pressures rite and muscovite mica flakes. Hand samples of these involved in metamorphism are even greater—sufficient rocks are sometimes difficult to distinguish from one to convert mineral matter into denser forms having another, illustrating that the transition from sedimentary more compact crystalline structures. Thus, metamorto metamorphic rock is often gradual and the change phism involves the formation of new minerals from preexisting ones. In environments where temperatures and pressures are more extreme, metamorphism causes a transformation so complete that the identity of the parent rock cannot be easily determined. In high-grade metamorphism, such features as bedding planes, fossils, and vesicles that 1. Metamorphism means to “change form.” Describe existed in the parent rock are obliterated. Further, when how a rock may change during metamorphism. rocks deep in the crust are subjected to compressional 2. What is meant by the statement “Every stress (like being placed in a giant vise), the entire mass metamorphic rock has a parent rock”? 3. Define metamorphic grade.

Drives Metamorphism? List and distinguish among the four agents that drive metamorphism. The agents of metamorphism include heat, pressure, directional stress, and chemically active fluids. During metamorphism, rocks may be subjected to all four metamorphic agents simultaneously. However, the degree of metamorphism and the contribution of each agent vary greatly from one environment to another.

Changes Caused by Heat The formation of new mineral grains that tend to be larger than the original grains is called recrystallization. During this process, the mineralogy of the rock may or may not change. For example, when quartz sandstone is metamorphosed to form quartzite, the mineralogy does not change; the quartz grains remain quartz. By contrast, when shale is metamorphosed to slate, the clay minerals are recrystallized and become new minerals—usually chlorite and muscovite. Although the mineralogy changes in the transition from shale to slate, the overall chemical composition remains essentially unchanged. Instead, the existing atoms are rearranged into new crystalline structures that are more stable in the new environment. (In some environments, ions may actually migrate into or out of a rock, thereby changing its overall chemical composition.) What Is the Source of Heat? There are two primary sources of heat within Earth. One is the increasing temperature that occurs as we travel deeper into Earth’s interior. The second is heat being released to the surrounding rocks as a magma body cools. Earth’s interior is extremely hot, mainly because of heat released from the repeated collision of asteroidsize bodies during the formation of our planet as well as from energy being continually released by the decay of radioactive elements. The rate of increase in temperature with depth is known as the geothermal gradient. In the upper crust, this increase in temperature averages that formed at Earth’s surface will experience a gradual Sources of heat for metamorphism The two main sources of heat for metamorphism are the increasing temperature that occurs as we travel deeper into Earth’s interior and heat released to the surrounding rocks when a magma body cools. (https://goo.gl/JzqfLx) increase in temperature if they are transported to greater depths. As described earlier, clay minerals tend to become unstable when buried to a depth of about 8 kilometers (5 clay minerals begin to recrystallize into new minerals, such as chlorite and muscovite, both of which are stable in this new environment. However, many silicate minerals, particularly those found in crystalline igneous rocks— such as quartz and feldspar—remain stable at these temperatures. Thus, metamorphic changes in quartz and feldspar generally occur at higher temperatures. which heat drives metamorphism. Environments where rocks may be carried to great depths and heated include convergent plate boundaries where slabs of sedimentladen oceanic crust are being subducted. Rocks may also become deeply buried in large basins where gradual subsidence results in thick accumulations of sediment. These basins, exemplified by the Gulf of Mexico, are known to develop low-grade metamorphic conditions near the base of the pile. In addition, continental collisions, which result in mountain building, cause some rocks to be uplifted while others are thrust downward, where elevated temperatures and pressures trigger metamorphism. Heat may also be transported from the mantle into the shallowest layers of the crust. Rising mantle plumes, upwelling at mid-ocean ridges, and magma generated by partial melting of mantle rock at subduction zones intrudes rocks at shallow depths, the magma cools and releases heat, which “bakes” the surrounding host rock.

Confining pressure and differential stress (https:// High confining During mountain building, rocks subjected to differential stress are shortened in the direction of maximum stress and lengthened in the direction of minimum stress.

Water is abundant in Earth’s crust. In the upper crust, water occurs as groundwater. At depth, hot water is released into the surrounding rocks when a magma body cools and solidifies. In addition, many minerals, including clays, micas, and amphiboles, are hydrated— which means they contain water in their crystalline structures. Elevated temperatures and pressures cause these minerals to dehydrate, expelling hot, mineralladen water.

Most metamorphic rocks have the same overall chemical composition as the parent rocks from which they formed, except for the possible loss or acquisition parent material metamorphic rocks were derived, the most important clue comes from their overall chemical Consider the large exposures of the metamorphic Because marble and the common sedimentary rock limestone have the same mineralogy (calcite), it seems reasonable to conclude that limestone is the parent rock of marble. Furthermore, because limestone usually forms in warm, shallow marine environments, we can surmise that considerable deformation must have occurred to convert limy deposits in a shallow sea into marble crags The mineral makeup of the parent rock also largely determines the degree to which each metamorphic agent will cause change. For example, when magma forces its way into an existing body of rock, high temperatures and hot fluids may alter the host rock. If the host rock is composed of minerals that are comparatively nonreactive, such as quartz, any alterations that may occur will be confined to a narrow zone next to the igneous intrusion. However, when the host rock is limestone, which is highly reactive, the zone of metamorphism may extend far from the intrusion.

1. List four agents that drive metamorphism. 2. Why is heat considered the most important agent of metamorphism? 3. How is confining pressure different from differential stress? 4. What role do chemically active fluids play in 5. What characteristic of a metamorphic rock is determined primarily by its parent rock?

The term foliation refers to any planar (nearly flat) arrangement of mineral grains or crystals within a rock. Although foliation may occur in some sedimentary and even a few types of igneous rocks, it is a fundamental characteristic of metamorphosed rocks that have been strongly deformed, mainly by folding. In metamorphic environments, foliation is ultimately driven by compressional stress that shortens rock units, causing mineral grains in preexisting rocks to develop parallel, or nearly parallel, alignments. Examples of foliation include the parallel alignment of platy minerals through rotation, recrystallization, and flattening of mineral grains or pebbles. Foliated textures include rock cleavage in which rocks can be easily split into tabular slabs, and compositional banding in which the separation of dark and light minerals generates a layered appearance. These diverse types of foliation can form in many different ways.

Flattening Spherically Shaped Grains Mechanisms that flatten existing mineral grains are important in the metamorphism of rocks that contain minerals such as quartz, calcite, and olivine. These minerals normally develop roughly spherical crystals and have a rather simple chemical composition.

Platy and elongated mineral grains having random Mineral grains that are aligned roughly perpendicular to the direction of maximum differential stress.

Solid-state flow of mineral grains Mineral grains can be flattened by solidstate flow when units of a mineral’s crystalline structure slide relative to each other. This mechanism involves breaking existing chemical bonds and forming new ones.

Flattened rock containing elongated quartz grains of a mineral’s crystalline structure slide relative to one another along discrete planes, thereby distorting the bonds and forming new ones. The shape of a mineral may also be altered by a process in which individual atoms move from a location along the margin of the grain that is highly stressed to a less-stressed position on the same grain. This mechanism, called pressure solution, is significantly aided by hot, ion-rich water. Mineral matter (ions) dissolves where grains are in contact with each other (areas of high stress) and is deposited in pore spaces (areas of low stress). As a result, the mineral grains tend to become shortened in the direction of maximum stress and elongated in the direction of minimum stress. While both of these mechanisms flatten mineral grains, the mineralogy remains the same.

Various types of foliation exist, depending largely upon the grade of metamorphism and the mineralogy of the parent rock. We will look at three: rock, or slaty, cleavage; schistosity; and gneissic texture, or banding.

Pressure solution results in flattened mineral grains This mechanism flattens mineral grains by dissolving ions from areas of high stress and depositing ions at sites of low stress. changes the shape of mineral grains but not their volume and perpendicular to the maximum Because slate typically forms during the low-grade metamorphism of shale, evidence of the original sedimentary bedding the orientation of slate’s cleavage usually develops at an angle to the sedimentary beds. Thus, unlike shale, which splits along bedding planes, slate often splits across bedding surfaces. Other metamorphic rocks, such as schists and gneisses, sometimes split along planar surfaces and exhibit rock cleavage.

Schistosity At higher temperatures and pressures, the minute mica and chlorite flakes in slate begin to recrystallize into larger muscovite and biotite crystals. When these platy minerals are large enough to be discernible with the unaided eye, they exhibit planar or layered structures called schistosity. Rocks that have this type of foliation are referred to as schist. In addition to containing platy minerals, schist often contains deformed quartz and feldspar crystals that appear flattened or lens-shaped and are embedded among the mica grains.

Development of gneissic banding Gneissic banding develops through the migration of ions that cause felsic and mafic minerals to grow in separate layers.

Ion migration causes light and dark minerals to separate.

Parent rock with randomly oriented mineral grains.

that exhibit equidimensional crystals, such as quartz or calcite. For example, when a fine-grained limestone (made of calcite) is metamorphosed by the intrusion of a hot magma body, the small calcite grains recrystallize to form larger interlocking crystals. The resulting rock, marble, exhibits Garnet–mica schist The dark red garnet crystals (porphyroblasts) are embedded in a matrix of fine-grained large, intergrown calcite crystals, similar in appearance to those in coarse-grained igneous rocks. Metamorphic rocks may also contain some unusually large grains, called porphyroblasts, that are surrounded by a fine-grained matrix of other minerals. Porphyroblastic textures develop in a Dennis Tasa wide range of rock types and Gneissic texture metamorphic environments when minerals in the parent rock recrystallize to form new minerals. During recrystallization, certain metamorphic minerals, such as garnet, tend to develop a small number of very large crystals. By contrast, minerals such as muscovite and biotite typically form a large number of smaller grains. As a result, metamorphic rocks that contain large crystals (porphyroblasts) of, for example, garnet embedded in a finer-grained matrix of biotite and muscovite, are relatively common.

1. Define foliation. 2. Briefly describe three ways in which the mineral grains in a rock develop a preferred orientation (that is, foliation). 3. Distinguish among slaty cleavage, schistosity, and gneissic textures. Close up of 4. What is meant by nonfoliated texture? Name one rock that exhibits this texture.

his metamorphic rock outcrop (bedrock exposed at the surface) is found in the Southern Alps, located on the South Island of New Zealand. The continued growth of the Southern Alps is somewhat unique in that these mountains lie where the Pacific and Australian plates collide and simultaneously slide past one another along a large transform fault called the Alpine Fault.

Metamorphic Rocks List and describe the most common metamorphic rocks. Most metamorphic rocks that we observe at Earth’s surface were derived from the three most common sedimentary rocks—shale, limestone, and quartz sandstone. Shale is the most likely parent of most slate, phyllite, schist, and gneiss. This sequence of metamorphic rocks reflects an increase in grain size, a change in rock texture, and a change in mineralogy. Limestone, which is composed of the mineral calcite (CaCO3), is the parent rock of marble, while quartz (SiO2) sandstone is the parent of quartzite. Because calcite and quartz are simple chemical compounds compared to clay minerals, their mineralogy does not change during metamorphism; calcite usually remains calcite, and quartz remains quartz. Rather, these minerals recrystallize to produce larger fused grains that are the main constituents of marble and quartzite, The major characteristics of the most common that metamorphic rocks can be broadly classified by the type of foliation exhibited and, to a lesser extent, the chemical composition of the parent rock. It is worth noting that certain rock names (slate, schist, and gneiss) are also used to describe rock texture.

Parallel alignment of mineral grains Black (carbonaceous) slate contains organic material, red slate gets its color from iron oxide, and green slate usually contains a lot of the mineral chlorite.

Phyllite Phyllite represents a degree of metamorphism between slate and schist. Its constituent platy minerals are larger than those in slate but not large enough to be readily identifiable with the unaided eye. Although phyllite appears similar to slate, it can be easily distinguished from Phyllite exhibits rock cleavage and is composed mainly of very fine crystals of mainly muscovite, chlorite, or both.

As you learned in the previous section, the term schist describes the texture of rocks, and as such it is used to name rocks that have a wide variety of chemical compositions. To indicate composition, mineral names are added. For example, schists composed primarily of muscovite and biotite are called mica schist minerals, some of which are unique to metamorphic rocks. Some common accessory minerals that occur as porphyroblasts include garnet, staurolite, and andalusite, in which case the rock is called garnet-mica schist, staurolite-mica schist, or andalusite-mica schist In addition, schists may be composed largely of the minerals chlorite or talc, in which case they are called chlorite schist and talc schist, respectively. Both chlorite and talc schists can form when rocks having basaltic compositions undergo metamorphism.

Gneiss Gneiss is the term applied to medium- to coarse-grained banded metamorphic rocks in which granular and elongated (as opposed to platy) minerals predominate. The most common minerals in gneiss are quartz, potassium feldspar, and plagioclase feldspar. Most gneisses also contain lesser amounts of biotite, muscovite, and amphibole. Some gneisses will split along the layers of platy minerals, but most break in an irregular fashion. Recall that during high-grade metamorphism, the light and dark components separate, giving gneisses their characteristic banded or layered appearance. Thus, most gneisses consist of alternating bands of white or reddish feldspar-rich zones and layers of dark ferromagnesian minerals. These banded gneisses often exhibit evidence of deformation, including folds and sometimes Gneisses having a felsic composition may be derived from granite or its fine-grained equivalent, rhyolite. However, most gneisses are generated through highgrade metamorphism of shale. Therefore, gneiss represents the highest-grade metamorphic rock in the sequence of shale, slate, phyllite, schist, and gneiss. Like schists, gneisses may also include large crystals of accessory minerals such as garnet. Gneisses made up primarily of dark minerals also occur. For example, an amphibole-rich rock that exhibits a gneissic texture is called amphibolite.

Marble The metamorphism of limestone or dolostone produces the crystalline metamorphic rock called composed essentially of the mineral calcite. Because of its relative softness (3 on the Mohs scale), marble is easy to cut and shape. White marble is particularly prized Quartz sandstone as a stone from which monuments and statues are carved, Taj Mahal in India (see GEOgraphics 8.1). Unfortunately, when marble is exposed to acid rain, its composition (calcium carbonate) makes it susceptible to chemical weathering. The parent rocks of most marbles contain impurities that color the stone. Thus, marble can be pink, gray, green, or even black and may contain a variety of accessory minerals (such as chlorite, mica, garnet, and wollastonite). Close up When marble forms from limestone interbedded with shales, it appears banded and exhibits visible foliation. When deformed, these banded marbles may develop highly contorted mica-rich folds that enhance the rocks’ artistic appearance. These decorative marbles have been used as building stones since prehistoric times.

Increase in and pressure variable mineral composition. The parent rock of most hornfels is shale or another clay-rich rock, which has been “baked” by a hot intruding magma body. Hornfels tends to be gray to black in color and quite hard, and it may display conchoidal fracture.

1. Although slate and phyllite resemble each other, how can they be differentiated? 2. In the rock mica schist, what does mica indicate, and what does schist indicate? 3. Briefly describe the appearance of the metamorphic rock gneiss and explain how it 4. Describe slate, phyllite, schist, and gneiss in terms of texture and grain size. 5. Compare and contrast marble and quartzite.

Write a description for each of these metamorphic environments: contact metamorphism, hydrothermal metamorphism, subduction zone metamorphism, and regional metamorphism.

Metamorphism occurs in many different environments. Most of these environments occur in the vicinity of plate margins, and several are associated with igneous activity. We will consider the basic metamorphic environments—contact or thermal metamorphism, hydrothermal metamorphism, burial and subduction zone metamorphism, and regional metamorphism—as well as a few types of metamorphism that generate relatively small quantities of metamorphic rock.

Metamorphic environments This graph illustrates the temperatures and pressures typically associated with the major types of metamorphic environments.

Not found in nature vertical axis. Notice that hydrothermal metamorphism occurs in relatively low-temperature and lowpressure environments, whereas burial and subduction metamorphism occur under relatively low-temperature and high-pressure conditions. Although not shown on this graph, regional and subduction metamorphism involve directional stress, whereas hydrothermal and contact metamorphism do not.

Metamorphic aureole (roof pendant) Rocks produced by contact metamorphism Contact metamorphism of shale yields hornfels, while contact metamorphism of quartz sandstone and limestone produces quartzite and marble, respectively.

to the magma body, high-temperature minerals such as garnet may form, whereas farther away, low- Hydrothermal metamorphism can occur at shallow crustal grade minerals such as chlorite are produced. depths in regions where geysers Depending mainly on the composition of the and hot springs are active. parent rock, a variety of metamorphic rocks can form in the same setting. For example, during contact metamorphism of mudstones and shales, the clay minerals are baked, much like clay is baked in 8.14). Hornfels can also form from a variety of other materials, including volcanic ash and basaltic rocks. Other metamorphic rocks that are produced by contact metamorphism are marble and quartzite (see ent of marble and that the metamorphism of quartz sandstone produces quartzite.

metamorphism Regional metamorphism is often associated with a continental collision where rocks are squeezed between two converging plates, resulting in mountain building.

conversion of mafic rocks of the oceanic crust and uppermost mantle into the hydrated rocks serpentinite and soapstone. Hydrothermal solutions circulating through the seafloor also remove large amounts of metals, such as iron, cobalt, nickel, silver, gold, and copper, from the newly formed crust. These hot, metal-rich fluids eventually rise clouds called black smokers. Upon mixing with the cold seawater, sulfides and carbonate minerals containing these heavy metals precipitate to form metallic deposits. Geologists credit this process with the formation of the copper ores mined today on the Mediterranean island of setting, cold, dense oceanic crust and sediments, which are poor conductors of heat, are subducting rapidly enough that pressure increases faster than temperature. This phenomenon, called subduction zone metamorphism, differs from burial metamorphism in that differential stress plays a major role in deforming rock as it is being metamorphosed.

Regional metamorphism is a common, widespread type of metamorphism typically associated with mountain building, where large segments of Earth’s crust are intensely deformed by the collision of two continental crust blocks. Whereas denser oceanic crust subducts under more buoyant continental crust, with Burial and Subduction Zone the collision of continental crust blocks, two landmasses instead collide and deform. Sediments and crustal rocks that form the margins of the colliding continents are Burial metamorphism tends to occur where massive folded and faulted and, as a result, shorten and thicken amounts of sedimentary or volcanic material accumulate like a rumpled carpet. Continental collisions may also in a subsiding basin such as the Gulf of Mexico (see Figcause crystalline basement rocks lying under sedimenure 8.3). Here, low-grade metamorphic conditions may tary layers, as well as slices of oceanic crust that once be reached within the deepest layers. Confining pressure floored the intervening ocean basin, to be uplifted and and heat drive the recrystallization of the constituent minerals, changing the texture and/or mineralogy of the The general thickening of the crust that occurs rock without appreciable deformation. during mountain building results in buoyant lifting, Rocks and sediments can also be carried to great in which deformed rocks are elevated high above sea depths along convergent boundaries where oceanic level. Crustal thickening also results in the deep burial of large quantities of rock as one crustal block is thrust Sediments deposited on beneath another. Deep in the roots of mountains, continental margins elevated temperatures caused by deep burial are responsible for the most intense metamorphic activity within a mountain belt. In some settings, deeply buried rocks become heated beyond their Continental crust melting points, producing magma. Subducting oceanic l When these magma bodies grow large enough to buoyantly rise, they intrude the overlying metamorphic and sediAsthenosphere belts consist of folded and faulted rocks, often intertwined bodies. Over time, rock masses are uplifted, and erosion removes the overlying material to expose the igneous and metaContinental crust morphic core of the mountain Partial melting Regional metamorphism of deeply buried crustal rocks produces some of the most common metamorphic rocks.

rocks behave like a brittle solid, fault breccia is generated along fault zones.

In this process, shale is metamorphosed to produce the sequences of slate, phyllite, schist, and gneiss. In addition, quartz sandstone and limestone are metamorphosed into quartzite and marble.

Other, less-common types of metamorphism generate relatively small amounts of metamorphic rock that tends to be geographically localized.

Metamorphism Along Fault Zones Near Earth’s surface, rock behaves like a brittle solid. Consequently, movement along a fault zone fractures and pulverizes called fault breccia composed of broken and crushed Andreas Fault have created a zone of fault breccia and related rock types more than 1000 kilometers (600 miles) long and up to 3 kilometers (nearly 2 miles) wide. Much of the deformation associated with fault zones occurs at great depth and thus at high temperatures. In this environment, preexisting minerals deform by ductile directions, the minerals in the fault zone between them tend to form elongated grains that give the rock a foliated and/or lineated appearance. Rocks formed in these zones of intense ductile deformation are termed mylonites (mylo = a mill, ite = a stone).

slow ductile flow to form rocks called mylonites. meteoroid (fragments of comets or asteroids) strike Earth’s surface (see GEOgraphics 8.2). Upon impact, the energy of the once rapidly moving meteorite is transformed into heat energy and shock waves that pass through the surrounding rocks. The result is pulverized, shattered, and sometimes melted rock. The products of these impacts, called impactiles, include mixtures of fused fragmented rock plus glassrich ejecta that resemble volcanic bombs. In some cases, a very dense form of quartz (coesite) and minute diamonds are found. The existence of these highpressure minerals provides convincing evidence that pressures and temperatures involved in impact metamorphism can be as great as those found in the upper 1. In which type of metamorphism does compressional stress play a major role? 2. Name three rocks that are produced by contact 3. What is an aureole? 4. What is the agent of hydrothermal metamorphism? 5. Which type of plate boundary is associated with regional metamorphism? 6. List the common metamorphic rocks generated by regional metamorphism.

Explain how index minerals are used to establish the metamorphic grade of a rock body. In areas affected by metamorphism, geologists can observe the usually systematic variations in the mineralogy and texture of the altered rocks. These differences are clearly related to variations in the degree of metamorphism that takes place in each metamorphic zone.

In addition to textural changes, we encounter corresponding changes in mineralogy as we shift from areas of low-grade metamorphism to those of high-grade metamorphism. An idealized transition in mineralogy Textural variations caused by regional metamorphism Idealized illustration of textural variations produced by regional metamorphism, progressing from low-grade metamorphism Tarbuck) (https://goo.gl/367yOH) (Se Sha dim le gra diat de e me arttiial (MMig ellttiingal igmma ng gra h to dominate. Under more extreme conditions, metaSlate morphic rocks may conShale tain garnet and staurolite crystals. At temperatures approaching the melting point of rock, sillimanite forms. SillimanBiotite ite is a high-temperature metamorphic mineral used to make porcelains used in extreme environments, such as for spark plugs. Through the study of metamorphic rocks in their natural settings (called field studies) and through experithat results from the regional metamorphism of mental studies, researchers have learned that certain form as shale changes to slate is chlorite. At higher indicators of the metamorphic environment in which they temperatures, flakes of muscovite and biotite begin formed. Using these index minerals, geologists distinguish among different zones of regional metamorphism. For example, the mineral chlorite begins to form when Garnet, an index mineral, ally slates) are categorized as low grade. By contrast, the intermediate- to high-grade mineral sillimanite forms only in extreme environments metamorphism These garnet porphyroblasts are found in a containing it are considered high grade. By mapping the gneiss in the Adirondacks, New occurrences of index minerals, geologists can identify York. (Photo by Michael Collier) (http:// zones of varying metamorphic grades.

Migmatites In the most extreme environments, even the highest-grade metamorphic rocks undergo change. For example, gneissic rocks may be heated sufficiently to trigger melting. However, minerals melt at different temperatures. The light-colored silicates, usually quartz and potassium feldspar, have the lowest melting temperatures Park, California, consists of dark-colored metamorphic rocks that overlie light-colored igneous rocks.

hydrothermal, burial, subduction zone, or regional metamorphism—that likely produced these metamorphic geologic history of this area, based on what you observe in this image.

Highly generalized map that shows areas of low- to high-grade metamorphism in New England. and begin to melt first, whereas the mafic silicates, such as amphibole and biotite, remain solid. When the partially melted rock cools, the light bands will be composed of igneous or igneous-appearing components, while the dark bands will consist of unmelted metamorphic material. Rocks of this type are called migmatites (migma = mixture, ite = a stone). The bands in migmatites often form intricate folds and may contain tabular inclusions of the dark components. Migmatites serve to illustrate the fact that some rocks are considered transitional and do not fit neatly into any of the three basic rock groups.

1. Describe the different grades of metamorphism that might be encountered moving west to east from Ohio to the crystalline core of the Appalachians. 2. How do geologists use index minerals? 3. Explain why migmatites are difficult to place into any one of the three basic rock groups.

Describe the temperature and pressure conditions associated with the following metamorphic facies: blueschist facies, hornfels facies, and zeolite facies. Nearly a century ago, geologists realized that groups of associated minerals could be used to determine the pressures and temperatures at which rocks undergo metamorphism. This discovery led Finnish geologist Pentti Eskola to propose the concept of metamorphic facies. Simply, metamorphic rocks containing the same assemblage of minerals belong to the same metamorphic facies— implying that they formed in very similar metamorphic environments. Using metamorphic facies to determine a metamorphic environment is analogous to using a group of plants to define a climatic zone, areas that experience similar precipitation and temperature conditions. For instance, sparsely vegetated regions dominated by cacti identify the desert climate zone, characterized by low precipitation and high temperatures.

8.31. These include the hornfels, zeolite, greenschist, amphibolite, granulite, blueschist, and eclogite facies. Facies names are based on the minerals that define them. For example, rocks of the amphibolite facies are characterized by hornblende (a common amphibole); the greenschist facies consists of schists in which the Metamorphic facies and corresponding temperature and pressure conditions Note the metamorphic rocks produced from regional metamorphism of basalt versus shale under similar conditions of temperature and pressure.

It should be noted that for each metamor0 refers to a metaZeolite Bas e derived specifialt on the and his basic terminology, phib Gneiss although now slightly modiolite fied, remains. The names of Eskola’s facies serve as conBlueschist venient labels for particular Not found in nature combinations of temperatures and pressures, no matter what the mineral composiFacies tion. In other words, even if a nonbasaltic parent rock produces different indicator minerals under a given set of metamorphic conditions, green minerals chlorite, epidote, and serpentine are prominent. Similar groups of minerals are found in the temperature and pressure ranges embodied by that rocks of all ages and in all parts of the world. Thus, metamorphic rock. For example, mica schist belongs to the concept of metamorphic facies is useful in interthe amphibolite facies, despite the fact that mica schist preting Earth’s history. Rocks belonging to the same was derived from shale—a nonbasaltic parent rock. metamorphic facies all formed under the same conditions of temperature and pressure, and therefore in similar tectonic settings, regardless of their location Metamorphic Facies and Plate or age.

Metamorphic facies and plate tectonics These block diagrams show various metamorphic facies and the tectonic environments that generate them.

Basaltic magma derived from partial melting of peridotite the Coast Range of California belong to the blueschist facies; these highly deformed rocks were once deeply buried but have been uplifted because of a change in the plate boundary. In some areas, subduction carries rocks to even greater depths, producing the eclogite facies that is diagnostic of very high temperatures and pressures Along some convergent high-pressure environments and extreme high-pressure environments zones, continental plates collide to form extensive mountain belts increased temperature results in expansion, so mineral of regional metamorphism that often include zones of phases that occupy greater volume (are less dense) tend contact and hydrothermal metamorphism. The increasto be more stable at high temperatures. Thus, detering temperatures and pressures associated with regional mining the conditions of temperature and pressure at metamorphism are recorded by the zeolite–greenschist– which a mineral is stable (does not change) is not an easy task. To help in this endeavor, researchers have turned to the laboratory. Here materials of various compositions are heated and placed under pressures that approximate conditions at various depths within Earth. From such experiments, we can determine Mineral Stability and Metamorphic which minerals are likely to form in various metamorEnvironments phic environments. In most tectonic environments, such as along subducSome minerals, such as quartz, are stable over a tion zones, rocks experience an increase in both preswide range of metamorphic settings and therefore are sure and temperature simultaneously. An increase in not useful in determining metamorphic environments. pressure causes minerals to contract, which favors Fortunately, other groups of related minerals do provide the formation of high-density minerals. However, useful estimates of conditions during metamorphism. One of the most important of these groups includes the he Matterhorn, located on the border between Switzerland and Italy, is one of the highest peaks in the Alps. Except for its base, the Matterhorn is composed mainly of gneiss.

Group of minerals useful in determining metamorphic environments This Kindersley Media Library; photo Researchers, Inc.) phase diagram illustrates the conditions of pressure and temperature at which the three polymorphs of Al2SiO5 (andalusite, kyanite, and sillimanite) are stable.

minerals kyanite, andalusite, and sillimanite. These three minerals have identical chemical compositions (Al2SiO5) but different crystalline structures, which phase diagram that shows the specific range of pressures and temperatures at which each of these aluminum-rich silicates is stable. Because shales and mudstones, which are very common, contain the elements found in these minerals, metamorphic products of shale (slate, phyllite, schist, and gneiss) often contain varying amounts of kyanite, andalusite, or sillimanite. For example, if shale were buried to a depth of about 35 kilometers (10 kilobars), at a In general, andalusite is produced by contact metamorphism in near-surface environments where temperatures are high but pressures are relatively low. Kyanite is the high-pressure polymorph that forms during the subduction and deep burial associated with mountain building. Sillimanite, on the other hand, forms only at high temperatures, as a result of contact with a very hot magma body and/or very deep burial. Knowing the ranges of temperatures and pressures a rock experienced during metamorphism provides geologists with valuable data needed to interpret past tectonic environments.

1. Define metamorphic facies. 2. What two physical conditions vary within Earth to produce different metamorphic 3. The rocks of the Coast Range of California belong to the blueschist facies. What does this tell you about the environment in which these rocks 4. Which process would most likely form minerals belonging to the hornfels facies—contact metamorphism or regional metamorphism?

Rafting the Colorado river in Arizona’s Marble Canyon. The rocks exposed in the walls of the canyon contain clues to millions of years of Earth history. (Photo by Michael Collier) tory and the importance of time as a component in all geologic processes. In the nineteenth century, Sir Charles Lyell and others effectively demonstrated that Earth had experienced many episodes of mountain building and erosion, which must have required great spans of geologic time. Although these pioneering scientists understood that Earth was very old, they had no way of determining its age in years. Was it tens of millions, hundreds of millions, or even billions of years old? Long before geologists could establish a geologic time scale that included numerical dates in years, they gradually assembled a time scale using relative dating principles. What are these principles? What part do fossils play? With the discovery of radioactivity and the development of radiometric dating techniques, geologists now can assign quite accurate dates to many of the events in Earth history. What is radioactivity? Why is it a good “clock” for dating the geologic past?

Distinguish between numerical and relative dating and apply relative dating principles to determine a time sequence of geologic events. Grand Canyon’s North Rim. Beneath him are thousands of meters of sedimentary strata that go as far back as Cambrian time, more than 540 million years ago. These strata rest atop even older sedimentary, metamorphic, and igneous rocks from a span known as the Precambrian. Some of these rocks are 2 billion years old. Although the Grand Canyon’s rock record has numerous interruptions, the rocks beneath the hiker contain clues to great spans of Earth history.

perceive our planet. They learned that Earth is much older than anyone had previously imagined, and they learned that its surface and interior have been changed over and over again by the same geologic processes that operate today.

Like the pages in a long and complicated history book, rocks record the geologic events and changing life-forms of the past. The book, however, is not complete. Many pages, especially in the early chapters, are missing. Others are tattered, torn, or smudged. Yet enough of the book remains to allow much of the story to be deciphered. Interpreting Earth history is an important goal of the science of geology. Like a modern-day sleuth, a geologist must interpret the clues found preserved in the rocks. By studying rocks, especially sedimentary rocks, and the features they contain, geologists can unravel the complexities of the past. Geologic events by themselves, however, have little meaning until they are put into a time perspective. Studying history, whether it is the Civil War or the age of dinosaurs, requires a calendar. Among geology’s major contributions to human knowledge are the geologic time scale and the discovery that Earth history is exceedingly long.

Numerical Dates During the late 1800s and early 1900s, attempts were made to determine Earth’s age. Although some of the methods appeared promising at the time, none of those early efforts proved to be reliable. What those scientists were seeking was a numerical date. Such dates specify the actual number of years that have passed since an event occurred. Today, our understanding of radioactivity allows us to accurately determine numerical dates for rocks that represent important events in Earth’s distant past. We will study radioactivity later in this chapter. Prior to the discovery of radioactivity, geologists had no reliable method of carrying out numerical dating and had to rely solely on relative dating.

The geologists who developed the geologic time scale revolutionized the way people think about time and sequence of formation—indicating which formed first, second, third, and so on—we are establishing relative dates. Such dates cannot tell us how long ago something took place, only that it followed one event and preceded another. The relative dating techniques that were developed are valuable and still widely used. Numerical dating methods did not replace those techniques but supplemented them. To establish a relative time scale, a few basic principles had to be discovered and applied. They were major breakthroughs in thinking at the time, and their discovery was an important scientific achievement.

Nicolas Steno (1638–1686), a Danish anatomist, geologist, and priest, was the first to recognize a sequence of historical events in an outcrop of sedimentary rock layers. Working in the mountains of western Italy, Steno applied a very simple rule that has become the most basic principle of relative dating—the principle of superposition (super = above; positum = to place). This principle simply states that in an undeformed sequence of sedimentary rocks, each bed is older than the one above and younger than the one below. Although it may seem obvious that a rock layer could not be deposited with nothing beneath it for support, it was not until 1669 that Steno clearly stated this principle. This rule also applies to other surface-deposited materials, such as lava flows and beds of ash from volcanic eruptions. Applying the law of superposition to the beds exposed in the upper portion of the Grand Canyon, we can easily place the layers in their proper order. rocks in the Supai Group are the oldest, followed in order Superposition Applying the principle of superposition to these layers in the upper portion of the Grand Canyon, the Supai Group is oldest, and the Kaibab Limestone is into a different type of sediment or until they river creates a canyon, we can assume that identical or similar strata on opposite sides once spanned the canyon may be separated by a considerable distance, the principle of lateral continuity tells us those outcrops once formed a isolated outcrops to one another. Combining the principles of lateral continuity and superposition lets us extend relative age relationships over broad areas. This process, called correlation, is examined in Section 9.3.

Steno is also credited with recognizing the importance of another basic rule, the principle of original horizontality, which says that layers of sediment are generally deposited in a horizontal position. Thus, if we observe rock layers that are flat, it means they have not been disturbed and still have their original horizontality. The layers in the Grand Canyon illustrate this in Figures 9.1 and 9.2. But if they are folded or inclined at a steep angle (discussed in detail in Chapter 10), they must have been moved into that position by crustal disturbances sometime after their deposition.

The principle of lateral continuity refers to the fact that sedimentary beds originate as continuous layers that extend in all directions until they eventually grade Mountain in southern Utah. The gray rocks are shale that originated as muddy river delta deposits. The sediments composing the orange sandstone were deposited by a river.

Sometimes inclusions can aid in the relative dating process. Inclusions are fragments of one rock unit that have been enclosed within another. The basic principle of inclusions is logical and straightforward. The rock mass adjacent to the one containing the inclusions must have been there first in order to provide the rock fragments. Therefore, the rock mass that contains inclusions is the younger of the two. For example, when magma intrudes into surrounding rock, blocks of the surrounding rock may become dislodged and incorporated into the magma. If these pieces do not melt, they remain as inclusions known as xenoliths (see Chapter 4). In another example, when sediment is deposited atop a weathered mass of bedrock, pieces of the weathered rock become incorporated into the younger sedimentary layer.

When we observe layers of rock that have been deposC. ited essentially without interruption, we call them conformable. Particular sites exhibit conformable beds representing certain spans of geologic time. However, no place on Earth has a complete set of conformable Throughout Earth history, the deposition of sediment has been interrupted over and over again. All such breaks in the rock record are termed unconformities. An unconformity represents a long period during which deposition ceased, erosion removed previously formed rocks, and then deposition resumed. In each case, uplift and erosion were followed by subsidence and renewed sedimentation.

Unconformities are important features because they represent significant geologic events in Earth history. There are three basic types of unconformities, and geologists can use them to identify what intervals of time are not represented by strata and thus are missing from the geologic record.

Angular Unconformity Perhaps the most easily recognized unconformity is an angular unconformity. It consists of tilted or folded sedimentary rocks that are overlain by younger, more flat-lying strata. An angular unconformity indicates that during the pause in deposition, a period of deformation (folding or tilting) and erosion occurred.

Inclusions The rock containing inclusions is younger than the inclusions. (https://goo.gl/Okfrm6) These inclusions of igneous rock contained in the adjacent sedimentary layer indicate the sediments were deposited atop the weathered igneous mass and thus are younger.

Xenoliths are inclusions in an igneous intrusion that form when pieces of surrounding rock are incorporated into magma.

Siccar Point, Scotland James Hutton studied this famous unconformity in the late 1700s. (Photo by Marli Miller) When James Hutton studied an angular unconformity in Scotland more than 200 years ago,* he understood that it represented a major episode of geologic activity. He and his colleagues also appreciated the immense time span implied by such relationships; a companion later wrote of their visit to this site, “the mind seemed to grow giddy by looking so far into the abyss of time.” record that represents a period of erosion rather than deposition. Imagine that a series of sedimentary layers is deposited in a shallow marine setting. Following this period of deposition, sea level falls or the land rises, exposing some the sedimentary layers. During this span, when the sedimentary beds are above sea level, no new sediment accumulates, and some of the existing layers are eroded away. Later, sea level rises or the land subsides, submerging the landscape. Now the surface is again below sea level, and a new series of sedimentary beds is deposited. The boundary separating the two sets of beds is a disconformity—a span for which there is no rock record. Because the layers above and below a disconformity are parallel, these features are sometimes difficult to identify unless you notice evidence of erosion such as a buried stream channel. *This pioneering geologist is discussed in the section on the birth of modern geology in Chapter 1.

Disconformity The layers on both sides of this gap in the rock record are essentially parallel.

Nonconformity The third basic type of unconformity is a nonconformity, in which younger sedimentary strata overlie older metamorphic or intrusive igneous rocks. Just as angular unconformities and some disconformities imply crustal movements, so too do nonconformities. Intrusive igneous masses and metamorphic rocks originate far below the surface. Thus, for a nonconformity to develop, there must be a period of uplift and erosion of overlying rocks. Once exposed at the surface, the igneous or metamorphic rocks are subjected to weathering and erosion, then undergo subsidence and renewed sedimentation.

Nonconformity Younger sedimentary rocks rest atop older metamorphic or igneous rocks.

Cross section of the Grand Canyon All three types of unconformities Vishnu Schist his close-up shows pieces of diorite (darkest rock) in granite. The thin white line is a vein of quartz. Think of a vein as a tiny dike.

Applying principles of relative dating (https:// Working out the geologic history of a hypothetical region 6. Finally, a period of uplift and erosion. The irregular surface and stream valley indicate that another gap in the rock record is being created by erosion.

1. Beneath the order (law of 2. Uplift and intrusion of a sill because of the inclusions in the sill of fragments from deposited in that order atop the erosion surface to produce an tilted and exposed layers were eroded.

Because the dike cuts through younger (principle of cross-cutting relationships).

continuous. Unconformities represent vast amounts of time that have not been recorded in the canyon’s layers. Canyon. All three types of unconformities can be seen in the canyon walls.

If you apply the principles of relative dating to the place in proper sequence the rocks and the events they represent. The statements within the figure summarize the logic used to interpret the cross section. In this example, we establish a relative time scale for the rocks and events in the area of the cross section. Remember that this method gives us no idea how many years of Earth history are represented, for we have no numerical dates. Nor do we know how this area compares to any other. See GEOgraphics 9.1 for another example of applying relative dating principles.

1. Distinguish between numerical dates and relative 2. Sketch and label four simple diagrams that illustrate each of the following: superposition, original horizontality, lateral continuity, and cross-cutting relationships. 3. What is the significance of an unconformity? 4. Distinguish among angular unconformity, disconformity, and nonconformity.

Define fossil and discuss the conditions that favor the preservation of organisms as fossils. List and describe various types of fossils. Fossils, the remains or traces of prehistoric life, are inclusions in sediment and sedimentary rocks. They are basic and important tools for interpreting the geologic past. The scientific study of fossils is called paleontology. It is an interdisciplinary science that blends geology and biology in an attempt to understand all aspects of the succession of life over the vast expanse of geologic time (see GEOgraphics 9.2). Knowing the nature of the life-forms that existed at a particular time helps researchers understand past environmental conditions. Further, fossils are important time indicators and play a key role in correlating rocks of similar ages that are from different places.

Fossils are of many types. The remains of relatively recent organisms may not have been altered at all. Such objects as teeth, bones, and shells are common examples . Far less common are entire animals, flesh included, that have been preserved because of rather unusual circumstances. Remains of prehistoric elephants called mammoths that were frozen in the Arctic tundra of Siberia and Alaska are examples, as are the mummified remains of sloths preserved in a dry cave in Nevada.

Permineralization When mineral-rich groundwater permeates porous tissue such as bone or wood, minerals precipitate out of solution and fill pores and empty spaces, a process called permineralization. The formation of petrified wood involves permineralization with silica, often from a volcanic source such as a surrounding layer of volcanic ash. The wood is gradually transformed into chert, sometimes with colorful bands from impurities such means “turned into stone.” Sometimes the microscopic details of the petrified structure are faithfully retained.

Skeleton of a mammoth, a prehistoric relative of modern elephant, from the La Brea tar pits. Excavating bones from pit 91. It is a site rich in unaltered Ice Age organisms. Scientists have been excavating here since 1915.

La Brea tar pits The fossils here are actual (unaltered) remains. (Excavation photo by Reed Saxon/ photo by Martin Shields/Alamy) and protected the remains from damage by water and air. As the resin hardened, a protective pressure-resistant case was formed.

Trace Fossils In addition to the fossils already mentioned, there are numerous other types, many of them only traces of prehistoric life. Examples of such indirect evidence r Tracks—animal footprints made in soft sediment that later turned into sedimentary rock. r Burrows—tubes in common fossils and wood, or rock often show preserved as a animal. These considerable detail thin carbon film holes may later become filled with mineral matter and preserved. Some of the oldest-known fossils are believed to be worm burrows. r Coprolites—fossil dung and stomach contents that can provide useful information pertaining to the size and food habits of r Gastroliths—highly tion called carbonization is particularly effective at preserving leaves and delicate animal forms. It occurs when fine sediment encases the remains of an organism. As time passes, pressure squeezes out the liquid and gaseous Conditions Favoring Preservation components and leaves behind a thin residue of carbon ing the geologic past have been preserved as fossils. Norin oxygen-poor environments often contains abundant mally, the remains of an animal or a plant are destroyed. carbonized remains. If the film of carbon is lost from a Under what circumstances are they preserved? Two spefossil preserved in fine-grained sediment, a replica of the cial conditions appear to be necessary: rapid burial and surface, called an impression, may still show considerable the possession of hard parts. When an organism perishes, its soft parts usually are quickly eaten by scavengers or decomposed by bacteria. Occasionally, however, the remains are buried by Amber Delicate organisms, such as insects, are difsediment. When this occurs, the remains are protected ficult to preserve, and consequently they are relatively from the surface environment, where destructive prorare in the fossil record. Not only must they be processes operate. Rapid burial, therefore, is an important tected from decay, but they must not be subjected to condition favoring preservation. any pressure that would crush them. One way in which In addition, animals and plants have a much better some insects have been preserved is in amber, the hardchance of being preserved as part of the fossil record if they have hard parts. Although traces and imprints of was preserved after being trapped in a drop of sticky soft-bodied animals such as jellyfish, worms, and insects resin. Resin sealed off the insect from the atmosphere exist, they are not common. Flesh usually decays so rapidly that preservation is exceedingly unlikely. Hard parts such as shells, bones, and teeth predominate in the record of past life. Because preservation is contingent on special conditions, the record of life in the geologic past is biased. The fossil record of those organisms with hard parts that lived in areas of sedimentation is quite abundant. However, we get only an occasional glimpse of the vast array of other life-forms that did not meet the special conditions favoring preservation.

1. Describe several ways that an animal or a plant can be preserved as a fossil. 2. List three examples of trace fossils. 3. What conditions favor the preservation of an organism as a fossil?

Explain how rocks of similar age that are in different places can be matched up. To develop a geologic time scale that is applicable to the entire Earth, rocks of similar age in different regions must be matched up. Such a task is called correlation. By correlating the rocks from one for example, shows the correlation of strata at three sites on the Colorado Plateau in southern Utah and northern Arizona. No single locale exhibits the entire sequence, but correlation reveals a more complete picture of the sedimentary rock record.

Within a limited area, geologists can correlate rocks of one locality with those of another simply by walking along the outcropping edges, but this may not be possible when the rocks are mostly concealed by soil and vegetation. Correlation over short distances is often achieved by noting the position of a bed in a sequence of strata. Or a layer may be identified in another location if it is composed of distinctive or uncommon Many geologic studies involve relatively small areas. Although they are important in their own right, their full value is realized only when they are correlated with other regions. Although the methods just described are sufficient to trace a rock formation over relatively short distances, they are not adequate for matching up rocks separated by great distances. When correlation between widely separated areas or between continents is the objective, geologists must rely on fossils.

The existence of fossils had been known for centuries, yet it was not until the late 1700s and early 1800s that their significance as geologic tools was made evident. During this period, English engineer and canal builder William Smith discovered that each rock formation in the canals he worked on contained fossils unlike those in the beds either above or below. Further, he noted that sedimentary strata in widely separated areas could be identified—and correlated—based on their distinctive fossil content.

Principle of Faunal Succession Based on Smith’s classic observations and the findings of many later geologists, one of the most important basic principles in historical geology was formulated: Fossil organisms succeed one another in a definite and determinable order, and therefore any time period can be recognized by its fossil content. This is known as the principle of fossil succession. In other words, when fossils are arranged according to their age, they do not present a random or haphazard picture. To the contrary, fossils document the evolution of life through time. For example, an Age of Trilobites is recognized quite early in the fossil record. Then, in succession, paleontologists recognize an Age of Fishes, an Age of Coal Swamps, an Age of Reptiles, and an Age of Mammals. These “ages” pertain to groups that were especially plentiful and characteristic during particular time periods. Within each of the “ages” are many subdivisions, based, for example, on certain species of trilobites and certain types of fish, reptiles, and so on. This same succession of dominant organisms, never out of order, is found on every continent.

Index Fossils and Fossil Assemblages When fossils were found to be time indicators, they became the most useful means of correlating rocks of similar age in Index fossils Since microfossils are often very abundant, widespread, and quick to appear and become extinct, they constitute ideal index fossils. This scanning electron micrograph shows marine microfossils from the Miocene epoch. (Photo by Biophoto Associates/Science different regions. Geologists pay particular attention to certain fossils called index fossils. These fossils are widespread geographically but limited to a short span of geologic time, so their presence provides an important method of matching rocks of the same age. Rock formations, however, do not always contain a specific index fossil. In such situations, a group of fossils, called a fossil assemblage, is used to establish the age of how an assemblage of fossils may be used to date rocks more precisely than could be accomplished by the use of any single fossil.

Fossil assemblage Overlapping ranges of fossils help date rocks more exactly than using a single fossil. (https://goo.gl/dUqgP3) In addition to being important, and often essential, tools for correlation, fossils are important environmental indicators. Although we can deduce much about past environments by studying the nature and characteristics of sedimentary rocks, a close examination of the fossils present can usually provide a great deal more information. For example, when the remains of certain clam shells are found in limestone, a geologist quite reasonably assumes that the region was once covered by a shallow sea. Also, by using what we know of living organisms, we can conclude that fossil animals with thick shells, capable of withstanding pounding and surging waves, inhabited shorelines. On the other hand, animals with thin, delicate shells probably indicate deep, calm offshore waters. Hence, by looking closely at the types of fossils, the approximate position of an ancient shoreline may be identified. Fossils also can be used to indicate the former temperature of the water. Certain kinds of present-day corals must live in warm and shallow tropical seas like those around Florida and The Bahamas. When similar types of coral are found in ancient limestones, they indicate the marine environment that must have existed when they were alive. These examples illustrate how fossils can help unravel the complex story of Earth history.

1. What is the goal of correlation? 2. State the principle of fossil succession in your own words. 3. Contrast index fossil and fossil assemblage. 4. Along with being important in correlation, how else are fossils useful to geologists?

Discuss three types of radioactive decay and explain how radioactive isotopes are used to determine numerical dates. In addition to establishing relative dates by using the principles described in the preceding sections, scientists can also obtain reliable numerical dates for events in the geologic past. For example, we know that Earth is about 4.6 billion years old and that the dinosaurs became extinct about 65 million years ago. As discussed in Chapter 1, dates expressed in millions and billions of years truly stretch our imagination because our personal calendars involve time measured in hours, weeks, and years. Nevertheless, the vast expanse of geologic time is a reality, and radiometric dating allows us to measure it. In this section you will learn about radioactivity and its application in radiometric dating.

Recall from Chapter 3 that each atom has a nucleus that contains protons and neutrons and is orbited by electrons. Electrons have a negative electrical charge, and protons an electron combined, so it has no charge (it is neutral). The atomic number is the number of protons in the nucleus. Every element has a different number of protons and thus a different identifying atomic number (hydrogen = 1, carbon = 6, oxygen = 8, uranium = 92, etc.). Atoms of the same element always have the same number of protons, so the atomic number stays constant. Practically all of an atom’s mass (99.9 percent) is in the nucleus, indicating that electrons have virtually no mass at all. So, by adding the protons and neutrons in an atom’s nucleus, we derive the atom’s mass number. The number of neutrons can vary, and these variants, or isotopes, have different mass numbers. To summarize with an example, uranium’s nucleus always has 92 protons, so its atomic number is always 92. But its neutron population varies, and uranium has three isotopes: uranium-234 (protons + neutrons = 234), uranium-235, and uranium-238. All three isotopes are mixed in nature. They look the same and behave the same in chemical reactions.

Beta (electron) emitted (–) Unstable parent 1 fewer no change an example of radioactive decay. When the radioactive parent, uranium-238 (atomic number 92, mass number 238) decays, it follows a number of steps, emitting 8 alpha particles and 6 beta particles before finally becoming the stable daughter product lead-206 (atomic number 82, mass number 206). One of the unstable daughter products produced during this decay series is radon.

Uranium-238 is an example of a radioactive decay series. Before the stable end product (Pb-206) is reached, many different isotopes are produced as intermediate steps.

Alpha emission Beta emission 92 91 90 89 88 87 86 85 84 83 82 Atomic number to daughter atoms is 1:7 (one parent atom for every seven daughter atoms). If the half-life of a radioactive isotope is known and the parent/daughter ratio can be determined, the age of the sample can be calculated. For example, assume that the half-life of a hypothetical unstable isotope is 1 million years, and the parent/daughter ratio in a sample is 1:15. This ratio indicates that four half-lives have passed and that the sample must be 4 million years old. Notice that the percentage of radioactive atoms that decay during one half-life is always the same: 50 percent. However, the actual number of atoms that decay with the passing of each half-life continually decreases. Thus, as the percentage of radioactive parent atoms declines, the proportion of stable daughter atoms rises, with the increase in daughter atoms just matching the drop in parent atoms. This fact is the key to radiometric dating.

from previous decay. The radiometric “clock” starts at this point. As the uranium in this newly formed mineral disintegrates, atoms of the daughter product are trapped, and measurable amounts of lead eventually accumulate.

Of the many radioactive isotopes that exist in nature, five have proved particularly useful in providing radiometric ages for ancient rocks (Table 9.1). Rubidium-87, thorium-232, and the two isotopes of uranium are used only for dating rocks that are millions of years old, but potassium-40 is more versatile.

Radioactive decay curve Change is exponential. Half of the radioactive parent remains after one half-life. After a second half-life, one-quarter of the parent remains, and so forth.

13 atoms 6 atoms Number of half-lives (Elapsed time) element is an inert gas that does not chemically combine decays by electron capture. The 40Ar produced by this process remains trapped within the mineral’s crystal lattice. Because no 40Ar was present when the mineral formed, all of the daughter atoms trapped in the mineral sample’s age, the 40K/40Ar ratio is measured precisely and basic principle of radiometric dating is simple, the actual procedure is quite complex. The analysis that determines the quantities of parent and daughter must be painstakingly precise. In addition, some radioactive materials do not decay directly into the stable daughter product, as was the case with our hypothetical example, and this fact may further complicate the analysis. In the case of uranium-238, there are 13 intermediate unstable daughter products formed before the 14th and last daughter product, the stable isotope lead-206, is produced (see Sources of Error It is important to understand that an accurate radiometric date can be obtained only for a mineral that remained a closed system from its formation to the present. Obtaining a correct date is not possible unless there was neither addition nor loss of parent or daughter isotopes. This is not always the case, and an important limitation of the potassium-argon method arises from the fact that argon is a gas, and it may leak from minerals, throwing off measurements. Indeed, losses can be significant if the rock is subjected to relatively high temperatures. Of course, a reduction in the amount of daughter product, 40Ar, would lead to underestimating the rock’s actual age. Sometimes temperatures remain high enough over a sufficiently long period so that all argon escapes. When this happens, the potassium-argon clock is reset, and dating the sample gives only the time of thermal resetting, not the true age of the rock. For other radiometric clocks, a loss of daughter atoms can occur if the rock has been subjected to weathering or leaching. To avoid such a problem, one simple safeguard is to use only fresh, unweathered material and not samples that exhibit signs of chemical alteration. To guard against error in radiometric dating, scientists often use cross-checks. This involves subjecting a sample to two different methods. If the results agree, the likelihood is high that the date is reliable. If the results are appreciably different, other cross-checks must be employed to determine which, if either, is correct.

Earth’s Oldest Rocks Radiometric dating methods have produced literally thousands of dates for events in Earth history. Rocks exceeding 3.5 billion years in age are found on all of the continents. Earth’s oldest rocks (so far) may be as old as 4.28 billion years (b.y.). Discovered Bay, these rocks may be remnants of Earth’s earliest crust. Rocks from western Greenland have been dated at 3.7 to 3.8 b.y., and rocks nearly as old are found in the Minnesota River Valley and northern Michigan (3.5 to 3.7 b.y.), in southern Africa (3.4 to 3.5 b.y.), and in western Australia (3.4 to 3.6 b.y.). Tiny crystals of the mineral zircon having radiometric ages as old as 4.3 b.y. have been The source rocks for these tiny durable grains either no longer exist or have not yet been found. Radiometric dating has vindicated the ideas of Hutton, Darwin, and others, who more than 150 years ago inferred that geologic time must be immense. Indeed, modern dating methods prove that there has been enough time for the processes we observe to have accomplished tremendous tasks.

Carbon-14 Production and decay of radiocarbon. These sketches represent the nuclei of the respective carbon-14 gradually decreases as it decays to nitrogen-14 by beta emission (Figure of carbon-14 and carbon-12 in a sample, radiocarbon dates can be determined. It is important to emphasize that carbon-14 can only be used to date organic materials, such as wood, charcoal, bones, flesh, and cloth. Although carbon-14 is only useful in dating the last small fraction of geologic time, it is a valuable tool for anthropologists, archaeologists, and historians, as well as for geologists who study very recent Earth history. In fact, the development of radiocarbon dating was considered so important that the chemist who discovered this application, in 1960.

Distinguish among the four basic time units that make up the geologic time scale and explain why the time scale is considered to be a dynamic tool. Geologists have divided the whole of geologic history into units of varying length. Together, they compose the geologic time scale of Earth history. The major units of the time scale were delineated during the nineteenth century, principally by scientists in Western Europe and Great Britain. Because radiometric dating was unavailable at that time, the entire time scale was created using methods of relative dating. It was only in the twentieth century that radiometric methods permitted numerical dates to be added.

The geologic time scale subdivides the 4.6-billionyear history of Earth into many different units and provides a meaningful time frame within which the events of the geologic past are arranged. As shown in time. The eon that began about 542 million years ago is the Phanerozoic, a term derived from Greek words meaning “visible life.” It is an appropriate description because the rocks and deposits of the Phanerozoic eon contain abundant fossils that document major evolutionary trends. Another glance at the time scale reveals that eons are divided into eras. The Phanerozoic eon consists of the Paleozoic era (paleo = ancient, zoe = life), the Mesozoic era (meso = middle, zoe = life), and the Cenozoic era (ceno = recent, zoe = life). As the names imply, these eras are bounded by profound worldwide changes in life-forms.* *Major changes in life-forms are discussed in Chapter 22.

Each era of the Phanerozoic eon is further divided into time units known as periods. The Paleozoic has seven, and the Mesozoic and Cenozoic each have three. Each of these periods is characterized by a somewhat less profound change in life-forms as compared with the eras. Each of the periods is divided into still smaller units The epochs of other periods usually are simply termed early, middle, and late.

Geologic time scale Numbers on the time scale represent time in millions of years before present. Numerical dates were added long after the time scale was established using relative dating techniques. The dates on this time scale are those currently accepted by the International Commission 2014. The color scheme used on this chart was selected because it is similar to that used by not divided into nearly as many smaller time units as the Phanerozoic eon. Why is the huge expanse of Precambrian time not divided into numerous eras, periods, and epochs? The reason is that Precambrian history is not known in great enough detail. The quantity of information that geologists have deciphered about Earth’s past is somewhat analogous to the detail of human history. The further back we go, the less that is known. Certainly more data and information exist about the past 10 years than for the first decade of the twentieth century; the events of the nineteenth century have been documented much better than the events of the first century c.e.; and so on. So it is with Earth history. The more recent past has the freshest, least disturbed, and most observable record. The further back in time a geologist goes, the more fragmented the record and clues become. Other reasons to explain our lack of a detailed time scale for this vast segment of Earth history include: r The first abundant fossil evidence does not appear in the geologic record until the beginning of the Cambrian period. Prior to the Cambrian, simple lifeforms such as algae, bacteria, fungi, and worms predominated. All of these organisms lack hard parts, an important condition favoring preservation. For this reason, there is only a meager Precambrian fossil record. Many exposures of Precambrian rocks have been studied in some detail, but correlation can be difficult when fossils are lacking. r Because Precambrian rocks are very old, most have been subjected to a great many changes. Much of the Precambrian rock record is composed of highly distorted metamorphic rocks. This makes it difficult to interpret past environments because many of the clues present in the original sedimentary rocks have been destroyed. Radiometric dating has provided a partial solution to the troublesome task of dating and correlating Precambrian rocks. But untangling the complex Precambrian record still remains a daunting task.

Some terms that are associated with the geologic time scale are not “officially” recognized as being a part of it. The best known, and most common, example is Precambrian—the informal name for the eons that came before the current Phanerozoic eon. Although the term Precambrian has no formal status on the geologic time scale, it has been traditionally used as though it does. Hadean is another informal term that is found on some versions of the geologic time scale and is used by many geologists. It refers to the earliest interval (eon) of Canyon, a zone called the Inner Gorge. The dark rock is the Vishnu Schist. The lightcolored rock, called the Zoroaster Granite, is a series of dikes. Both rocks date from Precambrian time. Suppose you are on a raft trip through the Grand Canyon. Your companions are bright and curious but are not trained in geology, as you are. Sitting around the campfire the night before you reached the site pictured here, you and your fellow rafters discussed the geologic time scale and the magnitude of geologic time.

asks why Precambrian history seems so sketchy and why this time span is not divided into nearly as many subdivisions as Phanerozoic time. Use this setting as you answer these questions.

Rafting the Colorado River Earth history—before the oldest-known rocks. When the term was coined in 1972, the age of Earth’s oldest rocks was about 3.8 billion years. Today that number stands at slightly greater than 4 billion, and, of course, is subject to revision. The name Hadean derives from Hades, Greek for underworld—a reference to the “hellish” conditions that prevailed on Earth early in its history. Effective communication in the geosciences requires that the geologic time scale consist of standardized divisions and dates. So, who determines which names and dates on the geologic time scale are “official”? The organization that is largely responsible for maintaining and International Union of Geological Sciences. Advances in the geosciences require that the scale be periodically updated to include changes in unit names and boundary age estimates. would have shown the Cenozoic era divided into the Tertiary and Quaternary periods. However, more recent versions divide the Tertiary period into the Paleogene and Neogene periods. As our understanding of this time span has changed, so too has its designation on the geologic time scale. Today, the Tertiary period is considered a 9.24. One reason for this is that a great deal of past (and some current) geologic literature uses this name.

Some scientists have suggested that the Holocene epoch has ended and that we have entered a new epoch called the Anthropocene. It is considered to be the span (beginning in the early 1800s) in which the global environmental effects of increased human population and economic development have dramatically transformed Earth’s surface. Although this designation is currently used as an informal metaphor for human-caused global environmental change, a number of scientists feel that there is merit in recognizing the Anthropocene as a new “official” geologic epoch. For those studying historical geology, it is important to realize that the geologic time scale is a dynamic tool that continues to be refined as our knowledge and understanding of Earth history evolves.

1. List the four basic units that make up the geologic time scale. 2. Why is zoic part of so many names on the geologic time scale? 3. What term applies to all of geologic time prior to the Phanerozoic eon? Why is this span not divided into as many smaller time units as the Phanerozoic eon? 4. To what does the term Hadean apply? Is it an “official” part of the geologic time scale?

Explain how reliable numerical dates are determined for layers of sedimentary rock. numerical dates to units of time is the fact that not all rocks can be dated by using radiometric methods. For a radiometric date to be useful, all the minerals in the rock must have formed at about the same time. For this reason, radioactive isotopes can be used to determine when minerals in an igneous rock crystallized and when pressure and heat created new minerals in a metamorphic rock. However, samples of sedimentary rock can only rarely be dated directly by radiometric means. Although a detrital sedimentary rock may include particles that contain radioactive isotopes, the rock’s age cannot be accurately determined because the grains composing the rock are not the same age as the rock in which they occur. Rather, the sediments have been weathered from rocks of diverse ages.

Dating sedimentary strata Numerical dates for sedimentary layers are usually determined by examining their relationship to igneous rocks.

Wasatch Formation because the dike does not intrude these Paleogene-age rocks. From this kind of evidence, geologists estimate that the last part of the Morrison Formation was deposited about 160 million years ago, as indicated by the ash bed. Further, they conclude that the Paleogene period began after the intrusion of the dike, 66 million years ago. This is just one example of literally thousands that illustrate how datable materials are used to bracket the various episodes in Earth history within specific time periods. It shows the necessity of combining laboratory dating methods with relative dating principles applied to field observations of rocks.

1. Briefly explain why it is often difficult to assign a reliable numerical date to a sample of sedimentary rock. 2. How might a numerical date for a layer of sedimentary rock be determined?

his is a close-up of a sample of the detrital sedimentary rock conglomerate. The rock contains radioactive isotopes that will yield numerical dates.

are present, a reliable numerical date for this conglomerate cannot be accurately determined. established for the conglomerate layer?

Wyoming’s Grand Tetons are the result of crustal deformation created by tectonic forces that operate in Earth’s interior. (Photo by Michael Collier) arth is a dynamic planet. Shifting lithospheric plates gradually change the face of our planet by moving continents across the globe. The results of this tectonic activity are perhaps most strikingly apparent in Earth’s major mountain belts. Rocks containing fossils of marine organisms are found thousands of meters above sea level, and massive rock units are bent, contorted, overturned, and sometimes riddled with fractures. This chapter explores the forces that deform rock and the rock structures that result. Foliation and rock cleavage were examined in Chapter 8; this chapter is devoted to the other major structural features of Earth’s crust and the tectonic forces that produce them.

Describe the three types of differential stress and name the type of plate boundary most commonly associated with each. Every body of rock, no matter how strong, has a point at which it will deform by bending or breaking. Deformation (de = out, forma = form) is a general term for the changes in the shape or position of a rock body in response to differential stress. Most crustal deformation occurs along plate boundaries. Plate motions and plate interactions along their margins generate the tectonic forces that cause rock to deform. The basic geologic features that form as a result of the forces generated by the interactions of tectonic plates are called rock structures, or geologic structures . Rock structures include folds (wave-like undulations), faults (fractures along which one rock body slides past another), joints (cracks), and small-scale structures associated with metamorphic rocks such as foliation and rock cleavage that were introduced in Chapter 8.

Confining pressure versus three types of stresses the volume of a block of rock but not its general shape. In contrast, shape of a rock body.

By sliding the top of the deck relative to the bottom, we can illustrate the type of shearing that commonly occurs along closely spaced planes of weakness in rocks.

Shear stress causes the circle in this deck of cards to become an ellipse, which can be used to measure the amount and type of strain.

Shearing and the resulting deformation (strain) An ordinary deck of playing cards with a circle embossed on its side illustrates shearing and the resulting strain.

that occurred to the surrounding rock body can be determined. Stress is the force that acts to deform rock bodies, while strain is the resulting distortion, or change in the shape of the rock body.

1. What is rock deformation? How might a rock body change during deformation? 2. List the three types of differential stress and briefly describe the changes they impart to rock 3. Identify the plate boundary that is most commonly associated with each of the three types of differential stresses.

Deformed trilobite Compare the fossil of this common Paleozoic life-form with the Compare and contrast brittle and ductile deformation. When rocks are subjected to stresses that exceed their strength, they deform, usually by bending or breaking. It is easy to visualize how rocks break because we normally think of rocks as being brittle. But how can large masses of rock be bent into intricate folds without fracturing in the process? To answer this question, geologists performed experiments in which they subjected rocks to differential stress under conditions experienced at various depths within Earth’s crust.

Through these experiments to determine how large masses of rock can be bent into intricate folds without fracturing, geologists determined that although different rocks deform under somewhat different conditions and rates, rocks experience three types of deformation: elastic, brittle, and ductile.

Elastic Deformation When stress is applied gradually, rocks initially respond by deforming elastically. Changes that result from elastic deformation are recoverable; that is, like a rubber band, the rock will snap back to nearly its original size and shape when the stress is removed. During elastic deformation, the chemical bonds of the minerals within a rock are stretched but do not break. When the stress is removed, the bonds snap back to their original length. You will see in Chapter 11 that the energy for most earthquakes comes from the release of stored elastic energy as the rock snaps back to its original shape.

Brittle Deformation When stress exceeds the elastic limit (strength) of a rock, the rock either bends or breaks. Rocks that break into smaller pieces exhibit brittle deformation (bryttian = to shatter). From our everyday experience, we know that glass objects, wooden pencils, china plates, and even our bones exhibit brittle failure once their strength is surpassed. Brittle deformation occurs when stress breaks the chemical bonds that hold a material together. Ductile Deformation Ductile deformation is a process in which a rock body is forced to flow in a solid state so that it changes shape without fracturing. Ordinary objects that display ductile behavior include modeling clay, beeswax, taffy, and some metals. For example, an automobile’s fender may be dented but not broken when hit by another vehicle.

Ductile deformation may occur by slippage along planes of weakness such as bedding surfaces and foliation in rock bodies. Recall from Chapter 8 that individual The major factors that influence the strength of a rock and how it will deform include temperature, confining pressure, rock type, and time.

The Role of Confining Pressure Recall from Chapter 8 that pressure, like temperature, increases with depth as the thickness of the overlying rock increases. Buried rocks are subjected to confining pressure, which is much like water pressure, where the forces are applied equally in all directions. Confining pressure “squeezes” the materials in Earth’s crust, making the materials stronger and thus harder to break. Therefore, rocks that are deeply buried are “held together” by the immense pressure and tend to bend rather than fracture.

The Role of Temperature The effect of temperature on the strength of a material can be easily demonstrated with a piece of glass tubing commonly found in a chemistry lab. If the tubing is dropped on a hard surface, it will shatter. However, if the tubing is heated over a Bunsen burner, it can be easily bent into a variety of shapes. Rocks respond to heat similarly. Where temperatures are high (deep in Earth’s crust), rocks tend to soften and become more malleable, so they deform by folding or flowing (ductile deformation). Likewise, where temperatures are low (at or near the surface), rocks tend to behave like brittle solids and fracture.

depths, however, the strength of all rock types decreases Some outcrops—sites where bedrock is exposed at the surface—consist of a sequence of interbedded weak and strong rock layers, such as shale and well-cemented sandstone beds, that have been moderately deformed by folding. In these settings, the strong sandstone layers are often highly fractured, while the weak shale beds form broad undulating folds. The formation of diverse structures (one brittle and one ductile) within the same rock mass can be illustrated by placing a Milky Way or similar chocolateover-caramel candy bar into a refrigerator. When the cool candy bar is slowly bent, it will exhibit brittle deformation in the chocolate and ductile deformation in the caramel.

Time as a Factor One key factor that researchers are unable to duplicate in the laboratory is how rocks respond to small stresses applied gradually over long spans of geologic time. However, we can observe the effects of time on deformation in everyday settings. For example, marble benches have been known to sag under their own weight over a time span of 100 years or so, and wooden bookshelves may bend within a few months after being loaded with books. In general, when tectonic forces are applied gradually over long spans of time, rocks tend to display ductile behavior and deform by bending or flowing. However, the same rocks may shatter if force is applied suddenly. An analogous situation occurs when you slowly move the two ends of a taffy bar together. The taffy will deform by folding. However, if you hit the taffy swiftly against the edge of a table, it will break into two or more pieces, exhibiting brittle failure.

Deformation caused by three types of stress Brittle deformation (fracturing and faulting) dominates in the upper crust, where the temperatures are comparatively cool. By contrast, at depths greater than about 10 kilometers (6 miles), where temperatures are high, rock deforms by ductile flow and folding.

as a result of the three types of stress: compressional, tensional, and shear stress. Compressional stresses associated with convergent plate boundaries tend to shorten and thicken Earth’s crust by folding, flowing, and faulting, whereas tensional stresses along divergent plate boundaries tend to lengthen rock bodies by displacement along faults in the upper crust and by ductile flow at depth. Shearing, often associated with transform plate boundaries, tends to produce fault zones in the upper crust and ductile flow at depth. Brittle deformation— fracturing and faulting—dominates in the upper crust, where temperatures are relatively cool. By contrast, at greater depths where temperatures and pressures are high, rocks exhibit ductile behavior and deform by folding or flowing.

Features associated with symmetrical folds The axial plane divides a fold as symmetrically as possible, while the hinge line traces the points of maximum bending of any layer.

Before erosion Axial plane in highly deformed mountainous regions such as Folds also can be tilted by tectonic forces that cause their hinge lines to slope rather than have a horizontal plunging folds because the hinge lines of the fold dip downward (plunge) and penetrate Earth’s surface. erosion removes the upper layers of a plunging anticline and exposes its interiors. Note that the outcrop pattern of an eroded anticline “points” in the direction it is plunging. The opposite is true for a syncline, which exhibits an outcrop pattern that points in the opposite direction of its plunge.

Common types of folds When sedimentary rock layers are folded in an arch-like manner, the structure is called an anticline. By contrast, trough-like structures are called synclines. Notice that the limb of an anticline is also the limb of the adjacent syncline.

Asymmetrical fold Axial plane Overturned fold Axial plane erosional forces attack folded sedimentary strata is found in the Valley and Ridge Province of the Appalachians. It is important to recognize that ridges are not necessarily associated with anticlines, nor are valleys related to synclines. Rather, ridges and valleys result because of differential said to plunge if the axis (hinge line) of the fold is tilted rather after being eroded.

Upper Penn. The Black Hills of South Dakota, a large structural dome The central core of the Black Hills is composed of resistant Precambrian-age igneous and metamorphic rocks. The surrounding rocks are mainly younger limestones and sandstones.

Fault in basement rock sedimentary strata. These folds appear to have resulted from the reactivaEast Kaibab Monocline, Arizona tion of ancient, steep-dipping faults located in basement rocks beneath the plateau. As large blocks of basement rock were displaced upward, the comparatively ductile sedimentary strata above responded by draping over the fault like clothes hanging over a bench. Displacement along these reactivated faults often exceeds 1 kilometer (0.6 miles). Examples of monoclines found on the Monocline, the Raplee Anticline, the Waterpocket Fold, and the San Rafael Swell. The extended over the sedimentary layers now exposed at the surface—evidence that tremendous volumes of rock have been eroded from this area.

Although we discuss folds and faults in separate sections, folds can be uniquely coupled with faults. Examples of this close association are broad, regional features called monoclines. Particularly prominent features of the Colorado Plateau, monoclines (mono = one, kleinen = incline) are large, step-like folds in otherwise horizontal 1. Distinguish between anticlines and synclines, between domes and basins, and between anticlines and domes. 2. Draw a cross-sectional view of a symmetrical anticline. Include a line to represent the axial plane and label both limbs. 3. The Black Hills of South Dakota are a good example of what type of geologic structure? 4. Where are the youngest rocks in an eroded basin outcrop: near the center or near the flanks? 5. How do monoclines form?

his image features a large geologic structure, called Sheep Mountain, that outcrops in north-central Wyoming. It consists of sedimentary layers that were folded about 60 million years ago during the Laramide mountain-building episode. This episode generated a portion of the Rocky Mountains that stretches from southern Montana to New Mexico.

Sketch and briefly describe the relative motion of rock bodies located on opposite sides of normal, reverse, and thrust faults as well as both types of strike-slip faults.

Faults form where brittle deformation leads to fracturing and displacement of Earth’s crust. Occasionally, small faults can be recognized in roadcuts where sedimentary beds have been offset less contrast, large faults, like the San Andreas Fault in California, have displacements of hundreds of kilometers and consist of many interconnecting fault surfaces. These structures, described as fault zones, can be several kilometers wide and are often easier to identify from aerial photographs than at ground level. Because faults have nearly planar surfaces, geologists describe their orientations by their strike and dip. Strike can be defined as the direction of a horizontal line on an inclined surface. For example, the strike (or trend) of the San Andreas Fault is in a northwesterly direction. Dip is the angle of inclination of a surface measured from a horizontal plane. The San Andreas is nearly vertical, so it has a dip, or inclination, of about 90 degrees. By contrast, some faults are nearly horizontal, with dips of 10 degrees or less. Strike and dip can be used to describe the orientation of sedimentary layers, dikes, joints, and other planar structures, in addition to faults. For example, the hinge and limbs of an anticline can be described by their strike and dip. How strike and dip are used to map geologic structures is considered later in this chapter.

Hanging wall block and footwall block The rock immediately above a fault surface is the hanging wall block, and the one below is the footwall block. These names came from miners who excavated ore deposits that formed along fault zones. The miners hung their lanterns on the rocks above the fault trace (hanging wall block) and walked on the rocks below the fault trace (footwall block).

Normal dip-slip faults The upper diagram illustrates the relative displacement that occurs between the blocks on either side of a normal dip-slip fault; the hanging wall block drops relative to the footwall block. The lower diagram shows how erosion may alter the up-faulted block.

Thrust Fault displaced mainly Precambrian rocks over Cretaceous National Park, Montana.

Strike-slip faulting faults. Notice how the stream channels have been offset by fault movement.

Offset drainage Linear valley Sag pond between two tectonic plates. These large strike-slip faults are called transform faults (trans = across, forma = form). Numerous transform faults cut the oceanic lithosphere and link spreading oceanic ridges. Others accommodate displacement between continental blocks that slip horizontally past each other. Some Fault, the Middle East’s Dead Sea Fault, and Turkey’s North Anatolian Fault. Large transform fault traces faults, like the San Andreas, accommodate relative displacements of up to several hundred kilometers (see GEOgraphics 10.1). Rather than being a single fracture along which movement takes place, most continental transform faults consist of a zone of roughly parallel fractures. The zone may be up to several kilometers wide. The most recent movement, however, is often along a strand only a few meters wide, which may offset features such as stream channels. Crushed and broken rocks produced during faulting are more easily eroded, so depressions such as linear valleys or sag ponds often mark the locations of large strike-slip faults.

a strike-slip fault. The earliest scientific records of strike-slip faulting were made following surface ruptures that produced large earthquakes. One of the most noteworthy of these was the great San Francisco earthquake of 1906. During this strong earthquake, structures such as fences and roads that were built across the San Andreas Fault were displaced as much as 4.7 meters (15 feet).

Some strike-slip faults slice through Earth’s crust and accommodate motion Oblique-slip faults Oblique-slip faults exhibit a combination of dip-slip and strike-slip movement.

Faults that exhibit both dip-slip and strike-slip movement, called oblique-slip faults, are caused by a combination of shearing and tensional or compressional stress . Nearly all faults have minor components of both dip-slip and strike-slip movement, so defining a fault as oblique requires that both types of slip be significant enough to be observed and measured.

Although we classify faults based on the relative movement of the rocks on opposite sides of the fault surface, the same processes generate all types of faults. Faults are a type of brittle deformation that results when stress surpasses the strength of a rock body, causing rock on one side of the fault to move relative to rock on the opposite side. Therefore, although faults vary considerably in size, they all exhibit similar characteristics.

Destruction in Port-auPrince, Haiti, following a devastating earthquake in January 2010. (Photo by Orlando Barria/EFE/Newscom) form a convergent plate boundary between a subducting slab of oceanic lithosphere and the overlying plate. This type of thrust fault is so large and destructive it is called a megathrust fault. Megathrust faults lie beneath the ocean floor and can displace the overlying water, generating destructive tsunamis. Megathrust faults have produced the majority of Earth’s most powerful earthquakes, including the 2011 Japan Ocean quake near Sumatra.

Slickensides As two rock bodies slide past one another, their fault surfaces often become polished and grooved into slickensides.

Among the most common rock structures are fractures called joints. Unlike faults, joints are fractures along which no appreciable displacement has occurred. Although some joints have a random orientation, most occur in roughly parallel groups. We have already considered two types of joints. Recall from Chapter 4 that columnar joints form when igneous rocks cool and develop shrinkage fractures 4.31, page 132). In addition, recall from Chapter 6 that sheeting produces a pattern of gently curved joints that develop more or less parallel to the surface of large exposed igneous bodies such as batholiths. Here the jointing results from the gradual expansion that occurs when erosion removes the overlying load and reduces pressure on the rock. Most joints are produced when rocks in the outermost crust are deformed, causing the rock to fail by brittle fracture. Extensive joint patterns often develop in response to relatively subtle and often barely perceptible regional upwarping and downwarping of the crust. In many cases, the cause of jointing at a particular locale is not particularly obvious. Many rocks are broken by two or even three sets of intersecting joints that slice the rock into numerous regularly shaped blocks. These joint sets often exert a strong influence on other geologic processes. For example, chemical weathering tends to be concentrated along joints, and joint patterns influence how groundwater moves through the crust. Joints may also be significant from an economic standpoint. Some of the world’s largest and most important mineral deposits are located along joint systems. Hydrothermal solutions (mineralized fluids) can migrate into fractured host rocks and precipitate economically significant amounts of copper, silver, gold, zinc, lead, and Highly jointed rocks present a risk to construction June 5, 1976, the Teton Dam in Idaho failed, taking 14 lives and causing nearly $1 billion in property damage. This earthen dam, constructed of very erodible clays and silts, was situated on highly fractured volcanic rocks. Although attempts were made to fill the voids in the jointed rock, water gradually penetrated the subsurface fractures and undermined the dam’s foundation. Eventually the moving water cut a tunnel into the easily erodible clays and silts. Within minutes the dam failed, sending a 20-meter- (65foot-) high wall of water down the Teton and Snake Rivers.

his satellite image shows an area just south of the Tien Shan Mountains, China. The distinctive red, green, and cream-colored bands are sedimentary rock layers that were tilted by compressional forces as various landmasses collided with southern Asia. Also visible in this image is the Piqiang Fault, which runs roughly perpendicular to the colored sedimentary layer for about 70 kilometers (40 miles).

Sandstone, Arches National Park, Utah Weathering and erosion along the joints have produced a topography known in the park as “fins.” (Photo by Michael Collier) 4. Describe the relative movement along a strikeslip fault. 5. How are joints different from faults?

Explain how strike and dip are measured and how these measurements tell geologists about the orientations of rock structures located mainly below Earth’s By studying the orientations of faults, folds, and tilted sedimentary formations, geologists can often reconstruct the original geologic setting and determine the nature of the forces that generated these structures. In this way, the complex events of Earth’s geologic history are unraveled. Frequently, structures are so large that only a small portion is visible from any particular vantage point. In many situations, most of the bedrock is concealed by vegetation or buried by recent sedimentation. Consequently, reconstruction must be done using data gathered from a limited number of outcrops of exposed bedrock. Despite these challenges, a number of mapping techniques enable geologists to infer the shape and orientation of rock structures below the surface. In recent years this work has been aided by advances in aerial photography, satellite imagery, and the development of the Global profiling (see Chapter 12) and drill holes provide data on the composition and orientation of rock structures that lie at depth.

Sedimentary rock units, because they are usually deposited in horizontal layers, are most useful when studying rock deformation. If the sedimentary rock layers are horizontal, geologists infer that the area is undisturbed structurally. Inclined, bent, or broken strata indicate that a period of deformation occurred following deposition.

st ne o rik f Mapping geologic structures By establishing the strike and dip of outcropping sedimentary beds and placing symbols on a map, geologists can infer the orientation of the rock structures below the 10 degrees to the east of north. Dip is the angle of inclination of the surface of a rock unit or fault, measured from a horizontal surface. Dip includes both an angle of inclination and a direction dip angle of the rock layer is 30 degrees. The direction of dip is always at a 90-degree angle to the strike. When doing field research, geologists measure the plotted on a topographic map or an aerial photograph, using T-shaped symbols. In laboratories, this information, as well as notes about the rock units, is used to prepare graphical depictions of the study area, called structures and begin to interpret the region’s geologic history. Geologic maps are also used to aid in extracting mineral resources and assessing hazards, such as the potential for groundwater contamination from a proposed disposal site.

1. Distinguish between the two measurements used to establish the orientation of deformed strata. 2. Briefly describe the method geologists use to infer the orientation of rock structures that lie mainly below Earth’s surface.

Tsunami striking the coast of Japan on March 11, 2011. (Photo by Sadatsugu Tomizawa/AFP/Getty Images) Presidential palace damaged during the 2010 Haiti earthquake (Photo by Luis Acosta/AFP/Getty Images) n January 12, 2010, an estimated 316,000 people lost their lives when a magnitude 7.0 earthquake struck the small Caribbean nation of Haiti, the poorest country in the Western Hemisphere. In addition to the staggering death toll, more than 300,000 people were injured, and more than 280,000 houses were destroyed or damaged. The quake originated only 25 kilometers (15 miles) from the country’s Andreas–like fault system at a depth of just 10 kilometers (6 miles). Because of the quake’s shallow depth, ground shaking was exceptional for an event of this magnitude. Other factors that contributed to the Port-au-Prince disaster included the city’s geologic setting and the nature of its buildings. The city is built on sediment, which is quite susceptible to ground shaking during an earthquake. More importantly, inadequate or nonexistent building codes meant that buildings collapsed far more readily than they should have. At least 52 aftershocks, measuring magnitude 4.5 or greater, jolted the area and added to the trauma that survivors experienced for days after the original strength that will be discussed later in this chapter.

Is an Earthquake? Sketch and describe the mechanism that generates most earthquakes. An earthquake is ground shaking caused by the sudden and rapid movement of one block of rock slipping past another along fractures in Earth’s crust called faults. Most faults are locked, except for brief, abrupt movements when sudden slippage produces an earthquake. Faults are locked because the confining pressure exerted by the overlying crust is enormous, causing these fractures in the crust to be “squeezed shut.” Earthquakes tend to occur along preexisting faults where internal stresses cause the crustal rocks to rupture or break into two or more units. The location where slippage begins is called the hypocenter, or focus. Earthquake waves radiate from this spot outward into the surrounding rock. The point on Earth’s surface directly above the hypocenter is called the epicenter. Large earthquakes release huge amounts of stored-up energy as seismic waves—a form of energy that travels through the lithosphere and Earth’s interior. The energy carried by these waves causes the material that transmits them to shake. Seismic waves are analogous to waves produced when a stone is dropped into a calm pond. Just as the impact of the stone creates a pattern of circular waves, an earthquake generates waves that radiate outward in all directions from the hypocenter. Although seismic energy dissipates rapidly as it moves away from the quake’s hypocenter, sensitive instruments can detect earthquakes even Thousands of earthquakes occur around the world every day. Fortunately, most are small and cannot be detected by people. Of these, only about 15 strong earthquakes (magnitude 7 or greater) are recorded each year, many of them occurring in remote regions. Occasionally, a large earthquake is triggered near a major population center. Such events are among the most destructive San Francisco in flames following the 1906 quake. Broken water mains left firefighters without water.

Fire triggered when a gas line ruptured during the Northridge earthquake in southern California in 1994.

Discovering the Causes The energy released by volcanic eruptions, massive landslides, and meteorite impacts can generate earthquake-like waves, but these events are usually weak. What mechanism produces a destructive earthquake? As you have learned, Earth is not a static planet. Because fossils of marine organisms have been discovered thousands of meters above sea level, we know that large sections of Earth’s crust have been thrust upward. Other regions, such as California’s Death Valley, exhibit evidence of extensive subsidence. In addition to these vertical displacements, offsets in fences, roads, and other structures indicate that horizontal movements between blocks of Earth’s crust are also common. The actual mechanism of earthquake generation study following the 1906 San Francisco earthquake. This earthquake was accompanied by horizontal surface displacements of several meters along the northern portion of the San Andreas Fault. Field studies determined that during this single earthquake, the Pacific plate lurched as much as 9.7 meters (32 feet) northward past the adjacent North American plate. To better visualize this, imagine standing on one side of the fault and watching a person on the other side suddenly slide horizontally 32 feet to your right.

Displacement of structures along a fault (Color What Reid concluded from his investigations is years, differential stress slowly bends the crustal rocks on both sides of a fault. This is much like a person enhanced by irregularities that occur along the fault surface.) At some point, the stress along the fault overcomes the frictional resistance, and slip initiates. Slippage allows the deformed (bent) rock to “snap back” to its original, stress-free, shape; a series of earthquake this “springing back” elastic rebound because the rock behaves elastically, much as a stretched rubber band does when it is released.

Strong earthquakes are followed by numerous earthquakes of lesser magnitude, called aftershocks, which result from crust along the fault surface adjusting to the displacement caused by the main shock. Aftershocks gradually diminish in frequency and intensity over a period of several months following an earthquake. In a little more than a month following the detected nearly 60 aftershocks with magnitudes of 4.5 or greater. The two largest aftershocks had magnitudes of 6.0 and 5.9, both large enough to inflict damage. Hundreds of minor tremors were also felt. Although aftershocks are weaker than the main earthquake, they often trigger the prod ve fa e gro alon n oran fornia.

This fence was offset 2.5 meters (8.5 feet) Francisco earthquake.

Deformation of a limber stick Elastic rebound destruction of already weakened structures. For example, in northwestern Armenia in 1988, where many people lived in large apartment buildings constructed of brick and concrete slabs, a moderate earthquake of magnitude 6.9 weakened many structures, and a strong aftershock of magnitude 5.8 completed the demolition. In contrast to aftershocks, small earthquakes called foreshocks often, but not always, precede major earthquakes by days or, in some cases, several years. Monitoring of foreshocks to predict forthcoming earthquakes has been attempted with only limited success.

1. What is an earthquake? Under what circumstances do most large earthquakes occur? 2. How are faults, hypocenters, and epicenters 3. Who was first to explain the mechanism by which most earthquakes are generated? 4. Explain what is meant by elastic rebound.

List the basic fault types and describe the tectonic setting where each type of faulting tends to dominate. Earthquakes occur along both new and preexisting faults, in places where differential stresses cause Earth’s crust to break. Some of these faults are large and capable of generating major earthquakes. One example is the San Andreas Fault, which is the strike-slip fault that separates two great sections of Earth’s lithosphere: the North American plate and the Pacific plate. The slippage that occurs along faults can be explained by the plate tectonics theory, which states that large slabs of Earth’s lithosphere are continually grinding past one another. These mobile plates interact with neighboring plates, straining and deforming the rocks at their edges. Faults associated with plate boundaries are the source of most earthquakes.

Recall from Chapter 10 that there are three basic types of faults: normal faults, reverse faults (including thrust faults), and strike-slip faults. Normal faults occur where tensional stress causes Earth’s crust to be stretched and elongated. Therefore, most earthquakes along normal faults are associated with divergent plate boundaries, mainly seafloor spreading centers and continental rifts. Although common, normal faults are not generally associated with large earthquakes.

The rupture surface propagates (travels) along the fault surface, at a rate of 2 to 3 kilometers per second.

Fault is a large fault system separating the Pacific American plate. These large strike-slip faults are called transform faults and can generate destructive or continuous; instead, they consist of numerous branches and smaller fractures that display kinks and offsets (Figure 11.7). In addition, geologists have learned that displacement along transform faults occurs in discrete segments that often behave differently from one another (see Andreas Fault exhibit slow, gradual displacement known as fault creep and produce little seismic shaking. Other segments slip at relatively closely spaced intervals, producing numerous small to moderate earthquakes. Still other segments remain locked and store elastic energy for a few hundred years before they break loose. Ruptures on these segments usually result in major earthquakes. Earthquakes that occur along locked segments of the San Andreas Fault tend to be repetitive. Soon after an earthquake occurs, strain begins accumulating due to the continuous motion of the plates on both sides of the fault. Decades or centuries later, the fault fails again.

The rupture surface continues to grow until it reaches a section of the fault where the rocks have not been sufficiently strained to rupture.

Fault system, cuts directly through the town of Hollister, California. Rather than being “locked,” this section of the fault is slowly slipping, producing noticeable offsets and damage to curbs, sidewalks, roads, and buildings. The concrete wall and sidewalk shown here were straight when they were originally considered likely to generate a major earthquake? Chapter 10.) stronger but also lasts longer than the vibrations produced by slippage along small fault segments. Why do earthquake ruptures stop rather than continue along the entire fault? Evidence suggests that slippage usually stops when the rupture reaches a section of the fault where the rocks have not been sufficiently strained to overcome frictional resistance, such as in a section of the fault that has recently experienced an earthquake. The rupture may also stop if it encounters a large kink, or an offset along the fault surface.

Ancient Chinese seismograph During an Earth tremor, the dragons located in the direction of the main vibrations would drop a ball into the mouth of a Patterson Collection) 1. What type of fault tends to produce the most destructive earthquakes? 2. During an earthquake the entire length of a fault slips in a single event that lasts less than 1 second. True or false? 3. Defend or rebut this statement: Faults that do not experience fault creep may be considered safe.

Compare and contrast the types of seismic waves and describe the principle of the seismograph. The study of earthquake waves, seismology, dates back to attempts made in China almost 2000 years ago to determine the direction from which these waves originated. The earliest-known instrument, invented by Zhang Heng, was a large hollow jar containing a weight suspended from the top . The suspended weight (similar to a clock pendulum) was connected to the jaws of several large dragon figurines that encircled the container. The jaws of each dragon held a metal ball. When earthquake waves reached the instrument, the relative motion between the suspended mass and the jar would dislodge some of the metal balls into the waiting mouths of frogs directly below.

The records obtained from seismographs, called seismograms, provide useful information about the nature of seismic waves. Seismograms reveal that two main types of seismic waves are generated by the slippage of a rock mass. One of these wave types, called body waves, travel through Earth’s interior. The other type, called surface waves, travel in the rock layers just below Earth’s surface.

The characteristic motion a strong earthquake, ground shaking consists of a combination of various kinds of seismic waves.

Earth’s surface similar to rolling ocean waves. The red arrows show the movement of rock as the wave passes.

Body Waves Versus Surface Waves By examining that the major difference among seismic waves is surface waves. Generally, in any solid Earth material, In addition to the velocity differences in the waves, exhibit even greater amplitudes. Surface waves also waves. As a result, surface waves tend to cause greater ground shaking and, hence, greater property damage, 1. Describe how a seismograph works. surface waves. 3. Which type of seismic waves tends to cause the greatest destruction to buildings?

From the position in step 2, we draw a vertical line that extends to the bottom of the graph and read the distance to the epicenter.

Using these steps, we determine that the earthquake Now we know the distance, but what about direction? The epicenter could be in any direction from the seismic station. Using a method called triangulation, we can determine the location when we know the distance from two or more additional seismic stations (Figure 11.18). On a map or globe, a circle is drawn around each seismic station. The radius of these circles is equal to the distance from the seismic station to the epicenter. The point where the three circles intersect is the approximate epicenter of the quake.

travel–time graph is used to determine the distance to an earthquake’s epicenter. The difference in arrival shown is 5 minutes.

Seismologists use a variety of methods to determine two fundamentally different measures that describe the size of an earthquake: intensity and magnitude. The first of these to be used was intensity—a measure of the amount of ground shaking at a particular location, based on observed property damage. Later, the development of seismographs allowed scientists to measure ground motion using instruments. This quantitative measurement, called magnitude, relies on data gleaned from seismic records to estimate the amount of energy released at an earthquake’s source.

To more accurately compare earthquakes around the globe, scientists searched for a way to describe the energy released by earthquakes that did not rely on factors such as building practices, which vary considerably from one part of the world to another. As a result, several magnitude scales were developed.

The green dots on the national map show locations of people who reported feeling earthquakes of similar magnitude, one that occurred in California versus one that occurred in Virginia. The difference is attributable to the rigidity of the bedrock.

Magnitude versus ground motion and energy released An earthquake that is one magnitude stronger than another maximum amplitude 10 times greater, and they release about 32 times more energy than the waves of the weaker quake.

Energy Release (equivalent kilograms of explosive) tool. Seismologists have since modified Richter’s work and developed other Richter-like magnitude scales. Despite its usefulness, the Richter scale is not adequate for describing very large earthquakes. For example, the 1906 San Francisco earthquake and the 1964 Alaska earthquake have roughly the same Richter magnitudes. However, based on the relative size of the affected areas and the associated tectonic changes, the Alaska earthquake released considerably more energy than the San Francisco quake. Thus, the Richter scale is considered saturated for major earthquakes because it cannot distinguish among them. Despite this shortcoming, Richter-like scales are still used because they can be calculated quickly.

Moment Magnitude For measuring medium and large earthquakes, seismologists now favor a newer scale, total energy released during an earthquake. Moment magnitude is calculated by determining the average amount of slip on the fault, the area of the fault surface that slipped, and the strength of the faulted rock. Moment magnitude can also be calculated by modeling data obtained from seismograms. The results are converted to a magnitude number, as in other magnitude scales. As with the Richter scale, each unit increase in moment magnitude equates to roughly a 32-fold increase in the energy released.

Because moment magnitude estimates the total energy released, it is better than the Richter scale for measuring very large earthquakes. Seismologists have used the moment magnitude scale to recalculate the magnitudes of older strong earthquakes. For example, the 1964 Alaska earthquake, originally given a Richter magnitude of 8.3, has since been recalculated using the 9.2. Conversely, the 1906 San Francisco earthquake that was given a Richter magnitude of 8.3 was downgraded to Chilean subduction zone earthquake, with a moment magnitude of 9.5.

1. What does the Modified Mercalli Intensity scale tell us about an earthquake? 2. What information is used to establish the lower numbers on the Mercalli scale? 3. How much more energy does a magnitude 7.0 earthquake release than a magnitude 6.0 4. Why is the moment magnitude scale favored over the Richter scale for large earthquakes?

Annual occurrence of earthquakes with various List and describe the major destructive forces that earthquake vibrations can trigger.

The most violent earthquake ever recorded in North America—the Alaska earthquake—occurred were recorded, 10 of them exceeding magnitude 6. The epicenter and the towns hardest hit by the earthquakes of 1811–1812, are generally felt more over a much larger area than those in earthquake-prone areas such as California.

The 1964 Alaska earthquake provided geologists with insights into the role of ground shaking as a destructive force. As the energy released by an earthquake travels along Earth’s surface, it causes the ground to vibrate in a complex manner involving up-and-down as well sideto-side motion. The amount of damage to human-made structures attributable to the vibrations depends on several factors, including (1) intensity and (2) duration of the vibrations, (3) the nature of the material on which structures rest, and (4) the nature of building materials and construction practices of the region. All the multistory structures in Anchorage were steel-frame building on the left withstood the vibrations, whereas the poorly designed JCPenney building was badly damaged. Engineers have learned that buildings constructed of blocks and bricks that are not reinforced with steel rods are the most serious safety threats in earthquakes. Unfortunately, most of the structures in the developing world are constructed of unreinforced concrete slabs and bricks made of dried mud—a primary reason the death toll in poor countries such as Haiti and Nepal is usually higher than for earthquakes of similar size in the The 1964 Alaska earthquake damaged most large structures in Anchorage, even though they were built according to the earthquake provisions of the Uniform Building Code. Perhaps some of that destruction can be attributed to the unusually long duration of the earthquake. Most quakes involve tremors that last less than a minute. For example, the 1994 Northridge earthquake was felt for about 40 seconds, and the strong vibrations of the 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake lasted less than 15 seconds. But the Alaska quake reverberated for 3 to 4 minutes.

Ground failure caused Alaska, to collapse (Photo Amplification of Seismic Waves Although the region near the epicenter experiences about the same intensity of ground shaking, destruction may vary considerably in this area. These differences are usually attributable to the nature of the ground on which the structures are built. Soft sediments, for example, generally amplify the vibrations more than Downtown Anchorage following solid bedrock. Thus, the buildings in Anchorthe 1964 Alaskan earthquake. age that were situated on unconsolidated sediments experienced heavy structural damage . In contrast, most of the town of over reservoir walls and weaken the structures, Whittier, though much nearer the epicenter, thereby endangering property as well as the lives of rested on a firm foundation of solid bedrock and, therethose downstream. fore, suffered much less damage from seismic vibrations.

Loose, saturated, sandy material Water and upper sandy layer mobilize an enormous firestorm (see city was reduced to ashes and ruins. It is estimated that 3000 people died and more than half of the city’s 400,000 residents were left The historic San Francisco earthquake reminds us of the formidable threat of fire, which started during that quake when gas and electrical lines were severed. The initial ground shaking broke the city’s water lines into hundreds of disconSand nected pieces, which made controlling the fires virtually impossible. The fires, which raged out of control for 3 days, were finally contained when expensive houses Sandy material becomes along Van Ness Avenue were more tightly packed dynamited to provide a fire break, similar to the strategy used in fighting forest fires. While few deaths were attributed to the San Francisco fires, other earthquake-initiated fires have been more destructive, claiming many more lives. For example, the 1923 earthquake in Japan triggered an estimated 250 fires, devastating the city of Yokohama and destroying more than half the homes in Tokyo. More than 100,000 deaths were attributed to the fires, which were driven by unusually high winds.

More than a century ago, San Francisco was the economic center of the western United States, largely because of gold and silver mining. Then, at dawn on April 18, 1906, a violent earthquake struck, triggering Turnagain Heights slide caused by the 1964 Alaska earthquake (Photo appear near the edge of the Turnagain Heights bluff. Layers of sand and gravel Turnagain Heights small area of caused by the Heights slide.

Megathrust ruptures, strain released Tsunami generated by displacement of the ocean floor The speed of a wave correlates with ocean depth. Waves moving in deep water advance at speeds exceeding 800 kilometers (500 miles) per hour. Speed gradually slows to 50 kilometers (30 miles) per hour at depths of 20 meters (65 feet). As waves slow in shallow water, they grow in height until they rush onto shore with tremendous force. The size and spacing of the swells shown here are not to scale. (https://goo.gl/3Iphb3) this striking characteristic, a tsunami in the open ocean can pass undetected because its height (amplitude) is usually less than 1 meter (3 feet), and the distance separating wave crests ranges from 100 to 700 kilometers (60 to 450 miles). However, upon entering shallow coastal waters, these destructive waves “feel bottom” and slow, causing tsunamis have exceeded 30 meters (100 feet) in height. As the crest of a tsunami approaches the shore, it appears as a rapid rise in sea level with a turbulent and chaotic surface; it does not resemble a breaking wave.

Japan Tsunami Because of Japan’s location along the circum-Pacific belt and its expansive coastline, it is especially vulnerable to tsunami destruction. The most 9.0). This historic earthquake and devastating tsunami resulted in at least 15,890 deaths, more than 3000 people missing, and 6107 injured. Nearly 400,000 buildings, 56 bridges, and 26 railways were destroyed or damaged. The majority of human casualties and damage were caused by a Pacific-wide tsunami that reached a maximum height of about 40 meters (130 feet) and travelled Japan. The chapter-opening photo (pages Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Complex. Across the Pacific in California, Oregon, Peru, and Chile, some loss of life occurred, and several houses, boats, and docks were destroyed. The tsunami was generated when a slab of seafloor located 60 kilometers (37 miles) off the east coast of Japan was suddenly “thrust up” an estimated 5 to 8 meters (16 to 26 feet). Tsunami Warning System In 1946, a large tsunami more than 15 meters (50 feet) high left several coastal villages in shambles. This destruction motivated the 5 hr 4 hr 3 h hr 2h r 1 hr r 11 hr 10 hr 8 r 6 r 4h r 3 r 2 r 2 hr 4 hr 5 hr the center use deep-sea buoys equipped with pressure sensors to detect energy released by an earthquake. In addition, tidal gauges measure the rise and fall in sea level that accompany tsunamis, and warnings are issued within an hour. Although tsunamis travel very rapidly, there is sufficient time to warn all except those in the areas nearest the epicenter. For example, a tsunami generated near the Aleutian Islands would take 5 hours to reach Hawaii, and one generated near the coast of Chile would travel 15 hours before reaching the shores of Hawaii.

1. List four factors that influence the amount of destruction that seismic vibrations cause to human-made structures.

Tsunami travel times Travel times to Honolulu, Hawaii, from 2. In addition to the destruction created directly by seismic vibrations, list three other types of destruction associated with earthquakes.

warning system for coastal areas of the Pacific that today includes 26 countries. Seismic observatories throughout the region report large earthquakes to the Tsunami Warning Center in Honolulu. Scientists at 4. List at least three reasons an earthquake with a magnitude of 7.0 might result in more death and destruction than a quake with a magnitude of 8.0.

ater-saturated sandy soil provides students an opportunity to experience the phenomenon of liquefaction. Liquefaction may occur when ground shaking causes a layer of saturated material to lose strength and act like a fluid.

a structure built on sandy soil that suddenly experienced liquefaction during an earthquake. storage tank be affected by liquefaction of the surrounding soil?

Locate Earth’s major earthquake belts on a world map and label the regions associated with the largest earthquakes. About 95 percent of the energy released by earthquakes originates in a few relatively narrow where tectonic plates interact along one of the three types of plate boundaries—convergent, divergent, and transform plate boundaries. Strong earthquakes can occur away from plate boundaries, although this is less common. Examples include the devastating Gujarat, India, earthquake of 2001, the 1811 and 1812 New Madrid, Missouri, earthquakes, and the Charleston, South Carolina, earthquake of 1886. Intraplate earthquakes occur when internal stresses build due to interaction of neighboring plates or because of loading or unloading as, for example, the melting of the glacial ice sheets following the last ice age. These stresses may cause failure along once-inactive fault zones.

Earthquakes Associated with The zone of greatest seismic activity, called the circum-Pacific belt, encompasses the coastal regions of Chile, Central America, Indonesia, Japan, and Alaska, earthquakes in the circum-Pacific belt occur along convergent plate boundaries, where one plate slides at a low angle beneath another. The contacts between the subducting and overlying plates are megathrust faults, along which Earth’s largest earthquakes are generated There are more than 40,000 kilometers (25,000 miles) of subduction boundaries in the circum-Pacific belt where displacement is dominated by thrust faulting.

Ruptures occasionally occur along segments that are nearly 1000 kilometers (600 miles) long, generating catastrophic megathrust earthquakes with magnitudes of Another major concentration of strong seismic activity, referred to as the Alpine–Himalayan belt, runs through the mountainous regions that flank the Mediterranean Sea and extends past the Himalayas mainly attributed to collisions of the African plate with the Eurasian plate and of the Indian plate with Southeast Asia. These plate interactions created many thrust and strike-slip faults that remain active. In addition, numerous faults located a considerable distance from these plate boundaries have been reactivated as India continues its northward advance into Asia. For example, slippage on a complex fault system in 2008 in the Sichuan Province of China killed an estimated 87,000 people and left 1.5 million others homeless. The cause was the Indian subcontinent continually shoving the Tibetan Plateau eastward against the rocks of the Sichuan basin. belt that extends thousands of kilometers through the world’s oceans. This zone coincides with the oceanic ridge system, which is an area of frequent but weak seismic activity. As tensional forces pull the plates apart during seafloor spreading, displacement along normal faults generates most of the earthquakes in this zone. The remaining seismic activity is associated with slippage along transform faults located a l a y an Belt between ridge faults and smaller strike-slip faults also run through continental crust, where they may generate large earthquakes that tend to occur on a cyclical basis. Examples include Large earthquakes are relatively uncommon in the middle of continents, far from the places where plates collide or grind past one another, or where one plate slides beneath another. Nevertheless, several damaging earthquakes have occurred in the central and eastern United States since colonial times.

Historical earthquakes east of the Rockies Large earthquakes are uncommon in the middle of continents, far from the places where plates collide or grind past one another, or where one plate slides beneath another. Nevertheless, several damaging earthquakes have occurred in the central and eastern United States since colonial times.

South Carolina, caused by the August 31, 1886, earthquake (Photo courtesy of unconsolidated floodplain deposits, buildings are more susceptible to damage than are similar structures built on bedrock. It has been estimated that if an earthquake the size of the 1811–1812 New Madrid event were to strike in the next decade, it would result in casualties in the thousands and damages in tens of billions of dollars. Damaging earthquakes that occurred in Aurora, Illinois (1909), and Valentine, Texas (1931), remind us that other areas in the central United States are vulnerable. The greatest historical earthquake in the eastern Carolina. The event, which spanned 1 minute, caused 60 deaths, numerous injuries, and great economic loss Within 8 minutes, effects were felt as far away as Chicago and St. Louis, where strong vibrations shook the upper floors of buildings, causing people to rush outdoors. In Charleston alone, more than 100 buildings were destroyed and 90 percent of the remaining structures were damaged. Numerous other strong earthquakes have been recorded in the eastern United States. New England and adjacent areas have experienced sizable shocks since colonial times. The first reported earthquake in the Northeast took place in Plymouth, Massachusetts, in 1683 and was followed in 1755 by the destructive Cambridge, Massachusetts, quake. New York State has experienced more than 300 earthquakes large enough to be felt since record-keeping began. States occur far less frequently than in California, yet history indicates that the East is vulnerable. Further, these shocks east of the Rockies have generally produced structural damage over a larger area than counterparts of similar magnitude in California. This is because the States is older and more rigid. As a result, seismic waves can travel greater distances with less attenuation than in the western United States. It is estimated that for earthquakes of similar magnitude, the region of maximum ground motion in the East may be up to 10 times larger higher rate of earthquake occurrence in the western 1. What is the zone of the greatest amount of seismic activity? 2. What type of plate boundary is associated with Earth’s largest earthquakes? 3. Describe another geologic setting where strong earthquake activity occurs. 4. List two reasons why a repeat of the 1811–1812 New Madrid, Missouri, earthquakes could be destructive to the Memphis, Tennessee, metropolitan area. 5. Explain why an earthquake east of the Rockies may produce damage over a larger area than one of similar magnitude in California.

Compare and contrast the goals of short-range earthquake predictions and longrange forecasts. The vibrations that shook the San Francisco area in 1989 caused 63 deaths, heavily damaged the 6.9). Seismologists warn that other earthquakes of comparable or greater strength can be expected along the San Andreas system, which cuts a nearly 1300-kilometer (800-mile) path through the western one-third of the state (see GEOgraphics 11.1). An obvious question is: Can these earthquakes be predicted?

The goal of short-range earthquake prediction is to provide a warning of the location and magnitude of a large earthquake within a narrow time frame (Table 11.2). Substantial efforts to achieve this objective have been attempted in Japan, the United States, China, and Russia—countries where earthquake risks are high. This research has concentrated on monitoring possible precursors—events or changes that precede a forthcoming earthquake and thus may provide warning. In California, for example, seismologists monitor changes in ground elevation and variations in strain levels near active faults. Other researchers measure changes in groundwater levels, while still others try to predict earthquakes based on an increase in the frequency of foreshocks that precede some, but not all, earthquakes.

Japanese and Chinese scientists have tried to monitor 2008, earthquake in China’s Sichuan Province, the streets of a village near the fault were filled with toads migrating hopes that animals can tell us something we don’t know . . . but animal behavior is way too unreliable.” Although precursors may exist, we have yet to determine effective ways to interpret and utilize the information. One claim of a successful short-range prediction, based on an increase in foreshocks, was made by the Chinese government after the February 4, 1975, earthquake in Liaoning Province. According to reports, very few people were killed—even though more than Collapse of the doubledecked section of double-decked highway, Viaduct, collapsed during the 1989 Loma Prieta Sakuma/AP Photo) 1 million lived near the epicenter—because the earthquake was “predicted,” and the residents were evacuated. Some Western seismologists have questioned this claim and suggest instead that an intense swarm of foreshocks, which began 24 hours before the main earthquake, may have caused many people to evacuate of their own accord. China, earthquake, which was not predicted. There were no foreshocks. Predictions can also lead to false alarms. In a province near Hong Kong, people reportedly evacuated their dwellings for over a month, but no earthquake followed.

In order for a short-range prediction scheme to be generally accepted, it must be both accurate and reliable. Thus, it must have a small range of uncertainty in regard to location and timing, and it must produce few failures or false alarms. Can you imagine the debate city, such as Los Angeles or San Francisco? The cost of evacuating millions of people, arranging for living accommodations, and providing for their lost work time and wages would be staggering. Currently, no reliable method exists for making short-range earthquake predictions. In fact, leading seismologists in the past 100 years have generally concluded that short-range earthquake prediction is not feasible.

Seismic gaps: Tools for forecasting earthquakes Seismic gaps are “quiet zones,” thought to be inactive, that are storing elastic strain that will eventually produce major earthquakes. This seismic gap occurs along a patch of the megathrust fault where oceanic lithosphere is being subducted beneath Sumatra, near Padang, a low-lying coastal city with a population of 800,000 people.

Seismic Gaps Seismologists began to plot the distribution of rupture zones associated with great earthquakes around the globe. The maps revealed that individual rupture zones tend to occur adjacent to one another, without appreciable overlap, thereby tracing out a plate boundary. Because plates are moving at known velocities, the rate at which strain builds can also be estimated. When these researchers studied historical records, they discovered that some seismic zones had not produced a large earthquake in more than a century or, in some locations, for several centuries. These quiet zones, called seismic gaps, are believed to be zones that are storing strain that will be released during a future the megathrust fault that lies offshore of Padang, a lowlying city of 800,000 people off the coast of Sumatra that has not ruptured since 1797. Scientists are particularly concerned about this seismic gap because, in 2004, a rupture of an adjacent segment of this megathrust fault that lies to the north generated a tsunami that claimed 230,000 lives.

The Japanese high-tech drilling ship Chikyu is capable of drilling 7000 meters (nearly 4.5 miles) into the ocean floor. (Photo by Kyodo/Landov) Washington University.

f you could slice Earth in half, the first thing you would notice is that it has distinct layers. The heaviest materials (metals) appear in the center. Lighter solids (rocks) make up the middle layers, and less dense liquids and gases make up the outer layer. Within Earth, we know these layers as the iron core, the rocky mantle and crust, the liquid ocean, and the gaseous atmosphere. More than 95 percent of the variations in composition and temperatures in Earth are due to this seemingly simple layered structure. However, this is not the end of the story. If it were, Earth would be a dead, lifeless cinder floating in space.

Internal Structure Explain how Earth acquired its layered structure. In Chapter 1 you learned that Earth’s interior consists of three major layers defined by their chemical composition—the crust, mantle, and core. In addition, Earth’s three compositionally distinct shells can be further subdivided into layers, based on physical properties that include whether the layer is solid or liquid and how weak or strong it is. Knowledge of both types of layers is essential to our understanding of basic geologic processes, such as volcanism, earthquakes, and mountain building.

If a bottle filled with clay, iron filings, water, and air were shaken, it would appear to have a single, muddy composition. If that bottle were then allowed to sit undisturbed, the different materials would separate and settle into layers. The iron filings, which are the densest, would be the first to sink to the bottom. Above the iron would be a layer of clay, then water, and, finally, air. The force of gravity is responsible for the layering in the bottle of muddy water, as well as the layering we detect in Earth’s interior.

Formation of Earth’s Layered Structure As material accumulated to form Earth (and for a short period afterward), the high-velocity impact of nebular debris and the decay of radioactive elements caused the temperature of our planet to steadily increase. During this time of intense heating, Earth became hot enough that elements including iron and nickel began to melt. Melting produced liquid blobs of heavy metal that gravitationally sank toward the center of the planet. This process occurred rapidly on the scale of geologic time and produced Earth’s dense iron-rich core. The early period of heating resulted in another process of chemical differentiation, whereby melting formed masses of less-dense, molten rock that buoyantly rose toward the surface and solidified to produce a primitive crust. These rocky materials were rich in oxygen and “oxygen-seeking” elements, particularly silicon and aluminum, along with lesser amounts of calcium, sodium, potassium, iron, and magnesium.

In addition, some heavy metals such as gold, lead, and uranium, which have low melting points or were highly soluble in the ascending molten masses, were scavenged from Earth’s interior and concentrated in the developing crust. This early period of chemical segregation established the three basic divisions of Earth’s interior: (1) the iron-rich core, (2) the thin primitive crust, and (3) Earth’s largest layer, called the mantle, which is located between the core and crust. It was from the primitive mantle that less-dense materials rose to form the crust and more dense metals sank to the core.

Horizontal Variations in Composition and Temperature In addition to Earth’s layers, there are small horizontal variations in mineral composition and temperature with depth. These differences, although small, indicate that the interior of our planet remains very dynamic. The rocks of the mantle and crust are in constant motion, not only moving about through plate tectonics but also continuously recycling between the surface and the interior. One surface manifestation of this ongoing process is volcanism—which carries water and gases from Earth’s interior to replenish our oceans and atmosphere, allowing life to exist at the surface.

Earth’s layered structure The properties of Earth’s layers include the physical state of the material (solid, liquid, or gas) as well as how strong the material is—for example, the distinction between the strong lithosphere and weak asthenosphere. Studies have shown that Earth’s layers are mainly determined by density, with the heaviest materials (iron) at the center and the lightest ones (gases and liquids) on the outside.

For example, at depths between 300 and 400 kilometers (190 and 250 miles), the intense pressure of the overlying rocks causes the mineral olivine, a common constituent in mantle rocks, to become unstable. As a result, the atoms in olivine rearrange into a denser and more stable crystalline structure. The increase in density of mantle rocks with depth is due both to the compression of existing minerals and to the formation of new “high-pressure” minerals that have greater density.

Lithospheric mantle (strong layer) 1. List the three compositionally distinct layers of Earth’s interior. 2. Describe the process that produced layering during Earth’s formation. 3. What causes a mineral phase change?

When traveling through Earth, seismic waves spread out from an earthquake source (hypocenter) as circular features called wave fronts.

strong earthquakes act like medical X-rays and provide the means to “see” into our planet. Detailed studies of these seismic waves using high-speed computers have greatly improved our understanding of the nature of Earth’s interior.

The paths taken by these waves can also be considered seismic rays, lines drawn perpendicular to the wave front as shown here.

Possible paths that seismic rays follow through Earth When seismic waves (rays) encounter a boundary between materials with different properties, such as air and water, the energy splits into reflected and refracted (bent) waves.

When the velocity of seismic waves decreases as they pass from one layer into another, the waves refract (bend) away from the boundary separating them.

Reflection and refraction Likewise, waves travel at different speeds through Earth materials that have different compositions. For example, seismic waves travel faster through oceanic crust, which is composed of basalt, than through the continental crust, which has an overall composition akin to that of granite. Thus, the speed at which seismic waves travel has helped researchers determine both the types of rocks found within Earth and how hot they are.

Interactions Between Seismic Waves Interpreting the waves recorded on seismograms in order to identify Earth’s layered structure is challenging. Seismic waves do not travel along straight paths; instead, they are reflected, refracted, and diffracted as they pass through our planet. You are familiar with reflected sound waves we call echoes. When a seismic wave hits a boundary between different Earth materials, such as the boundary between the crust and the mantle, some of the waves are reflected back toward the surface. The remaining energy passes though the boundary and is refracted (bent). This is similar to how light is refracted (bent) as it passes from air to water. Seismic waves can also bend when they pass by a curved surface such as a boundary between two compositionally different layers—a process called diffraction. These different wave behaviors have been used to identify the One of the most noticeable behaviors of seismic waves is that they follow strongly curved (refracted) paths . This occurs because the velocity of seismic waves generally increases with depth—the result of increasing pressure that squeezes the rock into a more compact, rigid material.

Within Earth’s interior, where there are both distinct boundaries and gradual seismic velocity changes caused by changes in mineral properties, the pattern of seismic waves generated by an earthquake is complex. Nevertheless, researchers who study seismograms from large earthquakes obtained from around the globe can identify Earth’s major internal structures.

1. What characteristic of seismic waves makes them useful for probing Earth’s interior? 2. What do reflected waves tell us about the composition of Earth’s interior? 3. Why do seismic waves travel along curved paths through the mantle?

These complicated ray paths are due to sudden increases in seismic velocity caused by mineral phase changes in the upper mantle.

Paths of seismic waves though the mantle The rays follow curved (refracting) paths rather than straight paths because the seismic velocity of rocks increases with depth as a result of a steady increase in pressure.

List and describe each of the layers of Earth’s interior. Combining the data obtained from seismological studies and mineral physics experiments has given us a layer-by-layer understanding of Earth’s composition (see GEOgraphics 12.1). The variations rocks at the pressures corresponding to these depths, geologists have made important discoveries about the compositions of Earth’s crust, mantle, and core.

Continental crust averages about 40 kilometers (25 Depth (km) 0 miles) thick but can be more 410 than 70 kilometers (40 miles) 660 thick in mountainous regions 1000 such as the Himalayas and the Andes. The thickest North 2000 American crust, beneath the Rockies, is more than 50 kilomantle 3000 meters (30 miles) thick. By contrast, the thinnest crust in North America is beneath the Basin and Range region in the western United States, where 5000 the crust is as thin as 20 kilometers (12 miles). Continental crust has an average density of about 2.7 g/cm3, which is much Velocity (km/sec) lower than the density of manSolid tle rock. The low density of continents relaThe rigid than the mantle. tive to the mantle explains why continents are buoyant—acting like giant rafts, floating atop tectonic plates—and why they cannot be readily subducted into the mantle. Because contiThe crust is Earth’s relatively thin, rocky outer skin, nental rocks cannot be easily recycled into the mantle, and two types exist: continental crust and oceanic crust. continental rocks that exceed 4 billion years in age have Continental crust and oceanic crust have very different been found. compositions, histories, and ages. In fact, oceanic crust is compositionally more similar to Earth’s mantle than to its Discovering Boundaries: The Moho The boundary between the crust and mantle, called the Moho, was continental crust. one of the first features of Earth’s interior discovered using seismic waves. In 1909, Croatian seismologist Oceanic Crust The ocean crust is about 7 kilometers Andrija Mohoroviĉi ć discovered this boundary that now travel about 6 kilometers per second (km/s), but they lion years old or less) and denser than continental rocks. Ocean crust has a density of about 3.0 g/cm , and is com- abruptly increase in speed to 8 km/s at a slightly greater Mohoroviĉi ć cleverly used this large jump in seiscomposition and formation of ocean crust are discussed to make his discovery. He noticed that two in greater detail in Chapter 13. different sets of seismic waves were recorded at seismographs located within a few hundred kilometers of an Continental Crust Unlike oceanic crust, which has a earthquake. One set of waves moved through the ground relatively homogeneous chemical composition, continental crust consists of many rock types. Although the upper at about 6 km/s, while the other set of waves traveled crust has an average composition of a granitic rock called about 8 km/s—allowing Mohoroviĉi ć to correctly detergranodiorite, its composition and structure vary consider- mine that the different waves were traveling through two different layers. ably from place to place.

Upper mantle Transition zone of how rigid (stiff) the material is; faster velocities indiAsthenosphere cate greater rigidity. The inner core is less rigid than Lithosphere the mantle, and the liquid outer core has no rigidity.

from an earthquake’s epicenter, the thickness of the crust for any location can be calculated. The difference between travel times for direct and refracted waves is comparable to the difference between driving to a destination on local roads versus on interstate highways. For short distances, you typically arrive sooner if you drive the most direct route, using local roads. For long distances, the trip may take less time if you take a less direct route that involves mostly interstate highways. The cross-over point, where both routes take an equal amount of time, is directly related to how far you must drive before reaching the interstate highway. Applied to determining the depth of the Moho, the cross-over is related to how far seismic waves travel through the Over a short distance the direct waves arrive first. crust (slow layer) before they reach the mantle (fast layer): The greater the cross-over distance, the deeper Earthquake Direct wave the Moho. The Moho lies about 25 to 70 kilometers (15 to 45 miles) beneath the (P-wave velocity 6 km/sec) continents and about 7 kiloMoho meters (4 miles) below the Upper mantle (P-wave velocity 8 km/sec) ocean floor.

At the cross-over point, both waves arrive at the same time. The distance to the cross-over point increases as the depth of the Moho increases, and therefore can be used to determine the thickness of the crust at different locations.

Beneath Earth’s crust lies the mantle. More than 82 percent of Earth’s volume is contained within the mantle, a nearly 2900-kilometer- (1800-mile-) thick shell extending from the base of the crust (Moho) to the travel through the mantle, we know that it is a solid rocky layer composed of silicate minerals that are rich in iron and magnesium. However, despite its solid nature, rock in the mantle is quite hot and capable of flow, albeit at very slow velocities.

Earth’s surface in that there are “upside-down mountains” of rock that protrude into the core. Furthermore, in some regions of the core–mantle boundary, the base base of the mantle where S-wave velocities decrease by 30 percent, an indication that the material there is quite weak.

The variable and unusual contains large, horizontal variations in both temperature and composition. Many geologists think that the subducted oceanic lithosphere and the birthplace of some mantle plumes.

Earth’s Interior interact with the low-velocity liquid iron of the outer core, which causes their rays to be refracted downward.

Gutenberg calculated 2900 kilometers (1800 miles) to the core boundary depth, which remains the accepted As Oldham predicted, Earth’s core exhibits markedly different properties from the mantle above, which causes is refracted as it passes from air to water. In addition, how their paths are affected by the core are shown in the shadow zone, they differ greatly from those expected in a planet without a core.

The composition of the core is thought to be an iron– nickel alloy, with minor amounts of oxygen, silicon, and sulfur. Because of the extreme pressure found in the core, this iron-rich material has an average density of more than 10 g/cm3 and is about 13 g/cm3 (13 times the density of water) at Earth’s center. The core accounts for only about one-sixth of Earth’s volume but one-third of its mass. This difference is because the core is composed mostly of iron, which has the greatest density of the common elements. Furthermore, the core consists of two zones that have markedly different strengths, the outer and inner core.

The Outer Core The outer core is a liquid iron-rich layer 2270 kilometers (1410 miles) thick. The nature of S-wave shadow zone (weak diffracted waves) the outer core was discovered when researchers noticed their absence in the outer core indicates its liquid state. The movement of metallic iron within this zone generates Earth’s magnetic field.

Boundary The boundary between the solid inner core and liquid outer core was discovered in 1936 by Danish seismologist Inge Lehman. By examining seismograph strongly refracted (bent) by a sudden increase in seismic velocities at a boundary within Earth’s core. The waves she observed were bent enough to arrive within the 1. How do continental crust and oceanic crust 2. What is the Moho? How were seismic waves used to discover the Moho and determine its depth?

The solid inner core moves independently of Earth’s other layers Slight variations in the travel times of seismic waves through the core, measured over many decades, suggest that the inner core actually rotates faster than the mantle. The reason for this is not yet understood.

3. List and briefly describe the composition and physical properties of the layers of the mantle. 4. How are Earth’s inner and outer cores different? How are they similar?

Describe the processes of heat transfer that operate within Earth’s interior and where each of these processes dominates. Deciphering Earth’s temperature structure and how temperature changes with depth are important for determining the movements of rock within our planet. As you are probably aware, heat surface. As a result, heat flows toward Earth’s surface. The rate at which Earth is cooling can be estimated by determining the rate at which heat escapes Earth’s surface—a mere 87 milliwatts per square meter. At this rate, it would require all the energy emitted from about 690 square meters, roughly the size of a baseball diamond, to power one 60-watt light bulb. However, because Earth’s surface is so large, heat leaves at a rate about three times greater than the world rate of energy Earth’s surface at the same rate in all locations. Heat flow is highest near mid-ocean ridges, where hot magma is consistently rising toward the surface. The rate of heat flow is also high in continental regions, where the rocks are enriched in radioactive isotopes. Heat flow is lowest in the deep abyssal plains, which are areas of old, cold oceanic seafloor.

Rate of heat flow at the rate of heat flow out of Earth as it gradually cools over time, measured in milliwatts per square meter.

isotopes, such as aluminum-26 and calcium-41. As these isotopes decayed to stable forms, they released a great deal of energy, called radiogenic heat. Another significant event that heated our planet was the collision of a Marssized object with Earth that led to the formation of the Moon. At that time the entire core and most, if not all, of the mantle was molten. From that point—about 4.5 billion years ago—to the present, Earth has gradually If Earth’s only heat had come from its early formation and the decay of short-lived Heat flow in mW/m2 radioactive isotopes, our planet would have cooled to a frozen cinder long ago. However, the mantle and crust also contain long-lived radioactive isotopes that keep our planet cooking as if on a slow burner. As shown in Table 9.1 (page 290), the half-lives of the four main isotopes—uranium-235, uranium-238, thorium-232, and potassium-40—are billions of years long. The young Earth was hot because of the heat Radioactivity plays two vital roles in geology. It is the generated by countless collisions with planetesimals, means for determining the ages of rocks, as discussed in and because of heat released by the decay of Chapter 9. More importantly, it is the source of radioshort-lived radioactive isotopes. genic heat that drives mantle convection and, ultimately, the movement of Earth’s tectonic plates.

Earth loses most of its heat near mid-ocean ridges, where magma rises to fill the cracks formed when tectonic plates pull apart.

Earth’s thermal history through time (https://goo.gl/ Continents emit more heat than old oceanic seafloor because they contain higher amounts of heat-producing radioactive isotopes.

If Earth’s only source of internal heat was generated during its early formative period, our planet would have cooled to a frozen cinder long ago. However, the mantle and crust also contain long-lived radioactive isotopes that keep our planet cooking as if on a slow burner.

Heat travels from Earth’s interior to space via three different mechanisms: convection, conduction, and radiation. The layers where these mechanisms contribute significantly to the outward flow of thermal energy are The third, radiation, transports heat away from Earth’s surface and eventually back to space.

Convection The transfer of heat in a fluid-like manEnergy output of long-lived radioactive isotopes through time.

ner, where hot materials displace cooler materials (or vice versa), is called convection. It is the primary means of heat transfer within Earth. You are familiar with convection if you have ever watched boiling water in a pot. The water appears to be rolling—rising in the middle and sinking down the sides of the pot. This pattern, called a convection cycle, occurs within Earth’s mantle and outer core, and possibly within the inner core as well.

Dominant types of heat transfer at various depths Heat travels from Earth’s interior to the surface through the processes of convection and conduction. However, Earth ultimately loses its heat to space through radiation.

flow as easily as water but can still flow. For example, ketchup flows, although it is thousands of times more viscous than water. Rock in the lower mantle is 10 trillion trillion (1025) times more viscous than water, but yet it flows. Temperature differences between the top and bottom of a convection cycle determine how vigorous the convection will be. Earth’s surface is extremely cold compared to the interior, so newly formed oceanic lithosphere cools rapidly. This causes oceanic lithosphere to contract, become denser and heavier, and, in time, sink back into the mantle at subduction zones. As these cold sinking slabs descend, they absorb heat. Some of this crustal material eventually becomes warm and buoyant enough to return to the surface. Cool oceanic lithosphere can therefore be thought of as the top of the mantle convection cycle, whereas rising mantle rock below spreading centers and the warm buoyant rocks called mantle plumes are the upward-flowing arms of this convection cycle Convection sometimes occurs when differences in density arise through chemical rather than thermal means. Chemical convection is an important mechanism operating in the outer core. As iron crystallizes and sinks to form the solid inner core, it leaves behind a molten material that contains a higher percentage of lighter elements. Because this liquid is more buoyant than the surrounding iron-rich material, it rises and contributes to convective flow in the outer core.

Conduction The flow of heat through a material is Convection occurs because of several factors: called conduction. Heat conducts in two ways: (1) thermal expansion, gravity-induced buoyancy, and fluthrough the collisions of atoms and (2) through the flow idity. When water at the bottom of a pot is heated, it of electrons. In rocks, atoms are locked in place but are expands and rises, replacing the cooler, denser water constantly oscillating. If one side of a rock is heated, at the top. Gravity is the driving force for convection. the atoms on that side will oscillate more energetiHot water is less dense (more buoyant) than cold water, cally. This increases the intensity of the collisions with so it rises, and the cold water sinks to take its place. If neighboring atoms, and in a domino effect, the energy you tried to boil water in outer space, where there is no strong gravity, you would find that the pot of water would not convect. Oceanic ridge Materials must Whole-mantle convection also be weak enough to to this model, the flow. Scientists usually entire mantle is in motion, measure a material’s driven by the sinking of cold Upper mantle fluidity in terms of oceanic lithosphere back its resistance to flow, into the deep mantle. This is called its viscosity. like stirring a pot of stew with Water flows easily and downward strokes of a spoon. The upward flow of rock likely has a low viscosity. The occurs through a combination liquid iron of Earth’s of mantle plumes and a broad outer core likely has a return flow of rock to replace viscosity similar to that the oceanic lithosphere that of water, and it convects leaves the surface at subduction easily as well. Materials zones. Not all scientists agree that are viscous do not with this model.

As heat conducts out of the core into the overlying mantle, the material in the outermost core cools, becomes denser, and sinks. This is a form of top-down, thermally driven convection. 2. Crystallization of solid iron near the bottom of the outer core sinks to form the inner core and leaves behind fluids that are less dense because they are depleted of iron. As this buoyant fluid rises, away from the inner core boundary, it drives a type of chemical 3. There are thought to be radioactive isotopes, such as potassium-40, within the core that could provide additional heat to drive thermal convection. The transfer of energy from the core to the mantle occurs by conduction because the iron-rich material of the core is too dense to intrude (convect) into the less-dense mantle rocks. For thermal energy to leave the core, it must conduct across the core–mantle boundary and up through energy is carried toward the surface through slow, sluggish mantle convection. Most of the thermal energy that reaches the upper mantle makes its final journey to the surface by slowly conducting across the stiff, rigid lithosphere. The remaining energy is carried to the surface along divergent plate boundaries and other sites of volcanic activity where rising molten rock erupts.

The profile of Earth’s average temperature at each depth is called the geothermal gradient, or geotherm deepest diamond mines in South Africa are more than 3 kilometers below Earth’s surface, where temperatures do not continue at this rapid rate; if they did, our planet would be molten ball surrounded by a 100-kilometerthick outer shell. At the base of the lithosphere, about 100 kilometers need to descend to nearly the bottom of the mantle of the mantle, the temperature increases very slowly— boundary, where temperatures increase by more than Determining temperatures deep within Earth is difficult, and uncertainties remain. The temperature at Earth’s center has been estimated to be between 5000° temperature at Earth’s center. point curves generally increase gradually with depth as a result of the continual increase in pressure exerted by the overlying material. Squeezing a material makes it more difficult to melt because in their liquid form, materials usually take up more volume than in their solid form. As a result, higher pressures result in higher melting Considered together, the geotherm and the melting point curve are valuable tools for investigating the behavior of Earth’s materials. In layers where the geotherm (temperature at depth) is greater than the melting The relationship between the geotherm and the melting temperature not only determines whether a directly related to the proximity of the geotherm curves rock approaches its melting point, it begins to soften and weaken. Low-viscosity regions, such as the asthenosphere lithosphere, are rigid. Most of the lower mantle is very stiff, so rock moves determined that convective flow is several times slower in the lower mantle than in the upper mantle. However, at the very base of the mantle, temperature increases relatively weak, flows more easily, and may experience some melting.

Discuss what studies of Earth’s gravity, seismic tomography, and Earth’s magnetic field have revealed about variations in the layers of our planet. As you have discovered in this chapter, Earth is not perfectly layered. At the surface, a variety of compositional and structural differences exist: oceans, continents, mountains, valleys, trenches, and mid-ocean ridges. Geophysical observations show that horizontal variations are not limited to the surface; they also occur within Earth and are directly related to the process of mantle convection and plate tectonics. Three-dimensional structures within Earth have been identified by studying variations in Earth’s gravitational and magnetic fields and imaging called seismic tomography.

Fisherman at the poles weighs 200 lbs therefore, is not a perfect sphere but instead bulges at the equator—a shape called an oblate ellipsoid. This difference causes the force of gravity to be slightly weaker at the equator than at the poles because gravitational attraction is less when objects are further apart. In fact, your body weight is 0.5 percent less at the equator than at the poles. Gravity measurements show that there are other variations that cannot be explained by Earth’s rotation. For instance, when a large body of unusually dense rock is underground, the increase in mass will cause a largerthan-average gravitational force at the surface directly above. Because metals and metal ores tend to be much denser than silicate rocks, local gravity anomalies (differences from the expected) have long been used to help prospect for ore deposits. the middle of the country is the mid-continent rift (red), where thick, dense volcanic rocks filled a rupture in the crust more than 1 billion years ago. The negative gravity anomaly (blue) in the Basin and Range region is a result of warm, low-density crust being stretched and thinned as it was intruded by hot buoyant magma bodies. Some large-scale differences in density deep beneath the surface have been detected using satellites. These gravity anomalies result from the large upwellings and downwellings of mantle convection. Areas of upwelling are associated with hot mantle plumes, whereas downwelling occurs where cold oceanic slabs descend into the mantle.

Earth is not a sphere but an oblate spheroid Because Earth rotates, it bulges at the equator and flattens at the poles.

The three-dimensional changes in composition and density that are detected with gravity measurements can also be viewed using seismology. The technique, called seismic tomography, involves collecting signals from many different earthquakes recorded at many seismograph stations, in order to “see” all parts of Earth’s interior. Seismic tomography is similar to medical tomography, in which *The force of gravity causes objects, such as apples, to accelerate as they fall to the ground, hence the expression “acceleration due to gravity.” The negative anomaly (blue) in the Basin and Range Province is the result of hotter, less dense, and tectonically active crust (rifting and volcanoes).

The narrow positive anomaly (red) that runs in a line down the middle of the country is the mid-continent rift, where dense volcanic rocks entered the crust more than a billion years ago.

The large blue structure extending far beneath North America is likely a sheet of cold, dense, ancient Pacific seafloor that is sinking toward the base of the mantle.

Older portions of continents, North America and Africa, are cold and strong—the blue color indicates fast waves travel faster or slower than average for a particular depth. These seismic velocity anomalies are then interpreted as variations in material properties such as temperature, composition, mineral phase, or water content. For instance, increasing the temperature of rock about images from seismic tomography are often interpreted in terms of temperature variations. Regions where waves travel slower than average (negative anomalies) are red, and regions where waves travel faster than average (positive anomalies) are blue. Significant patterns can be observed in this diagram. For example, the lithosphere beneath the interiors of North America and Africa exhibits faster seismic velocities than oceanic lithosphere because continental lithosphere is older and has been cooling for billions of years. Seismic imaging also shows that continental lithosphere (deep blue areas) can be quite thick, extending more than 300 kilometers (180 miles) into the mantle. Conversely, oceanic ridges In the mantle beneath North America, you can see a sloping zone of fast seismic velocities (blue/green) representing a sheet of descending oceanic lithosphere known as the Farallon plate. The segment of this former boundary. Given enough time, this slab may become hot and buoyant enough to begin to rise back to the surface.

The negative anomalies (blue) beneath the Rockies and Appalachians show us that the crust has deep roots made up of less dense rock beneath the slice, showing the structure of the mantle Colors show variations in their average value. Cool, strong rock produces fast blue, while warm, weak waves and is shown in red.

The large orange structures beneath western Africa and the Pacific Ocean are thought to be superplumes of warm material that are rising toward the surface.

Convection of liquid iron in the outer core is vigorous, which makes the outer core appear uniform when viewed with seismic waves. In reality, however, patterns of flow in the outer core create variations in Earth’s magnetic field that are measurable at the surface and tell a different story.

The Geodynamo Earth’s magnetic field has a complex structure that reflects the processes that generate it. As iron-rich fluid in the outer core rises, its path becomes twisted because of Earth’s rotation. As a result, the fluid moves in spiraling columns that align with Earth’s axis of rotation. Because this iron-rich fluid is electrically charged and flowing, it generates a magnetic field—a phenomenon called a geodynamo. This process is similar to how an electromagnet generates a magnetic field. When a wire is wrapped around an iron nail and an electric current passes through it, the nail becomes a magnet that generates a magnetic field that resembles 2. The electrically-charged spiral flow in the outer core generates Earth's magnetic field. of magnetic field is called a dipolar field because This is similar to how an electromagnet works. it has two poles (north and south magnetic poles). The magnetic field that emanates from Earth’s outer core has The large region of slow seismic velocities beneath Africa (the large reddish orange region at the lower right more complex. More than 90 percent of Earth’s region of upward flow in the mantle. These slow velocimagnetic field is dipolar, but the remainder is a result of ties are likely due to both unusually high temperatures patterns of convection. In addition, and rock that is highly enriched in iron. The rising rock of Earth’s magnetic field change cannot easily break through the thick African crust, so sailors have used compasses to it seems to be deflected to both sides of the continent, track of the direction toward perhaps supplying magma to both the Mid-Atlantic and From compass observations, Indian Ocean spreading centers. it was determined that the positions of the magnetic poles gradually change. Understanding this phenomenon It was once thought that Earth's core acted like a requires an examination of large bar magnet. Now scientists think that Earth's magnetic field is similar to that produced by an how the magnetic field is This simple electromagnet consists of electromagnet. The cylinders of spiraling liquid iron a nail wrapped in a coil of wire that has an electrical current traveling through it.

Locations of the north magnetic pole over time The patterns of convection within the outer core change fast enough that we can see the strength and position of the magnetic field change significantly over our lifetimes.

compass would show if tilted on its side. At the magnetic north pole, the field points directly downward, while at the equator, it is horizontal. In the central United States it tilts downward at an intermediate angle. Recent studies have shown that the locations of the magnetic poles change significantly over time. Earth’s magnetic north pole was previously located in Canada but moved northward into the Arctic Ocean during the past decade. Currently, it is moving northwestward at over 70 kilometers (40 miles) per year. While the magnetic north pole has been moving toward the geographic North Pole, the magnetic south pole has been moving away from the geographic South Pole, passing from Antarctica to the Pacific Ocean.

Inclination or dip of the magnetic field at different locations Although a compass measures only the horizontal direction of the magnetic field (the declination), at most locations, the field also dips in or out of the surface at various angles (inclination).

Magnetic Reversals Although the pattern of convection in the core changes over time, causing the magnetic poles to move, the locations of the magnetic poles averaged over thousands of years align with Earth’s axis of rotation (geographic poles). One major exception occurs during periods of magnetic reversals. At apparently random times, Earth’s magnetic field reverses polarity so that the north needle on a compass points south. (The importance of these reversals in the study of paleomagnetism is described in Chapter 2.) During a reversal, the strength of the magnetic field decreases to about 10 percent of normal, and the locations of the poles begin to wander, going so far as to cross the equator. When the strength of the magnetic field returns to normal levels, the field is regenerated with reverse polarity. The entire process takes only a few thousand years.

Computer simulations showing how Earth’s magnetic field might reverse direction The white circle represents the core–mantle boundary, and the dashed white line represents the projected position of the equator. The arrows point a reversal, the strength of the magnetic field weakens, and the poles begin to wander greatly, going so far as to cross the equator. When the strength of the field returns to normal levels, the field is regenerated with reverse polarity.

The rate at which the magnetic field reverses provides evidence that convection patterns in the outer core change over relatively short time spans. This complex The existence of magnetic reversals has been extremely important to geoscientists in providing the foundation for the theory of plate tectonics. However, magnetic reversals have potentially harmful consequences for Earth’s land dwellers. An atmospheric magnetic layer, known as the magnetosphere, surrounds our planet and protects Earth’s surface from bombardment by ionized particles, called solar wind, emitted by the Sun. If the strength of the magnetic field decreases significantly during a reversal, the increased amounts of ionized particles reaching Earth’s surface could cause health hazards for humans and other life-forms.

Global Dynamic Connections The layers of planet Earth are not isolated from one another; rather, they are connected by their thermally driven motions. These connected motions do not necessarily interact in a predictable, steady manner; instead, they tend to occur episodically or in pulses. One example is the possible connection between magnetic reversals, hot-spot volcanism, and the Pangaea began to break up about 200 million years ago, and the accompanying increase in plate motion resulted in the subduction of large amounts of seafloor. About 80 million years later, the magnetic reversal process shut down, preventing Earth’s magnetic field from reversing for 35 million years. During this period, several enormous outpourings of lava have been linked to the arrival of new hot-spot mantle plumes at the surface. In one hypothesis, these three events are closely connected. In the 80 million years following the breakup of Pangaea, a large amount of subducted lithosphere is thought to have plunged to the base of the mantle. This would have displaced hot rock at the base of the mantle, causing much of it to rise toward the surface and erupt as flood basalts. India’s Deccan Traps are an example of such a process. At the same time, the sudden infusion of comparatively cold oceanic lithosphere next to the hot core at the core–mantle boundary would have chilled the uppermost core. This would have increased the temperature gradient—hotter at the bottom, cooler at the top—in the outer core. The result would have been more vigorous convection that prevented the magnetic field from weakening and reversing. This hypothesis, if accurate, is an important reminder that Earth is a complex, churning, pulsing planet that is active in a variety of geologic functions.

1. Is the force of gravity the same over Earth’s entire surface? Explain why or why not. 2. Give examples of tectonic features of Earth’s three-dimensional structure that are revealed by seismic tomography. 3. What is thought to produce Earth’s magnetic field? 4. Describe how the positions of the magnetic poles change through time.

Aerial view of Bora Bora, an island in French Polynesia that is a remanent of an extinct volcano surrounded by a barrier reef. (Photo by Michel Renaudeau/AGE Fotostock) he ocean is Earth’s most prominent feature, covering more than 70 percent of its surface. Yet, prior to the 1950s, information about the ocean floor was extremely limited. With the development of modern instruments, our understanding of the diverse topography of the ocean floor improved dramatically. Particularly significant was the discovery of the global oceanic ridge system, a broad elevated landform that stands 2 to 3 kilometers higher than the adjacent deep-ocean basins and is In this chapter we will examine the topography of the ocean floor and look at the processes that generate its varied features.

Define bathymetry and describe the various bathymetric techniques used to map the ocean floor. If all water could be drained from the ocean basins, a great variety of features would be observed, including volcanic peaks, deep trenches, extensive plains, linear ridges, and large plateaus. In fact, the topography would be nearly as diverse as that on the continents.

The complex nature of ocean-floor topography did not The first systematic bathymetric survey of the ocean was made aboard the historic 3½-year voyage. (Photo courtesy of the Library of Congress) (https://goo.gl/F3dYJ2) 1876, the Challenger expedition made the first comprehensive study of the global ocean ever attempted. During the 127,500-kilometer (79,200-mile) voyage, the ship and its crew of scientists traveled to every ocean except the Arctic. Throughout the voyage, they sampled a multitude of ocean properties, including water depth, which was accomplished by laboriously lowering measured the depth of the deepest spot on the seafloor in 1875. Today, this spot is called the Challenger Deep and is about 10,994 meters (36,070 feet) deep.

Echo sounder An echo sounder determines the water depth by measuring the time interval required for an acoustic wave to travel from a ship to the seafloor and back.

Mapping the Ocean Floor from Space Another technological breakthrough that led to an enhanced understanding of the seafloor involves measuring the shape of the ocean surface from space. After compensating for waves, tides, currents, and atmospheric effects, scientists discovered that the water’s surface is not perfectly “flat.” Because massive structures such as seamounts and ridges exert stronger-than-average gravitational attraction, they produce elevated areas on the ocean surface. Conversely, canyons and trenches create slight depressions. Satellites equipped with radar altimeters are able to measure subtle differences in sea level by bouncing microwaves off the sea surface. These devices can measure variations as small as a few centimeters.

Oceanographers studying the topography of the ocean floor identify three major areas: continental margins, deep-ocean basins, and oceanic (mid-ocean) ridges. North Atlantic Ocean, and the profile at the bottom shows the varied topography. Profiles of this type usually have their vertical dimension exaggerated many times (40 times, in this case) to make topographic features more conspicuous. Vertical exaggeration, however, makes slopes appear much steeper than they actually are.

1. Define bathymetry. 2. Assuming that the average speed of sound waves in water is 1500 meters (4900 feet) per second, determine the water depth if the signal sent out by an echo sounder requires 6 seconds to strike bottom and return to the recorder.

3. Describe how satellites orbiting Earth can determine features on the seafloor without being able to directly observe them beneath several kilometers of seawater.

Such data have added greatly to our knowledge of oceanfloor topography. Combined with traditional sonar depth measurements, the data are used to produce detailed 4. What are the three major topographic provinces of the ocean floor?

Major topographic divisions of the North Atlantic The accompanying profile extends from New England to the coast of North Africa and provides a glimpse of the various structures found across the Atlantic 1. Continental shelf 2. Continental slope 3. Continental rise 4. Seamount 5. Abyssal plain 6. Rift valley 7. Abyssal plain 8. Seamount 9. Continental rise 10. Continental slope 11. Continental shelf 0 km 5 km 10 km Compare and contrast a passive continental margin with an active continental margin and list the major features of each.

As the name implies, the continental margins are the outer margins of the continents, where continental crust transitions to oceanic crust. Two types of continental margin have been identified—passive and active. Nearly the entire Atlantic Ocean and a large portion of the Indian Ocean that some of those active subduction zones lie far beyond the margins of the continents.

Distribution of Earth’s subduction zones Notice that most of Earth’s active subduction zones surround the Pacific basin.

Passive continental margins The slopes shown for the continental shelf and continental slope are greatly exaggerated. The continental shelf has an average slope of one-tenth of 1 degree, while the continental slope has an average slope of about 5 degrees. (https://goo.gl/ shelf valleys are the seaward extensions of river valleys on the adjacent landmass. They were eroded during the last Ice Age (Quaternary period), when enormous quantities of water were stored in vast ice sheets on the continents, which lowered sea level by at least 100 meters (330 feet). Because of this sea-level drop, rivers extended their courses, and land-dwelling plants and animals migrated to the newly exposed portions of the continents. Dredging off the coast of North America has retrieved the ancient remains of numerous land dwellers, including mammoths, mastodons, and horses—providing further evidence that portions of the continental shelves were once above sea level. Although continental shelves represent only 7.5 percent of the total ocean area, they have economic and political significance because they contain important reservoirs of oil and natural gas (discussed in Chapter 23) and support important fishing grounds.

Continental Slope Marking the seaward edge of the continental shelf is the continental slope, a relatively steep structure that marks the boundary between continental crust and oceanic crust. Although the inclination of the continental slope varies greatly from place to Active continental margins place, it averages about 5 degrees and in places exceeds 25 degrees.

Continental Rise The continental slope merges into a more gradual incline known as the continental rise, which may extend seaward for hundreds of kilometers. The continental rise consists of a thick accumulation of sediment that has moved down the continental slope and onto deep-ocean floor. Most of the sediments are delivered to the seafloor by turbidity currents, mixtures of sediment and water that periodically flow 234). When these muddy slurries emerge from the mouth of a canyon onto the relatively flat ocean floor, they deposit sediment that forms a deep-sea fan (see grow, they merge to produce a continuous wedge of sediment at the base of the continental slope, forming the continental rise.

Active continental margins are located along convergent plate boundaries, where oceanic lithosphere is being subducted beneath the leading edge of a continent (Figure at convergent plate boundaries. Most of these deep, narrow furrows surround the Pacific convergent plate boundaries where oceanic lithosphere is being subducted beneath the basin. One exception is the Puerto volcanic arc leading edge of a continent. Rico trench, which forms the boundary between the CaribTrench Ocean. Along some subduction Oceanic crust sediments from the ocean floor and pieces of ocecrust anic crust are scraped from the descending oceanic plate 100 km plastered against the edge overriding plate (Figure osp ocea chaotic accumula13.9B 200 km tion of deformed sediment and scraps of oceanic crust ary wed is called an accretionary wedge (ad = toward, crescere to grow). Prolonged plate subduction can produce massive accumulations of sediSubducting ment along active continental Subducting oceanic The opposite process, known as subduction erosion, characterizes many other subduction zones (see sediment and rock scraped off the bottom of subduction zones where sediments from the the overriding plate are carried into the ocean floor are scraped from the descending accumulating along mantle by the subducting plate. oceanic plate and pressed against the edge the front of the overriding plate, of the overriding plate.

Caribbean Sea 1. List the three major features of a passive continental margin. Which of these features is considered a flooded extension of the continent? Which one has the steepest slope? 2. Describe the differences between active and passive continental margins and give a geographic example of each.

3. How are active continental margins related to plate tectonics? 4. Briefly explain how an accretionary wedge forms. 5. What is meant by subduction erosion?

List and describe the major features of the deep-ocean basins. The size of this region—almost 30 percent of Earth’s surface—is roughly comparable to the percentage of land above sea level. This region contains deep-ocean trenches, which are extremely deep linear depressions in the ocean floor; remarkably flat areas known as abyssal plains; tall volcanic peaks called seamounts and guyots; and large, elevated flood basalt provinces called oceanic plateaus. Another ocean feature with a biological origin is the coral atoll, featured in GEOgraphics 13.1.

Deep-ocean trenches are long, narrow creases in the seafloor that are the deepest parts of the ocean floor. Most trenches are located along the margins of the Pacific Ocean, where many exceed 10 kilometers Deep, located in the Mariana trench, has been measured at 10,994 meters (36,069 feet) below sea level, making it the deepest known part of the world ocean . Only two trenches are located in the Atlantic—the Puerto Rico trench adjacent to the Sandwich trench. Although deep-ocean trenches represent a very small portion of the area of the ocean floor, they are nevertheless significant geologic features. Trenches are sites of plate convergence where slabs of oceanic lithosphere subduct and plunge back into the mantle. In addition to generating earthquakes as one plate “scrapes” against another, plate subduction also triggers volcanic activity. As a result, most trenches run parallel to an arc-shaped row of active volcanoes called making up portions of the Andes and the Cascades, are located parallel to subduction zones that lie adjacent to continental margins. The volcanic activity associated with the trenches that surround the Pacific Ocean explains why this region is called the Ring of Fire.

The Challenger Deep Located near the southern end of the Mariana trench, the Challenger Deep is the deepest place in the global ocean, about 10,994 meters deep. Film director James Cameron (Titanic and Avatar) made news in March 2012 as the first person to dive to the bottom of the Challenger Deep in more than 50 years.

(1) fine sediments transported far out to sea by turbidity currents, (2) mineral matter that has precipitated out of seawater, and (3) shells and skeletons of microscopic marine organisms. Abyssal plains are found in all oceans. However, the Atlantic Ocean has the most extensive abyssal plains because it has few trenches to act as traps for sediment carried down the continental slope.

Oceanographic Institution) Dotting the seafloor are numerous volcanic structures of various sizes. Many occur as isolated features that resemble volcanic cones on land. Others occur in nearly linear chains that stretch for thousands of kilometers, while still others are massive structures that cover areas the size of Texas.

Oceanic Plateaus The ocean floor also contains several massive oceanic plateaus. Resembling the flood basalt provinces found on continents, oceanic plateaus are thought to form when the bulbous head of a rising mantle plume melts, producing a vast outpouring of basaltic lava Some oceanic plateaus appear to have formed Java Plateau, which formed in less than 3 million years, and the Kerguelen Plateau, which formed in 4.5 million 1. Explain how deep-ocean trenches are related to plate boundaries. 2. Why are abyssal plains more extensive on the floor of the Atlantic than on the floor of the Pacific? 3. How does a flat-topped seamount, called a guyot, 4. What features on the ocean floor most resemble flood basalt provinces on the continents?

Darwin’s Hypothesis Coral atolls are ring-shaped structures that often extend from slightly above sea level to depths of several thousand meters. What causes atolls to form, and how do they attain such great thicknesses?

Reef-building corals only grow in warm, clear sunlit water. The depth of most active reef growth is limited to warm tropical water no more than about 45 meters (150 feet) deep. The strict environmental conditions required for coral growth create an interesting paradox: How can corals—which require warm, shallow, sunlit water no deeper than a few dozen meters—create massive structures such as coral atolls that extend to great depths?

Most corals secrete a hard external skeleton made of calcium carbonate. Colonies of these corals build large calcium carbonate structures, called reefs, where new colonies grow atop the strong skeletons of previous colonies. Sponges and algae may attach to the reef, further enlarging the structure.

Corals: Tiny colonial animals Corals are marine animals that typically live in compact colonies of many identical organisms called polyps.

Rift valleys The axes of some segments of the oceanic ridge system contain deep down-faulted structures called rift valleys that may exceed 30 to 50 kilometers in width and 500 to 2500 meters in depth. (https://goo.gl/fFLJ9V) implies, but have widths from 1000 to 4000 kilometers (600 to 2500 miles) and the appearance of broad, elongated swells that exhibit varying degrees of ruggedness. Furthermore, the ridge system is broken into segments that range from a few tens to hundreds of kilometers in length. Each ridge segment is offset from the adjacent segment by a transform fault. Oceanic ridges are as high as some mountains on the continents, but the similarities end there. Whereas most mountain ranges on land form when the compressional forces associated with continental colliAmerica sions fold and metamorphose thick sequences of sedimentary rocks, oceanic ridges form where upwelling from the mantle generates new oceanic crust. Oceanic ridges consist of layers and piles of newly formed basaltic rocks that are buoyantly uplifted by the hot mantle rocks from which they formed. Along the axis of some segments of the oceanic ridge system are deep, down-faulted structures called rift valleys because of their striking similarity to the continental rift valleys found in East Africa (Figure 13.15). Some rift valleys, including those along the rugged Mid-Atlantic Ridge, are typically 30 to 50 kilometers (20 to 30 miles) wide and have walls that tower 500 to 2500 meters (1600 to 8200 feet) above the valley floor. This makes them comparable to the deepest and widest part of Arizona’s Grand Canyon.

1. Briefly describe the oceanic ridge system. 2. Although oceanic ridges can be as tall as some mountains found on the continents, list some ways in which the features are different. 3. Where do rift valleys form along the oceanic ridge ffshore drilling rigs are used to tap oil and natural gas reserves on the continental shelf and beyond. Notable offshore fields are found in the Gulf of Mexico, the North Sea, and the Persian Gulf, as well as off the coasts of West Africa, Brazil, and Newfoundland. Drilling rigs can be fixed to the seafloor or may float. The latter group includes semi-submersibles, anchored platforms that are partially filled with seawater, and drill ships that typically use dynamic positioning to remain over the drilling location.

Gulf of Mexico and sank in 2010? Mexico, is floating in 2,438 meters (7997 feet) of water. Explain at least one logistic issue or difficulty posed by drilling in water this deep.

Researchers, Inc. The greatest volume of magma (more than 60 percent of Earth’s total yearly output) is produced along the oceanic ridge system in association with seafloor spreading. As plates diverge, fractures created in the oceanic crust fill with molten rock that gradually wells up from the hot mantle below. This molten material slowly cools and crystallizes, producing new slivers of seafloor. This process repeats in episodic bursts, generating new lithosphere that moves away from the ridge crest in a conveyor belt fashion.

The primary reason for the elevated position of the ridge system is that newly created oceanic lithosphere is hot and therefore less dense than cooler rocks of the deepocean basin. As the newly formed basaltic crust travels away from the ridge crest due to seafloor spreading, it is cooled from above as seawater circulates through the pore spaces and fractures in the rock. Further cooling occurs as it gets farther and farther from the zone of hot mantle upwelling. As a result, the lithosphere gradually cools, contracts, and becomes denser. This thermal contraction accounts for the greater ocean depths that occur away from the ridge. After about 80 million years of cooling and contraction, rock that was once part of an elevated ocean-ridge system becomes part of the deepocean basin. As lithosphere is displaced away from the ridge crest, cooling also causes a gradual increase in lithospheric thickness. This happens because the boundary between the lithosphere and asthenosphere is a thermal (temperature) boundary. Recall from Chapter 12 that the lithosphere is Earth’s cool, stiff outer layer, whereas the asthenosphere is a comparatively hot and weak layer. As material in the uppermost asthenosphere ages (cools), it becomes stiff and rigid. Thus, the upper portion of the asthenosphere is gradually converted to lithosphere simply by cooling. Oceanic develops along the ridge crest, and the topography of the ridge is typically rugged.

Layer #4 Layered gabbro Ophiolite complex: Structure of the oceanic crust This view of the layered structure of oceanic crust is based on data obtained from ophiolite complexes, seismic profiling, and core samples obtained from deep-sea drilling expeditions.

Peridotite and related rocks r Layer 4. The lowest unit is mainly gabbro, the coarse-grained equivalent of basalt, which crystallized deeper in the crust without erupting. When fragments of oceanic crust and the underling mantle are discovered on land, they are called an ophiolite complex. From studies of various ophiolite complexes around the globe and related data, geologists have pieced together a scenario for the formation of the ocean floor.

The molten rock that forms new oceanic crust originates from partial melting of the ultramafic mantle rock. This process generates basaltic melt that is less dense than the surrounding solid rock. The newly formed melt rises through the upper mantle along thousands of tiny conduits that feed into a few dozen larger, elongated channels, perhaps 100 meters (300 feet) or more wide. These structures, in turn, feed lens-shaped magma chambers located directly beneath the ridge crest. The addition of melt from below steadily increases the pressure inside the magma chambers. As a result, the rocks above these reservoirs periodically fracture, allowing the melt to ascend along numerous vertical fractures that develop in the ocean crust. Some of the melt cools and solidifies to form dikes. New dikes intrude older dikes, which are still warm and weak, to form a sheeted dike complex. This portion of the oceanic crust is usually 1 to 2 kilometers thick. Roughly 10 to 20 percent of the melt eventually erupts on the ocean floor. Because the surface of these submarine lava flows is chilled quickly by seawater, these flows generally travel no more than a few kilometers before completely solidifying. The forward motion occurs as lava accumulates behind the congealed margin and then breaks through. This process occurs repeatedly, as molten basalt is extruded—like toothpaste from a tightly squeezed other, hence the name pillow lavas. In some settings, pillow lavas may build volcano-size mounds that resemble shield volcanoes, whereas in other situations they form elongated ridges tens of kilometers long. These structures are eventually separated from their supply of magma as they are carried away from the ridge crest by seafloor spreading.

The lowest unit of the ocean crust develops from crystallization within the central magma chamber itself. The first minerals to crystallize are olivine, pyroxene, and occasionally chromite (chromium oxide), which settle through the magma to form a layered zone near the floor of the reservoir. The remaining melt tends to cool along the walls of magma chambers to form massive amounts of coarse-grained gabbro. This portion accounts for up to 5 of the 7 kilometers (3 to 4.5 miles) of ocean crust thickness. Although molten rock rises continuously from the mantle toward the surface, seafloor spreading occurs in pulse-like bursts. As the melt begins to accumulate in the lens-shaped reservoirs, it is blocked from continuing upward by the stiff overlying rocks. As the amount of melt entering the magma reservoirs increases, pressure rises. Periodically, the pressure exceeds the strength of the overlying rocks, which fracture and initiate a short episode of seafloor spreading.

Cross-sectional view of pillow lava This pillow lava is exposed along a sea cliff Zealand. Notice that each “pillow” shows an outer dark glassy layer created by rapid cooling enclosing a dark gray basalt interior. Researchers, Inc.) these mineral-rich fluids buoyantly rise along fractures and eventually spew out on the ocean floor. Studies conducted by submersibles along several segments of the oceanic ridge have photographed these metallic-rich solutions gushing from the seafloor to form particle-filled clouds called black smokers (see dissolved minerals precipitate to form massive metallic sulfide deposits, some of which are economically important. Occasionally these deposits grow upward to form underwater chimney-like structures equivalent in height to skyscrapers.

1. Briefly describe the four layers of the ocean crust. 2. How does a sheeted dike complex form? 3. How does hydrothermal metamorphism alter the basaltic rocks that make up the seafloor? How is seawater changed during this process? 4. What is a black smoker?

Outline the steps by which continental rifting results in the formation of new ocean Although geoscientists still debate what initiated this event, the breakup of Pangaea illustrates that ocean basins originate when large landmasses break apart.

Europe). By contrast, where the crust is thin, hot, and weak, rifts can be more than 1000 kilometers (600 miles) wide, as exemplified by the Basin and Range region in In settings where rifting continues, the rift system evolves into a young, narrow ocean basin, such as the present-day Red Sea. Continued seafloor spreading eventually results in the formation of a mature ocean basin Ocean is such a feature.

East African Rift Valley Valley, as well as the rifted Satellite-generated image of a small section of the eastern branch of the rift Kilimanjaro. Higher uplifted areas appear reddish brown National Park, which supports the world’s greatest concentration of large mammals. The dark green areas and the large lakes are situated on the floor of the rift valley. Volcanoes formed during the rifting can also be seen, including the caldera of the volcano Ngorongoro that is thought to be extinct.

America and Africa to form the South Ocean basin Continental crust Oceanic crust surrounding the Red Sea are similar to the steep cliffs that border the East African Rift. Although the Red Sea reaches oceanic depths (up to 5 kilometers [3 miles]) in only a few locations, symmetrical magnetic stripes indicate that typical seafloor spreading has been occurring for at least the past 5 million years.

Formation of an ocean basin (https://goo.gl/rkXCfv) Midcontinent rift Map showing the location of a failed rift extending from the Great Lakes region to Kansas.

of supercontinents, is called the supercontinent cycle and is described in detail in Chapter 22. The supercontinent cycle must involve major changes in the direction and nature of the forces that drive plate motion. In other words, over long periods of geologic time, the forces that drive plate motions tend to organize crustal fragments into a single supercontinent, only to change directions and disperse them again. Mechanisms that are thought to contribute to continental rifting include plumes of hot mobile rock rising from deep in the mantle, upwelling from shallow levels in the asthenosphere, and forces that arise from plate motions.

Volcanic rocks At least two supercontinents existed in the geologic past. Pangaea, the most recent, was assembled into a supercontinent between 450 and 230 million years ago, only to break up shortly after it formed. Geologists have concluded that the formation of supercontinents followed by continental splitting is an integral part of plate tectonics. This process, which involves the formation and dispersal rock that has a large mushroom-shaped head hundreds of kilometers in diameter attached to a long, narrow, trailing tail. As the plume head nears the base of the rigid lithosphere, it spreads laterally. Decompression melting within the plume generates huge volumes of basaltic magma that rises and triggers hot-spot volcanism at the Research suggests that mantle plumes tend to concentrate beneath a supercontinent because once assembled, a large landmass forms an insulating “blanket” that traps heat in the mantle. The resulting temperature increase leads to the formation of mantle plumes that serve to dissipate heat. Evidence that mantle plumes play a role in the breakup of at least some landmasses can be observed in modern passive continental margins. In several regions on both sides of the Atlantic, continental rifting was preceded by crustal uplift and massive outpourings of basaltic lava. Examples include the Etendeka flood basalts of southwest About 130 million years ago, when South America and Africa were a single landmass, vast outpourings of lava produced a large continental basalt plateau (Figure the basalt province into two parts—the Etendeka and States, a failed rift extends from Lake Superior into Kansas. This once-active rift valley is filled with clastic sedimentary and basaltic rocks that were extruded onto the crust more than a billion years ago. Why one rift valley develops into a full-fledged active spreading center while others fail to develop is not fully understood.

The role that mantle plumes might play in continental rifting the Atlantic, consisting of rifted continental crust that has been covered by a thick wedge of relatively undisturbed sediment and sedimentary rock.

Approximate surface location of mantle plumes prior to the breakup of Pangaea. The location of the plume that produced the Central Atlantic Province is unknown and may have involved a superplume that was deflected by the unusually Province includes lava flows, sills, and dikes in northeastern South America, northwestern Africa, southwestern Europe, and eastern North America.

Timing of the breakup of Pangaea along various rift zones and the plume volcanism that was associated with each period of continental fragmentation. In most cases, volcanism appears to precede breakup by a few million years, or more.

Ethiopia called the Afar Lowlands, an area of extensive typical rift system consisting of three arms that meet at a triple junction. Two of these rifts, the Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden, are active spreading centers. The third arm is the East African Rift, which may represent the initial stage in the breakup of a continent, as described earlier, or it may be destined to become a failed rift. plumes that have generated large flood basalt plateaus One mantle plume is currently located beneath Iceland, near the crest of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. Vast outpourings of basaltic lava began about 55 million years ago; evidence of these outpourings occurs in eastern Islands of northern Scotland. The oldest magnetic stripes Eruption of fluid basaltic lava, Iceland, 2010 Iceland is located over a mantle plume that began to build this large volcanic island more than 20 million years ago. (Photo by Pakos Photography/Alamy) It is important to note that hot-spot volcanism does Siberian Traps, are not associated with continental fragmentation. Furthermore, along some rifted continental margins, stretching and thinning of the lithosphere was not accompanied by large-scale volcanism and melting. Consequently, other forces that contribute to continental fragmentation must exist.

Role of Tensional Stress Continental rifting requires tensional stresses that are sufficiently strong to tear the lithosphere. In the Basin and Range region, where the lithosphere is thin, hot, and weak, small stresses are sufficient to cause spreading. During the past 20 million years, a broad zone of upwelling within the asthenosphere is thought to have caused considerable stretching page 434). In such settings, rifting is accompanied by large-scale melting and volcanism. Tensional stresses resulting from plate motions are also thought to be particularly significant in continental rifting. In settings where a continent is attached to a subducting slab of oceanic lithosphere, the continental crust is pulled along by the descending slab. However, this continental lithosphere is thick and tends to resist being towed, which creates tensional stresses that may be sufficient to tear the landmass. The zones of rifting in the fragmentation of a supercontinent may be influenced by a preexisting weakness, such as sutures—the sites where continents once collided to form the supercontinent.

1. Name a modern example of a continental rift. 2. Briefly describe each of the four stages in the evolution of an ocean basin. 3. What role do hot spots and mantle plumes play in the breakup of a supercontinent?

Compare and contrast spontaneous subduction and forced subduction. Although new lithosphere is continually being produced at divergent plate boundaries, Earth’s surface area is not growing larger. In order to balance the amount of newly created lithosphere, there must be a process whereby oceanic lithosphere is destroyed.

The angle of plate subduction depends on its Pacific, some oceanic lithosphere exceeds 180 million years in age and descends into the mantle at angles approaching 90 degrees. at a low angle.

is assimilated into the mantle? Or do most plates descend to the core–mantle boundary, where they are heated and eventually rise back toward Earth’s surface as mantle What is known with some certainty is that oceanic lithosphere will resist subduction unless its overall density is greater than that of the underlying asthenosphere. It takes at least 15 million years for a young slab of oceanic lithosphere to cool sufficiently to become denser than the supporting asthenosphere.

divided into two basic types, based on the nature of the subducting plate. The first Young, warm, buoyant lithosphere subducts type, referred to as a MariAsthenosphere ana-type subduction zone, is at a low angle characterized by old, dense lithosphere sinking into the mantle by its own weight. The lithosphere entering the Mariana trench is about ic li 185 million years old, some of the oldest and densest lithosphere in today’s oceans. Along this trench, the subAsthenosphere slab descends into the mantle at a steep angle that approaches 90 degrees (Figure Deep, located at the southern limb of the Mariana trench. The Mariana and most of the other subduction zones in the western Pacific involve cold, dense lithosphere and therefore exhibit spontaneous subduction. It is important to note that the lithospheric mantle, which makes up about 80 percent of the descending oceanic slab, drives subduction. Even when the oceanic crust is quite old, its density is still less than that of the underlying asthenosphere. Subduction, therefore, depends on lithospheric mantle that is colder and therefore denser than the underlying asthenosphere. When an oceanic slab descends to about 400 kilometers (250 miles), mineral phase changes (transitions from low-density mineral to high-density mineral; see Chapter 12) enhance subduction. At this depth, the transition of olivine to its compact, much denser spinel structure increases the density of the slab, which helps pull the plate into the subduction zone.

Forced Subduction The second type of subduction zone, called the Peru–Chile–type subduction, is characterized by younger, hotter, and less-dense lithosphere Chile–type boundaries, the lithosphere is too buoyant to subduct spontaneously; rather, it is forced beneath the overlying plate by compressional forces. In areas where forced subduction occurs, a strong coupling develops between the overlying plate and the subducting plate, which can result in particularly strong and frequent earthquakes. Stated another way, plate motion generates horizontal compressional forces that cause the upper plate and underlying plate to grind against each other. The result can be folding and thickening of the upper plate and sometimes the formation of mountainous terrains like we see today in the Andes.

Shallow subduction and strong coupling have also been observed in the past decade along the Sunda subduction zone, off the coast of Sumatra, another region that has experienced several major earthquakes. Researchers have also determined that unusually thick units of oceanic crust, those that approach 30 kilometers (20 miles) in thickness, are likely to resist subduction. The Ontong Java Plateau, for example, is a thick oceanic plateau, about the size of Alaska, located the boundary between the subducting Pacific plate and the overriding Australian–Indian plate. Apparently too buoyant to subduct, the Ontong Java Plateau clogged the trench. We will consider the fate of crustal fragments that are too buoyant to subduct in the next chapter.

The demise of the Farallon plate Because the Farallon plate was subducting faster than it was being generated, it continually got smaller and smaller. The remaining fragments of the once-mighty Farallon Cocos, and Nazca plates.

San Andreas Fault (transform fault) The spreading center, which generated both the Farallon Beginning about 180 million years ago, the Americas were propelled westward as Pangaea broke up and the Atlantic Ocean started to open. As a result, the Farallon plate began subducting beneath the Americas faster than it was being generated, causing it to fragments of the once-extensive Farallon plate include the modern Juan de Fuca, Cocos, and Nazca plates. The westward migration of North America also caused a section of the East Pacific Rise to enter the fault system that currently accommodates the differential motion between the North American and Pacific plates. Because of this change in plate geometry, the Pacific plate has captured a sliver of Peninsula and a portion of southern California) and is carrying it northwestward toward Alaska at a rate of about 6 centimeters (2.5 inches) per year. As more of the ridge subducted, the transform fault system, which we Fault, increased in length Andreas Fault connects to a young spreading center that is generating the Gulf of California. the Queen Charlotte transform fault, located off the west coast of Canada and southeastern Alaska.

1. Explain why oceanic lithosphere subducts even though the oceanic crust is less dense than the underlying asthenosphere. 2. Compare spontaneous subduction and forced subduction. Provide examples of places where each operates. 3. What role do mineral phase changes play in plate 4. Explain what happened when the spreading center that generated the Farallon plate collided with the North American plate.

Mount Rundle consists mainly of limestones and shales that were trust over younger rocks during the formation of the Grandmaison/AGE Fotostock) ountains provide some of the most spectacular scenery on our planet. Poets, painters, and songwriters have captured their splendor. Geologists understand that at some time, all continental regions were mountainous masses and that continents grow through the addition of mountains to their flanks. As geologists unravel the secrets of mountain formation, they gain a deeper understanding of the evolution of Earth’s continents. If continents do indeed grow by adding mountains to their flanks, then why do mountains exist in the interior of landmasses? To answer this and related questions, this chapter pieces together the sequence of events that generate these lofty structures.

Mountain Building 14.1 Locate and name Earth’s major mountain belts on a world map.

Earth’s major mountain belts Notice the east–west trend of major mountain belts in Eurasia in contrast to the north–south trend The shields and stable platforms shown are composed of old crustal rocks that have been highly deformed during ancient mountainbuilding events. These are discussed in Chapter 21.

Mountain building has occurred in the recent geologic past at several locations around the world. Young mountain belts include the American Cordillera (cordillera means “spine” or “backbone”), which runs along the western margin of the Americas from Cape Horn at the tip of South America to Alaska and includes the Andes and Canadian Rockies; the Alpine–Himalaya chain, which extends along the margin of the Mediterranean, through Iran to northern India and into Indochina; and the mountainous terrains of the western Pacific, which include volcanic island arcs that comprise Japan, the Philippines, and Sumatra. Most of these young mountain belts have come into existence within the past 100 million years. Some, including the Himalayas, began their growth as recently as 50 million years ago. The connection between convergent plate boundaries and young mountain belts can be striking visual evidence of great Mount Kidd. These sedimentary rocks are continental shelf deposits compressional forces that have that were folded and displaced toward the interior of Canada by shortened the crust horizontally low-angle thrust faults. while thickening it vertically. These compressional mountains contain large quantities of preexisting sedimentary and crystalline rocks that have been faulted and contorted into a series of folds. Although folding and thrust faulting are often the most conspicuous signs of orogenesis, varying degrees of metamorphism and igneous activity are always present. How do mountain belts form? Since the time of the ancient Greeks, this question has intrigued philosophers and Callan Bentley scientists. One early proposal suggested that mountains are simply wrinkles in Earth’s crust, produced as the planet cooled from its original semimolten state. According to this idea, Earth contracted and shrank as it lost heat, which caused the crust to deform in a manner similar to how an orange peel wrinkles as the fruit dries out. However, neither this nor any other early process of subduction has driven mountain building hypothesis withstood scientific scrutiny. around the globe. The theory of plate tectonics provides a model for orogenesis with excellent explanatory power and accounts for the origin of virtually all the present mountain belts and most of the ancient ones. According to 1. Define orogenesis. this model, the tectonic processes that generate Earth’s major mountainous terrains occur along convergent 2. In the plate tectonics model, which type of plate plate boundaries, where oceanic lithosphere subducts boundary is most directly associated with Earth’s into the mantle. We will first look at the nature of conmajor mountain belts? vergent plate boundaries and then examine how the List and describe the four major features associated with subduction zones. In their ongoing quest to unravel the events that produce mountains, researchers examine ancient eruptions, and it plays a pivotal role in generating most of Earth’s mountain belts.

Subduction zones can be roughly divided into four regions: (1) a volcanic arc, which is built on the overlying plate; (2) a deep-ocean trench, which forms where subducting slabs of oceanic lithosphere bend and descend into the asthenosphere; (3) a forearc region, which is located between a trench and a volcanic arc; and (4) a back-arc region, which is located on the side of the volcanic arc opposite the trench.

Canada (https://goo.gl/cPwoXR) Development of two types of volcanic arcs where one slab of oceanic lithosphere is subducted beneath another slab of oceanic lithosphere. arcs are generated when a slab of oceanic lithosphere subducts beneath a block of continental crust.

plate subducts at a very low angle. Trench depth is also of sediment from the Columbia River basin fills most of what would otherwise be a shallow trench in this subduction zone—about 3 kilometers (2 miles) deep.

In settings where two oceanic slabs converge, one is subducted beneath the other, initiating partial melting of the mantle wedge located above the subducting plate. This molten rock rises and eventually leads to the growth of a volcanic island arc, or simply an island arc, on the ocean floor. Examples of active island arcs include the By contrast, when oceanic lithosphere is subducted beneath a continental block, a continental volcanic on the topography of older, thicker continental blocks, resulting in volcanic peaks that may reach 6000 meters (nearly 20,000 feet) above sea level. The Cascade Range of the Pacific Northwest is a classic example.

The forearc region of a subduction zone is located between a deep-ocean trench and the associated from the volcanic arc, as well as sediments eroded from the adjacent landmass, accumulate. Ocean-floor sediments are also carried to forearc regions by subducting The amount of sediment carried to a forearc region varies. The forearc region adjacent to the Mariana trench, for example, contains minimal sediment, partially because of its distance from a significant source of sediment. By contrast, the forearc region adjacent to the Cascadia subduction zone is choked with sediment In addition, forearc width can vary significantly. Where an oceanic slab subducts at a steep angle, the forearc region is quite narrow, but when the angle of subduction is low, the forearc tends to be broad.

Back-Arc Another site where sediments and volcanic debris accumulate is the back-arc, which is located on the backside of the volcanic arc when viewed from the tend to prevail, causing Earth’s crust to stretch and thin and resulting in the formation of a down-faulted basin. The reason for this development is considered in the next Back-arc regions associated with volcanic island arcs tend to be long linear seas, such as the Sea of Japan and the Java Sea. In continental settings, the back-arc regions are located landward of the continental volcanic arc. Here stretching of the crust usually results in subsidence, forming basins that quickly fill with volcanic ash and sediments derived from the growing volcanic structures.

Because subduction zones form where two plates converge, it is logical to assume that large compressional forces deform the plate margins. However, convergent margins are not necessarily regions dominated by compressional forces. As mentioned above, tensional stresses act on the overlying plates along some convergent plate margins and cause extension—stretching and thinning— of the crust. But how do extensional processes operate where two plates are moving together? The age of the subducting oceanic slab is thought to play a significant role in determining the dominant forces acting on the overriding plate. When a relatively cold, dense slab subducts, it does not follow a fixed path into 14.3 Subduction and Mountain Building flow in the mantle, called slab suction, that “pulls” the upper (non-subducting) plate toward the retreating trench. Island arc elongated and thinned, often resulting in the formation of a basin and spreading center behind the volcanic arc.

As the subducting plate sinks, it creates a flow in the asthenosphere called slab suction that “pulls” the upper plate toward the retreating trench. (Visualize what would have happened if you were in a lifeboat, unable to move away from the Titanic as it sank!) Slab suction, in turn, produces tensional stress that elongates and thins the overriding plate, most often creating a basin in the region behind the volcanic arc (Figure mantle rock and accompanying decompression melting. Continued extension may initiate seafloor spreading, which increases the size of the newly formed basin. Basins of this type within a back-arc region are termed is currently enlarging the back-arc basins found landward of the Mariana and Tonga volcanic island arcs.

spreading centers that generate a deep ocean basin behind the volcanic arc. Back-arc basin 1. List the four major features of subduction zones. 2. Briefly describe how back-arc basins form.

and Mountain Building Sketch a cross-section of an Andean-type mountain belt and describe how its major features are generated.

The subduction of oceanic lithosphere is the driving force in orogenesis. Oceanic lithosphere subducting beneath an oceanic plate results in a volcanic island arc and related tectonic features. Subduction beneath a continental block, on the other hand, forms a continental volcanic arc and mountainous topography along the margin of a continent. In addition, volcanic island arcs and other crustal fragments “drift” across the ocean basin until they reach a subduction zone, where they collide and become welded to another crustal fragment or a larger continental block. If subduction continues long enough, it can ultimately lead to the collision of two continental blocks, triggering a major mountain-building event.

Formation of a back-arc Andean-type mountain Mountain Building sediments and sedimentary rocks.

Andean-type mountain building is characterized by subduction beneath a continent rather than oceanic lithosphere. Subduction along these active continental margins is associated with long-lasting magmatic activity that builds continental volcanic arcs. The result is crustal thickening, with the crust reaching thicknesses of more than 70 kilometers (45 miles). The first stage in the development of Andean-type mountain belts, named after the Andes Mountains of South America, occurs along passive continental margins geologically inactive regions located some distance from plate boundaries. Passive continental margins develop when continental blocks rift apart and are separated by seafloor spreading that occurs along a mid-ocean ridge. The margins on both sides of the Atlantic provide modern examples of passive continental margins, where continued deposition of sediments has produced a thick platform of shallow-water sandstones, limestones, and The formation of an Andean-type mountain begins when the forces that drive plate motions change and a subduction zone develops along the margin of a continent. In order for a new subduction zone to form, oceanic lithosphere must be old and dense enough to create a downward force capable of shearing the lithosphere. Alternatively, strong compressional forces tear off the oceanic lithosphere along a continental margin, thereby initiating subduction.

Recall that as oceanic lithosphere descends into the mantle, increasing temperatures and pressures drive volatiles (mostly water and carbon dioxide) from the crustal rocks. These mobile fluids migrate upward into the wedge-shaped region of mantle between the subducting slab and upper plate. At a depth of about 100 kilometers (60 miles), these water-rich fluids sufficiently reduce the melting point of hot mantle rock the ultramafic rock peridotite generates primary magmas, with mafic (basaltic) compositions. Because these newly formed basaltic magmas are less dense than the rocks from which they originated, they will buoyantly rise. Upon reaching the base of the low-density materials of the continental crust, they typically collect, or pond. Continued ascent through the thick continental crust is generally achieved through magmatic differentiation, in which heavy ferromagnesian minerals crystallize and settle out of the magma, leaving the remaining melt enriched in silica and other “light” components (see Chapter 4). Hence, through magmatic differentiation, a comparatively dense basaltic magma can generate low-density, buoyant secondary magma of intermediate and/or felsic composition.

Emplacement of Batholiths Because of its low density and great thickness, continental crust significantly impedes the ascent of molten rock. Consequently, a high percentage of the magma that intrudes the crust never reaches the surface; instead, it crystallizes at depth to form massive igneous plutons called batholiths activity is thickening of Earth’s crust. Eventually, uplifting and erosion exhume the batholiths consisting of numerous interconnected several large batholiths, including the Sierra Nevada of California, the Coast Range Batholith of western Canada, and several large igneous bodies in the Andes. Most batholiths consist of intrusive igneous rocks that range in composition from granite to diorite.

Joa y San Valle upward, it tends to act as a barrier to the movement of sediment from the volcanic arc to the trench. As a result, sediments begin to collect between the accretionary wedge and the volcanic arc. This region, which is composed of Subsidence and continued sedimentation in forearc basins can generate a sequence of nearly horizontal sedimentary strata that can attain thicknesses of several kilometers.

Sierra Nevada, Coast Ranges, and Great Valley development of volcanic arcs, unconsolidated sediments that are carried on the subducting plate, as well as fragments of oceanic crust, may be scraped off and plastered against the edge of the overriding plate. The resulting chaotic accumulation of deformed and thrust-faulted sediments and scraps of ocean crust is called an accretionary these sediments are comparable to a wedge of soil being scraped and pushed in front of an advancing bulldozer. Some of the sediments that comprise an accretionary wedge are muds that accumulated on the ocean floor and were subsequently carried to the subduction zone by plate motion. Additional materials are derived from an adjacent continent or volcanic arc and consist of volcanic debris and products of weathering and erosion. In regions where sediment is plentiful, prolonged subduction may thicken a developing accretionary wedge sufficiently that it protrudes above sea level. This has occurred along the southern end of the Puerto Rico trench, where the Orinoco River basin of Venezuela is a major source of sediments. The resulting wedge emerges to form the island of Barbados. By contrast, some subduction zones have small accretionary wedges or none at all.

hese interbedded layers of chert and shale have been strongly folded during the growth of an exposed these deformed strata near Marin Headlands, north of San Francisco, California.

most likely generated these highly folded strata: compressional or tensional? accretionary wedges form? in the San Francisco Bay area?

subduction of a portion of the Pacific basin (the Farallon 13.28, page 414). The Sierra Nevada Batholith is a remnant of the continental volcanic arc that was produced by many surges of magma during a time span that exceeded 100 million years. The Coast Ranges were built from the vast accumulation of sediments (accretionary wedge) that collected along the continental margin, or perhaps an island arc that lay offshore. Beginning about 30 million years ago, subduction America, as the spreading center that produced the Farallon plate entered the California trench. The uplifting and erosion that followed removed most of the evidence of past volcanic activity and exposed a core of crystalline igneous and associated metamorphic rocks that make up were uplifted only recently, as evidenced by the young, unconsolidated sediments that currently blanket portions of these highlands. California’s Great Valley is a remnant of the forearc basin that formed between the Sierra Nevada and the accretionary prism and trench that lay offshore. Throughout much of its history, portions of the Great Valley lay below sea level. This sediment-laden basin contains thick marine deposits and debris eroded from the adjacent continental volcanic arc.

1. The formation of mountainous topography at a volcanic island arc is considered just one phase in the development of a major mountain belt. Explain. 2. How do mantle-derived magmas that have a basaltic composition generate magmas that exhibit an intermediate to felsic composition? 3. What is a batholith? In what modern tectonic setting are batholiths being generated? 4. What is an accretionary wedge? Briefly describe its formation. 5. In what ways are the Sierra Nevada and the Andes ranges similar?

Compare and contrast the formation of a Cordilleran-type mountain belt with that of an Alpine-type mountain belt. Most major mountain belts are generated when one or more buoyant crustal fragments collide with a continental margin as a result of subduction. Whereas oceanic lithosphere, which is relatively dense, readily subducts, continental lithosphere contains significant amounts of low-density crustal rocks and is therefore too buoyant to undergo subduction. Consequently, the arrival of a crustal fragment at a trench results in a collision and usually ends further subduction.

Accretion and Orogenesis As oceanic plates move, they carry embedded oceanic plateaus, volcanic island arcs, and microcontinents to an Andean-type subduction zone. When an oceanic plate contains small seamounts, these structures are generally subducted along with the descending oceanic slab. However, large, thick units of oceanic crust, such as the Ontong Java Plateau, which is the size of Alaska, or an island arc composed of abundant “light” igneous rocks, render the oceanic lithosphere too buoyant to subduct. In these situations, a collision between the crustal fragment and the continental margin occurs. The sequence of events that happen when small crustal fragments reach a Cordilleran-type margin is crustal layers of these thickened zones are “peeled” from the descending plate and thrust in relatively thin sheets on the adjacent continental block. Convergence does not generally end with the accretion of a crustal fragment. Rather, new subduction zones typically form, and they can carry other island arcs or microcontinents toward a collision with the continental margin. Each collision displaces earlier accreted terranes further inland, adding to the zone of deformation as well as to the thickness and lateral extent of the continental margin.

The Nature of Terranes What is the nature of crustal fragments, and where did they originate? Research suggests that prior to their accretion to a continental block, some of these fragments may have been microcontinents similar to the modern-day island of Madagascar, located east of Africa in the Indian Ocean. Many others were island arcs Still others may have been submerged oceanic plateaus More than 100 of these relatively small crustal fragments, most of which are in the Pacific, are known to exist.

The correlation between mountain building and the accretion of crustal fragments arose primarily from studies conducted in the North American Cordillera. Researchers determined that some of the rocks in the orogenic belts of Alaska and British Columbia contain fossil and paleomagnetic evidence indicating that these strata previously lay much closer to the equator.

It is now known that many of the terranes that make up the North American Cordillera were scattered throughout the eastern Pacific, like the island arcs and oceanic plateaus currently distributed in the western Pacific. During the breakup of Pangaea, the eastern portion of the Pacific basin (Farallon plate) began to subduct under the western margin of North America. This activity resulted in the piecemeal addition of crustal fragments to Geologists expect that many modern microcontinents will likewise be accreted to active continental margins surrounding the Pacific, producing new orogenic belts.

Alpine-type orogenies, named after the Alps that have been intensively studied for more than 200 years, occur where two continental masses collide. This type of orogeny may also involve the accretion of continental fragments or island arcs that occupied the ocean basin that once separated the two continental blocks. Mountain belts formed by characterized by shortened and thickened crust, achieved through folding and large-scale thrust faulting. The zone where two continents collide and are “welded” together is called the suture. This portion of the mountain belt often preserves slivers of oceanic lithosphere, or ophiolites, that were trapped between the colliding plates. The unique structure of these pieces of identify the collision boundary. Noteworthy features of most collisional mountain ranges are fold-and-thrust belts. These mountainous zones result from the deformation of thick sequences of shallow marine sedimentary rocks, like those currently During continental collisions, sedimentary rocks are pushed inland, away from the core of the developing mountain belt and over the stable continental interior. In essence, crustal shortening is achieved by displacement along thrust faults where once relatively flat-lying strata are “sliced” into thick layers that are eventually stacked one upon another. During this displacement, material caught between the thrust faults is often folded, thereby forming the other Valley and Ridge province, the Canadian Rockies, the In the next section we take a closer look at two examples of collisional mountains: the Himalayas and the Appalachians. The Himalayas, Earth’s youngest collisional mountains, are still rising. By contrast, the Appalachians are a much older mountain belt, in which active mountain building ceased about 250 million years ago.

The mountain-building episode that created the Himalayas began roughly 50 million years ago, when India began to collide with Asia. Prior to the breakup of Pangaea, India was located between Africa and Antarctica in the Southern Hemisphere. As Pangaea fragmented, India moved rapidly, geologically speaking, a few thousand kilometers in a northward direction. The subduction zone that facilitated India’s northward migration was near the southern margin of Asia created an Andean-type plate margin containing a welldeveloped continental volcanic arc and an accretionary wedge. India’s northern margin, on the other hand, was a passive continental margin consisting of a thick platform of shallow-water sediments and sedimentary rocks.

India and Asia, India’s northern margin consisted of a thick platform of continental shelf sediments, whereas Asia’s was an active continental margin with a well developed accretionary wedge and volcanic arc.

Oceanic lithosphere folded and faulted the crustal rocks that lay along the margins of these continents to form the Himalayas. This event was followed by the gradual uplift of the Tibetan Plateau as the subcontinent of India was shoved under Asia.

Continental collision, the formation of the Himalayas These diagrams illustrate the collision of India with the Eurasian plate that produced the spectacular Himalayas.

India continued its northward trek, parts of Asia were “squeezed” eastward, out of the collision zone. These displaced crustal blocks include much of Southeast Asia (the region between India and China) and sections of Why was the interior of Asia deformed to such a large extent, while India has remained essentially intact? The answer lies in the nature of these diverse crustal blocks. Much of India is a continental shield 14.1). This thick, cold slab of crustal material has been India’s continued northward migration severely deformed much of China and Southeast Asia intact for more than 2 billion years and is mechanically strong as a result. By contrast, Southeast Asia was assembled more recently, from the collision of several smaller crustal fragments. Consequently, it is still relatively “warm and weak” from recent periods of mountain building.

About 600 million years ago, the precursor to the North Atlantic began to close. Located within this ocean basin was an active volcanic arc that lay off the coast of North America and a microcontinent situated closer to Africa.

Alleghanian Orogeny The final event, the Alleghanian Orogeny, occurred between 250 and 300 million years ago, when Africa collided with North America. The result was the formation of the Appalachian Mountains, perhaps once as majestic as the Himalayas. The Appalachians lay in the interior of the newly assembled supercontinent of Pangaea.

About 600 million years ago, for reasons geologists do not completely understand, plate motion changed dramatically, and the ancient ocean basin began to close. This led to three main orogenic events that culminated in the collision of North America and Africa.

Taconic Orogeny Around 450 million years ago, the marginal sea between the volcanic island arc and ancestral North America began to close. The collision that Rifting of Pangaea About 180 million years ago, Pangaea began to break into smaller fragments, a process that Ocean. Because this new zone of rifting occurred east of the suture that formed when Africa and North America collided, remnants of African crust remain “welded” to the North American plate.

ensued, called the Taconic Orogeny, caused the volcanic arc along with ocean sediments located on the upper plate to be thrust over the larger continental block. The remnants of this volcanic arc and oceanic sediments are recognized today as the metamorphic rocks found across much of the western Appalachians, especially in New metamorphism, numerous magma bodies intruded the crustal rocks along the entire continental margin.

The Valley and Ridge province This region of the Appalachian Mountains consists of folded and faulted sedimentary strata that were displaced building, called the Acadian Orogeny, occurred about 350 million years ago. The continued closing of this ancient ocean basin led to the collision of a microcontinent with thrust faulting, metamorphism, and the intrusion of several large granite bodies. In addition, this event added substantially to the width of North America.

The final orogeny, called the Alleghanian Orogeny, occurred between 250 and America. The material that was accreted earlier was displaced by as much as 250 kilometers (155 miles) toward the interior of North America. This event also displaced and further deformed the shelf sediments and sedimentary rocks that had once flanked the eastern margin of thrust-faulted sandstones, limestones, and shales make up the largely unmetamorphosed rocks of the Valley and Ridge province. Outcrops of the folded and thrust-faulted structures that characterize collisional mountains are found as far inland as central Pennsylvania With the collision of Africa and North America, the majestic Appalachians were located in the interior of Pangaea. Then, about 180 million years ago, this newly formed supercontinent began to break into smaller fragments, a process that ultimately created the modern Atlantic Ocean. Because this new zone of rifting occurred east of the suture that formed when Africa and North America collided, remnants of Africa remain “welded” to the North American plate (Figure Other mountain ranges that exhibit evidence of The Alps formed as Africa and at least two smaller crustal fragments collided with Europe during the closing of the Tethys Sea. Similarly, the Urals were uplifted during the assembly of Pangaea, when northern Europe and northern Asia collided, forming a major portion of Eurasia.

1. Differentiate between terrane and terrain. 2. During the formation of the Himalayas, the continental crust of Asia was deformed more than India proper. Why was this the case? 3. How does the plate tectonics theory help explain the existence of fossil marine life in rocks atop compressional mountains? 4. How can the Appalachian Mountains be considered a collision-type mountain range when the nearest continent is 5000 kilometers (3000 miles) away?

Summarize the stages in the formation of a fault-block mountain range. Most mountain belts form in compressional environments, as evidenced by the predominance of large thrust faults and folded strata. However, other tectonic processes, such as continental rifting, can also produce mountainous terrain. Recall that continental rifting occurs when tensional forces stretch and thin the lithosphere, resulting in upwelling of hot mantle rock. Upwelling heats the thinned lithosphere, which becomes less dense (more buoyant) and rises. This accounts, in part, for the elevated topography associated with continental rifts. Simultaneously, stretching elongates the rigid upper crust, which breaks into large crustal blocks that are bounded by high-angle normal faults. Continued Mountains that form in these tectonic settings are termed fault-block mountains.

The Teton Range in western Wyoming is an excellent example of fault-block mountains. This lofty structure was faulted and uplifted along its eastern flank as the block tilted downward to the west. Looking west from Jackson Hole, Wyoming, the eastern front of this mountain rises more than 2 kilometers (1.2 miles) above the valley, making it one of the most imposing mountain fronts in the United States.

Jackson Hole Wyoming’s Teton Range, an example of fault-block mountains (Photo by Rob Marmion/Shutterstock) structures produced nearly parallel mountain ranges, averaging about 80 kilometers (50 miles) in length, which 10.18, page 314). Geologists have proposed several hypotheses to explain the events that generated the Basin and Range region. The most widely accepted view is that a change in the nature of the plate boundary along California’s western margin led to the formation of this region . About 30 million years ago, the dominant forces acting on the western margin of North America were compressional, caused by the buoyant subduction Starting about 25 million years ago, subduction gradually ceased along the California coast as the spreading center that separated the Farallon plate from the Pacific began to subduct beneath North America.

Proposed model for the formation of the Basin and Range province The Basin and Range region consists of more than 100 faultblock mountains generated during the past 20 million years. Upwelling of hot mantle rock and gravitational collapse (crustal sliding) may have contributed to considerable stretching and thinning of the crust.

This event spawned the San Andreas Fault, with its According to this hypothesis, the northwestward motion of the Pacific plate produced tensional forces American plate to produce the fault-block mountains Stretching and thinning of the lithosphere also led to mantle upwelling, which accounts for the higher-thanaverage elevation of this region. Another model contends that about 20 million years ago, the cold, dense lithospheric mantle located beneath the Basin and Range region decoupled (separated) from the overlying crustal layer and slowly sank into the mantle. This process, called delamination, resulted in upwelling and lateral spreading of hot mantle rock that produced tensional forces that stretched and thinned the overlying crust. According to this view, these elevated crustal blocks began to gravitationally slide from their lofty perches to generate the fault-block topography of the Basin and Range province.

Suggest several processes other than tectonic activity that can affect the elevation of a region. The causes of Earth’s varied topography are complex and cumulative; see, for example, GEOgraphics 14.1. Geologists know that colliding plates provide the tectonic forces that thicken and elevate crustal rocks during mountain building. Adjustments in Earth’s gravitational balance can affect elevation, and up-and-down motions within the mantle can also change the elevation of a region. Furthermore, whenever land is uplifted, weathering and erosion sculpt Earth’s surface into a vast array of landforms. In this section large-scale regional uplift and subsidence are discussed; the specific ways in which weathering and erosion alter Earth’s surface are covered in subsequent chapters.

The principle of isostasy This drawing shows how wooden blocks of different thicknesses float in water. In a similar manner, thick sections of crustal material float higher than thinner crustal slabs.

The effects of isostatic adjustment and erosion on mountainous topography This sequence illustrates how the combined effects of erosion and isostatic adjustment result in a thinning of the crust in mountainous regions.

Gravitational collapse Without compressional forces to support them, mountains gradually collapse under their own weight. Gravitational collapse involves normal faulting in the upper, brittle portion of the crust and ductile spreading in the warm, weak rocks at depth.

shortening and thickening of the crust buoyancy of hot rising material accounts for broad upwarping in the overlying lithosphere, whereas downward flow causes downwarping.

Where compressional forces are great, such as those driving India into Asia, lofty mountains such as the Himalayas result. Is there a limit on how high a mountain can rise? As mountaintops are elevated, gravity-driven processes such as erosion and mass wasting are accelerated, carving the deformed strata into rugged landscapes. Equally important, however, is the fact that gravity also acts on the rocks within these massive structures. The higher the mountain, the greater the downward force on rocks near the base. Eventually, the rocks deep within the developing mountain, which are relatively warm and This is analogous to what happens when a ladle of very thick pancake batter is poured onto a hot griddle. Similarly, mountains are altered by a process called gravitational collapse, which involves ductile spreading at depth and normal faulting and subsidence in the upper, brittle portion of Earth’s crust. Considering these factors, a seemingly logical question follows: “What keeps the Himalayas standing?” Simply, the horizontal compressional forces that are driving India into Asia are greater than the vertical force of gravity. However, when India’s northward trek ends, the downward pull of gravity, as well as weathering and erosion, will become the dominant forces acting on this mountainous region.

Africa is one region where large-scale vertical motion is evident. The topography of the region consists of an expansive plateau that has an average elevation of nearly 1500 meters (5000 feet)— much higher than what would be predicted for a stable continental platform. Gravitational collapse results Evidence from seismic in stretching and thinning of the crust 12.19, page 379) indicates that a large mass of hot mantle rock is centered below the southern tip of Africa. This structure, called a superplume, extends upward about 2900 kilometers (1800 miles) from the core–mantle boundary and has a lateral expanse of a few thousand kilometers. Researchers have determined that the upward flow associated with this huge mantle plume is Crustal Subsidence Extensive areas of downwarping also occur at Earth’s surface. In the United States, large, nearly circular basins are found in Michigan and Illinois. Similar structures are known on other continents as well. The cause of the downwarping that created these basins may be linked to the subduction of slabs of oceanic lithosphere. One proposal suggests that when subduction ceases, the descending slab detaches from the trailing lithosphere and continues its descent into the mantle. As this detached lithospheric slab sinks, it creates a downward flow in its wake that tugs at the base of the overriding continent. In some settings, the crust is apparently pulled down sufficiently to produce a large basin that eventually fills with sediments. As the oceanic slab sinks deeper into the mantle, the pull of the trailing wake weakens, and the continent “floats” back into isostatic balance.

1. Define isostasy. What happens to a floating object when weight is added? Removed? 2. Briefly describe how the principle of isostatic adjustment accounts for changes in the elevation of mountains. 3. Give one example of evidence that supports the concept of crustal uplift. 4. Explain the process whereby mountainous regions experience gravitational collapse.

The Work of Gravity Washington. Triggered by heavy rains, a large mass of mud and debris buried a 2.6-square-kilometer (1-square-mile) area, damming a river, engulfing 49 buildings, and blocking a highway. The event claimed 43 lives. (Photo by Michael Collier) the preceding chapters focused on internal processes that are powered by energy from Earth’s interior and produce volcanoes, earthquakes, ocean basins, and mountains. Beginning with this chapter and extending through Chapter 20, we turn our attention to external processes that sculpt and erode Earth’s surface. Driven by gravity and energy from the Sun, external processes are responsible for shaping a wide variety of landforms and creating many distinctive landscapes.

Importance of Mass Wasting Describe how mass-wasting processes can cause natural disasters and discuss the role that mass wasting plays in the development of landforms.

Earth’s surface is not perfectly flat but instead consists of slopes of many different varieties. Some are steep and precipitous; others are moderate or gentle. Some are long and gradual; others are short and abrupt. Slopes can be mantled with soil and covered by vegetation or can consist of barren rock and rubble. Taken together, slopes are the most common elements in our physical landscape. Although most slopes may appear to be stable and unchanging, the force of gravity causes rock material to move downslope by way of processes we call mass wasting. At one extreme, the movement may be gradual and practically imperceptible. At the other extreme, it may consist of a roaring debris flow or a thundering rock avalanche. Some mass-wasting processes are dangerous events that represent significant geologic hazards. Perhaps less well known is the fact that mass-wasting processes play an important role in the development and evolution of many of Earth’s varied landforms.

The chapter-opening photo is a striking example of a phenomenon that many people would call a landslide. For most of us, the word landslide implies a sudden event in which large quantities of rock and soil plunge down steep slopes. When people and communities are in the way, a natural disaster may result. Landslides constitute major geologic hazards that each year in the United States cause billions of dollars in damages and the loss of dozens of lives. As you will see, many landslides occur in connection with other major natural disasters, including earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, wildfires, and severe storms. If you were to view several images of events called landslides, you would likely notice that the term seems to refer to several different things—from mudflows to rock avalanches. This variety reflects the fact that although many people, including geologists, frequently use the word landslide, the term has no specific definition in geology. Rather, it is a popular, nontechnical word used to describe any or all relatively rapid forms of mass wasting. Landslides are spectacular examples of a basic geologic process called mass wasting. Mass wasting refers to the downslope movement of rock, regolith, and soil under the direct influence of gravity. It is distinct from the erosional processes that are examined in subsequent chapters in that mass wasting does not require a transporting medium, such as water, wind, or glacial ice. Landslides are not just events that occur in remote mountains and canyons. People frequently live where rapid mass-wasting events occur. Nevertheless, even in populated areas with steep slopes, catastrophic landslides are relatively rare. Consequently, people living in susceptible areas often do not appreciate the risks of living where they do. However, such events occur with some regularity around the world. GEOgraphics 15.1 provides some examples.

The Role of Mass Wasting In the evolution of most landforms, mass wasting is the step that follows weathering, discussed in Chapter 6. By itself, weathering does not produce significant landforms. Rather, landforms develop as products of weathering are removed from the places where they originate. Once weathering weakens and breaks rock apart, mass wasting transfers the debris downslope, where a stream or glacier, acting as a conveyor belt, usually carries it away. Although there may be many intermediate stops along the way, the sediment is eventually transported to its ultimate destination: the sea.

Landslides don’t just occur in remote mountains and canyons. People frequently live where rapid mass wasting events occur. Here are a few examples.

Even in areas with steep slopes, catastrophic landslides are relatively rare, thus, people living in susceptible areas often do not appreciate the risks of living where they do. This deadly event, triggered by an earthquake in January Tecla, El Salvador. Many unsuspecting residents perished.

On March 1, 2012, this boulder broke loose from a steep mountain slope in the French Alps, crushing a car and then crashing into this house. There was no warning and no obvious trigger for this event.

In January 2011, following a period of torrential rains, this thick slurry of Brazil. Heavy rains are an important trigger of mass wasting processes. Weathered rock, precipitous slopes, and the shock of an earthquake combined to produce many rockfalls and rock avalanches in and around Christchurch, New Zealand on February 22, 2011.

by steep and unstable slopes. It is in such settings that massive destructive landslides, such as those described at the beginning of the chapter, occur. As mountain building subsides, mass-wasting and erosional processes lower the land. Through time, steep and rugged mountain slopes give way to gentler, more subdued terrain. Thus, as a landscape ages, massive and rapid mass-wasting processes give way to smaller, less dramatic downslope movements that are often imperceptibly slow.

1. Define mass wasting. How does mass wasting differ from erosional processes such as streams, glaciers, and wind? 2. Sketch or describe how mass wasting contributes to the development of a valley. 3. In what environment are rapid mass-wasting processes most likely to occur?

Summarize the factors that control and trigger mass-wasting processes. Gravity is the controlling force of mass wasting, but several factors play important roles in overcoming inertia and creating downslope movements. Long before a landslide occurs, various processes work to weaken slope material, gradually making it more and more susceptible to the pull of gravity. During this span, the slope remains stable but gets closer and closer to being unstable. Eventually, the strength of the slope is weakened to the point that something causes the slope to cross the threshold from stability to instability. Such an event that initiates downslope movement is called a trigger. Remember that a trigger is not the sole cause of a mass-wasting event but just the last of many causes. Among the common factors that trigger mass-wasting processes are saturation of material with water, oversteepening of slopes, removal of anchoring vegetation, and ground vibrations from earthquakes.

Small amounts of water increase the cohesion among sand grains becomes very slick—another example of the “lubricating” effect of water. Water also adds considerable weight to a mass of material. The added weight in itself may be enough to cause the material to slide or flow downslope.

Oversteepening of slopes is another trigger of many mass movements. There are many situations in nature where oversteepening takes place. For example, as a stream cuts into a valley wall, it removes material from the base of the wall. This causes the slope to become too steep and through their activities, people often create oversteepened and unstable Wet sand slopes that become prime sites for mass wasting. Loose, granular particles (sand-size or coarser) assume a stable slope called the angle of repose (reposen = to be at rest). This is the steepest angle at which material remains in place. Depending on the size and shape of Saturation reduces the particles, the angle of friction and causes the repose varies from 25 to 40 sand to flow degrees. The larger, more angular particles maintain the steepest slopes. If the angle is increased, the rock debris will adjust by moving Oversteepening is not just important because it triggers movements of unconsolidated granular materials. Oversteepening also produces unstable slopes and mass movements in cohesive soils, regolith, and bedrock. The response will not be immediate, as with loose, granular material, but sooner or later, one or more mass-wasting processes will eliminate the oversteepening and restore stability to the slope.

Angle of repose The angle of repose is the steepest angle at which an accumulation of granular particles remains stable. Larger, more angular particles maintain the steepest slopes.

Wildfires contribute to mass wasting In September 2014, this wildfire consumed 9000 acres of dense forest on Pond, California. During the summer, wildfires are common occurrences in many parts of the western United States. Millions of acres are burned each year. The loss of anchoring vegetation sets the stage for accelerated mass wasting. (Photo by Noah Berger/Reuters) the infiltration of water, resulting in increased surface runoff during rains. The consequence can be dangerous torrents of viscous mud and rock debris.

Conditions that favor mass wasting may exist in an area for a long time without movement occurring. An additional factor is sometimes necessary to trigger the movement. Among the most important and dramatic triggers are earthquakes. An earthquake and its aftershocks can dislodge enormous volumes of rock and unconsolidated material.

Angeles region of southern California. Named for its epicenter in the town of Northridge, the magnitude 6.7 event produced estimated losses of $20 billion. Some of the losses resulted from more than 11,000 landslides in an area of about 10,000 square kilometers (3900 square miles) disaster was avoided when Chinese engineers successfully breached the landslide dam and safely drained the lake.

Earthquakes as triggers China’s mountainous Sichuan Province in May 2008 triggered hundreds of landslides. The landslide shown here took 51 lives.

Liquefaction Intense ground shaking during earthquakes can cause watersaturated surface materials to lose their strength and behave as fluidlike masses pages 343-344). This process, called liquefaction, was a major cause of property damage in Anchorage, Alaska, during the massive 1964 Good Friday earthquake— the largest quake to strike North America in the twentieth century.

Do rapid mass-wasting events always require some sort of trigger, such as heavy rains or an earthquake? The answer is no. For example, on the afternoon of May 9, 1999, a landslide killed 10 hikers and Park near Hauula, on the north shore of Oahu, Hawaii. The tragic event occurred when a mass of rock from a canyon wall plunged 150 meters (500 feet) down a nearly vertical slope to the valley floor. Because of safety concerns, the park was closed so that landslide specialists from Their study concluded that the landslide occurred without triggering by external conditions. Many rapid mass-wasting events occur without a discernible trigger. Slope materials gradually weaken over time, under the influence of long-term weathering, infiltration of water, and other physical processes. Eventually, if the strength falls below what is necessary to maintain slope stability, a landslide will occur. The timing of such events is random, and thus accurate prediction is impossible. GEOgraphics 15.2 includes two maps that show the potential for landslides in the contiguous United States and worldwide. All regions experience some damage from rapid mass-wasting processes, but it is obvious that not all regions have the same landslide potential.

1. How does water affect mass-wasting processes? 2. Describe the significance of the angle of repose. 3. How might a wildfire influence mass wasting? 4. Describe the relationship between earthquakes and landslides.

uring summer, wildfires are common occurrences in many parts of the western United States. Millions of acres are burned each year. This wildfire occurred near Santa Clarita, California, in July 2004. We have learned that Earth is a system in which various parts of its four major spheres interact in uncountable ways. Let’s relate this idea to the situation pictured here. thus set the stage for this wildfire? possibility and a human possibility. shown here, might influence future mass-wasting events in the area.

List and explain the criteria that are commonly used to classify mass-wasting processes. Geologists use the term mass wasting to describe a broad array of different processes. Generally, the different types are classified based on the type of material involved, the kind of motion displayed, and the velocity of the movement.

In the mountains, mechanical weathering produces angular rock fragments that fall to the base of a cliff. Over time, a talus slope forms. features. (Photo by Whit Richardson/Alamy Images) trapped air and ice. Along the way, it ripped loose millions of tons of additional debris that ultimately and tragically buried more than 20,000 people in the towns of Yungay and Ranrahirca. in Yosemite National Park on July 10, 1996. When two large rock masses broke loose from steep cliffs and fell Valley, the impacts were great enough to be recorded at seismic stations 200 kilometers (125 miles) from the site. As the dislodged rock masses struck the ground, they generated atmospheric pressure waves that were comparable in velocity to a tornado or hurricane. The force of the air blasts uprooted and snapped more than 1000 trees, including some that were 40 meters (130 feet) tall.

Blackhawk rock avalanche This prehistoric event is considered one of the largest-known landslides in North America.

The mass of rocky debris raced downslope on a cushion of compressed air.

Distinguish among slump, rockslide, debris flow, and earthflow. The common rapid mass-wasting processes discussed in this section are slump, rockslide, debris flow, and earthflow. They are most common where slopes are steep. The speed of movement varies from barely perceptible to very rapid.

Slump Slump occurs when material slips downslope en masse along a curved surface of rupture. It is an example of a rotational slide. Earthflows frequently form at the base of the water through the upper layers reduces the strength of the clay below, resulting in slope failure.

Rockslide These rapid movements are classified as translational slides in which the material moves along a relatively flat surface with little or no rotation or backward tilting.

Gros Ventre rockslide This massive slide occurred on June 23, 1925, just east Collier) (https://goo.gl/el2Ecj) a severe earthquake west of Yellowstone National Park Surface of River in southwestern Montana. In a matter of moments, an estimated 27 million cubic meters of rock, soil, and trees slid into the canyon. The debris dammed the river and buried a campground and highway. More than 20 unsuspecting campers perished. Heavy rains and melting snow, rather than an earthquake, triggered another major rockslide in the Yellowstone region. Not far from the site of the Madison Canyon slide, the legendary Gros Ventre rockslide occurred 34 years earlier. The Gros Ventre River flows River. On June 23, 1925, a massive rockslide took place in its valley, just east of the small town of Kelly. In the underlying surface to the point that friction is no lon- the span of only minutes, a great mass of sandstone, shale, and soil crashed down the south side of the valger sufficient to hold the rock unit in place. As a result, ley, carrying with it a dense pine forest. The volume of rockslides tend to be most common during the spring, debris, estimated at 38 million cubic meters (50 million when heavy rains and melting snow are most prevalent. As mentioned earlier, earthquakes can trigger rock70 meters (230 feet) high. Because the river was comslides and other mass movements. There are many wellpletely blocked, a lake was formed. It filled so quickly known examples. The 1811 earthquake at New Madrid, that a house that had been 18 meters (60 feet) above Missouri (see Chapter 11), caused slides in an area of the river was floated off its foundation 18 hours after more than 13,000 square kilometers (5000 square miles) the slide. In 1927, the lake overflowed the dam, paralong the Mississippi River valley. On August 17, 1959, tially draining the lake and resulting in a devastating The side of the mountain gave flood downstream. Gros Ventre way when the tilted sandstone Why did the Gros Ventre rockslide take landslide debris bed, that had been cut through Former land by the river, could no longer view of the geology of maintain its position atop the that (1) the sedimensaturated bed of clay. tary strata in this area dip (tilt) 15 to 21 degrees; (2) underlying the bed of sandstone is a relatively thin layer of clay; and (3) at the bottom of the valley, the river had cut through much of the sandstone layer. During the spring of 1925, water from heavy rains and melting snow seeped through the sandstone, saturating the clay below. Because much of the sandstone layer had been Ventre River, the layer had virtually no support at the bottom of the slope. Eventually the sandstone could no longer hold its position on the wetted clay, and gravity Even though the Gros Ventre pulled the mass down the rockslide occurred in 1925, side of the valley. The cirthe scar left on the side of cumstances at this location Sheep Mountain is still a were such that the event was prominent feature.

Debris flow is a relatively rapid type of mass wasting that involves a flow of soil and regolith containing a large amount of water. The examples. Debris flows are sometimes called mudflows when the material is primarily fine-grained. Although they can occur in many different climate settings, they tend to occur more frequently in semiarid mountainous regions. Because of their fluid properties, debris flows frequently follow canyons and stream channels. In populated areas, debris flows can pose a significant hazard to life and property.

Regions When a cloudburst or rapidly melting mountain snows create a sudden flood in a semiarid region, large quantities of soil and regolith are washed into nearby stream channels because there is usually little vegetation to anchor the surface material. The end product is a flowing tongue of well-mixed mud, soil, rock, and water. Its consistency may range from that of wet concrete to a soupy mixture not much thicker than muddy water. The rate of flow, therefore, depends not only on the steepness of the slope but also on the water content. Dense debris flows are capable of carrying or pushing large boulders, trees, and even houses with relative ease. Debris flows pose a serious hazard to development in relatively dry mountainous areas such as southern California. The construction of homes on canyon hillsides and the removal of native vegetation by brush fires and other means have increased the frequency of these destructive events. Moreover, when a debris flow reaches the end of a steep, narrow canyon, it spreads out, covering the area beyond the mouth of the canyon with a mixture of wet debris. This material contributes to the buildup of fanlike deposits, called alluvial fans, at canyon mouths. The fans are relatively easy to build on, often have nice views, and are close to the mountains; in fact, like the nearby canyons, many have become preferred sites for development. Because debris flows occur only sporadically, the public is often unaware of the potential hazard of such sites.

Lahars Debris flows composed mostly of volcanic materials on the flanks of volcanoes are called lahars. The word originated in Indonesia, a volcanic region that has experienced many of these The consistency of a debris flow ranges from that of wet concrete to a soupy mixture not much thicker than muddy water.

is a moving tongue of wellmixed mud, soil, rock, and water. (Photo by Michael Collier) When the material is fine-grained, the event may be called a mudflow.

We have seen that debris flows are frequently confined to channels in semiarid regions. In contrast, earthflows most often form on hillsides in humid areas during times of heavy precipitation or snowmelt. When water saturates the soil and regolith on a hillside, the material may break away, leaving a scar on the slope and forming a tongue- or teardrop-shaped mass that flows downslope . The materials most commonly involved are rich in clay and silt and contain only small proportions of sand and coarser particles. Earthflows range in size from bodies a few meters long, a few meters wide, and less than a meter deep to masses more than 1 kilometer long, several hundred meters wide, and more than 10 meters deep. Because earthflows are quite viscous, they generally lahars, can be found in Chapter 5.

move at slower rates than the more fluid debris flows described in the preceding section. They are characterized by a gradual movement that may go on for periods ranging from days to years. Depending on the steepness of the slope and the material’s consistency, measured velocities range from less than a millimeter a day up to several meters a day. Over the time span during which an earthflow is active, movement is typically faster during wet periods than during drier times. In addition to occurring as isolated hillside phenomena, earthflows commonly take place in association with large slumps. In this situation, they may be seen as tongue-like flows at the base of the slump block.

1. Without looking at Figures 15.12 and 15.13, sketch and label a simple cross-section (side view) of a 2. Both slumps and rockslides move by sliding. How do these processes differ? Ventre, Wyoming? 4. How is a lahar different from a debris flow that might occur in southern California? 5. Contrast earthflows and debris flows.

eavy rains in late July 2010 triggered the mass wasting Colorado. Heavy equipment is clearing away material that blocked railroad tracks and significantly narrowed the adjacent stream channel.

occurred here? Explain your choice. thing leads to another.” It certainly applies to the Earth system. Suppose the material from the mass-wasting event had completely filled the stream. What other natural hazard might have developed?

Creep is a type of mass wasting that involves the gradual downhill movement of soil and regolith. One factor that contributes to creep is the alternating expansion and contraction of surface material caused by freezing 15.20, freezing or wetting lifts particles at right angles to the slope, and thawing or drying allows the particles to fall back to a slightly lower level. Each cycle therefore moves the material a tiny distance downslope. Creep is aided by anything that disturbs the soil, such as raindrop impact and disturbance by plant roots and burrowing animals. Creep is also promoted when the ground becomes saturated with water. Following a heavy rain or snowmelt, a water-logged soil may lose its internal cohesion, allowing gravity to pull the material downslope. Because creep is imperceptibly slow, the process cannot be observed in action. However, the effects of creep can be observed. Creep causes fences and utility poles to tilt and retaining walls to be displaced.

Solifluction lobes near the Solifluction occurs in permafrost regions when the active layer thaws in summer. Because summers are cool and very short, frozen soils generally thaw to depths of less than 1 meter (3 feet). (Photo from and subarctic climates. (There is more about permafrost in the next section.) Solifluction occurs in a zone above the permafrost called the active layer, which thaws to a depth of about a meter during the brief high-latitude summer and then refreezes in winter. During the summer season, water is unable to percolate into the impervious permafrost layer below. As a result, the active layer becomes saturated and slowly flows. The process can occur on slopes as gentle as 2 to 3 degrees. Where there is a well-developed mat of vegetation, a solifluction sheet may move in a series of well-defined lobes or as a series of partially overriding folds.

the surface material. Knowing how much ice is present and where it is located is very important when it comes to constructing roads, buildings, and other projects in areas underlain by permafrost.

In the continuous zone, the only unfrozen areas are beneath deep lakes or rivers.

When people disturb the surface, such as by removing the insulating vegetation mat or by constructing roads and buildings, the delicate thermal balance is disturbed, and ice within the permafrost can thaw. Thawing produces unstable ground that may slide, slump, subside, and undergo severe frost heaving. When a heated structure is built directly on permafrost that contains a high proportion of ice, thawing creates soggy material into which a building can sink. One solution is to place buildings and other structures on piles, like stilts. Such piles allow subfreezing air to circulate between the floor of the building and the soil and thereby keep the ground frozen.

1. Describe the basic mechanisms that contribute to creep. How might you recognize that creep is 2. During what season does solifluction in the Arctic occur? Explain why it occurs only during that 3. What is permafrost? How might disturbing permafrost lead to unstable ground that may slide, flow, or subside?

Extraordinary rains in September 2013, caused extensive flash flooding in the Colorado Rockies in and around the city of Boulder. During the height of the flood, the Big nearly did the same to the houses in the bottom of the image. (Photo by Andy Cross/The Denver Post/Getty Images) bittersweet relationship we have with rivers. They are vital economic tools—used as highways to move goods and as sources of water for irrigation and energy—as well as prime locations for recreation. When considered as part of the Earth system, rivers and streams represent a fundamental link in the constant cycling of our planet’s water. Yet running water is the dominant agent of landscape alteration, eroding more terrain and transporting more sediment than any other process. Soils and other materials can be washed away, only to be deposited elsewhere. Because human populations concentrate along rivers, flooding represents enormous potential for destruction and loss of life. This chapter provides an overview of the hydrologic cycle, the nature of river systems, the types of river channels and the factors that produce them, the influences of running water on our planet’s landscapes, and the nature of floods and their impact on people.

Surface water and other million cubic miles) of water. The vast majority of it, an estimated 96.5 percent, is stored in the global ocean. Ice sheets and glaciers account for another 1.74 percent, leaving less than 2 percent divided among lakes, streams, subsurface water, Surface water and the atmosphere. and other freshwater Water is constantly movAtmosphere 0.22% Biological water 0.22% ing among Earth’s different Rivers 0.46% spheres—the hydrosphere, the atmosphere, the geo2.53% sphere, and the biosphere. unending circulation of Soil moisture is called the hydro3.52% logic cycle. Recall from Chapter 1 that the hydrologic cycle is one of many important subsystems that conand ice stitute the Earth system. When precipitation falls on land, it either soaks into the ground, a process called infiltration, flows over the surface as runoff, or immediately evaporates. Much of the water that infiltrates or runs off eventually finds its way back to the atmosphere via evaporation from soil, lakes, and streams. In addition, some of the water that soaks into the 96,000 km3 ground is absorbed by plants, which later release it into the atmosphere. This 284,000 km3 process is called transpiration (trans = across, spiro = to breathe). Each year a field of crops may 60,000 km3 transpire the equivalent of a water layer 0.6 meter (2 feet) deep over the entire field. The 36,000 km3 320,000 km3 same area of trees may pump twice this amount into the atmosphere. Because both evaporaInfiltration tion and transpiration involve the transfer of water from the surface directly to the atmosphere, they are often considered together as the combined process of evapotranspiration. More water falls on land as precipitation than is lost is balanced. This basically means that although water by evapotranspiration. The excess is carried back to the is constantly moving from one reservoir to another, the ocean mainly by streams; less than 1 percent returns overall amount of water in the oceans and on land remains as groundwater. However, much of the water that flows about the same. Each year, solar energy evaporates about in rivers is not transmitted directly into river channels 320,000 cubic kilometers of water from the oceans, but groundwater provides a form of storage that sustains the meters that are carried to the ocean as runoff. Although runoff makes up a small percentage of the total, running flow of streams between storms and during periods of water is, nevertheless, the single most important erosional drought. Groundwater is the focus of Chapter 17. agent sculpting Earth’s land surface. When precipitation falls in very cold areas—at high elevations or high latitudes—the water may not immediately soak in, run off, or evaporate. Instead, it becomes part of a snowfield or a glacier. In this way, glaciers store large quantities of water. If present-day 1. Describe or sketch the movement of water through glaciers were to melt and release their stored water, the hydrologic cycle. Once precipitation has fallen sea level would rise by several tens of meters worldon land, what paths might the water take? wide and submerge many heavily populated coastal 2. What is meant by the term evapotranspiration? areas. As you will see in Chapter 18, over the past 2 million years, huge ice sheets have formed and 3. Over the oceans, evaporation exceeds precipitation, melted on several occasions, each time changing the yet sea level does not drop. Explain why. balance of the hydrologic cycle.

Describe the nature of drainage basins and river systems. Sketch and briefly explain four basic drainage patterns. Recall that most of the precipitation that falls on land either enters the soil (infiltration) or remains at the surface, moving downslope as runoff. The amount of water that runs off rather than soaks into the ground depends on several factors: (1) the intensity and duration of rainfall, (2) the amount of water already in the soil, (3) the nature of the surface material, (4) the slope of the land, and (5) the extent and type of vegetation. When the surface material is highly impermeable or when it becomes saturated, runoff is the dominant process. Runoff is also high in urban areas because large areas are covered by impermeable buildings, roads, and parking lots.

The hydrologic cycle The primary movement of water through the cycle is shown by the large arrows. annual amount of water taking a particular path.

Runoff initially flows in broad, thin sheets across slopes in a process called sheet flow. This thin, unconfined flow eventually develops threads of current that form tiny channels called rills. Rills meet to form gullies, which join to form brooks, creeks, or streams. Then, when they reach an undefined size, they are called rivers. Although the terms river and stream are often used interchangeably, geologists define stream as water that flows in a channel, regardless of size. River, on the other hand, is a general term for streams that carry substantial amounts of water and have numerous tributaries. In humid regions, the water to support streamflow comes from two sources: overland flow that sporadically enters the stream and groundwater that enters the channel. In areas where the bedrock is composed of soluble rocks such as limestone, large openings may exist that facilitate the transport of groundwater to streams. In arid regions, however, the water table may be below the level of the stream channel, in which case the stream loses water to the groundwater system by outflow percolating through the streambed.

Mississippi River drainage basin The drainage basin of the Mississippi River forms a funnel that stretches from Miles City consists of many smaller drainage basins. The drainage basin of the Yellowstone River is one of many that contribute water to the Missouri River, which, in turn, is one of many that make up the drainage basin of the Mississippi River.

Headward erosion is occurring here. Tributaries to the San Rafael River are dissecting this flat upland area.

streams tend to erode their channels downward. This lowering of the stream leads to increased rates of erosion on the steeper slopes, which lie in the opposite direction of streamflow. Thus, through headward erosion, a valley is extended into previously undissected Rafael River illustrate this process.

Rivers drain much of the land area, with the exception of extremely arid regions or polar areas that are permanently frozen. To a large extent, the variety of rivers that exist is a reflection of the different environments in which they are found. For example, although the Paraná–La Plata river system in South America drains an area roughly the same size as the Nile in Egypt, it carries nearly 10 times more water to the ocean. Because its drainage basin is entirely in a rainy tropical climate, the Paraná–La Plata system has a huge discharge. By contrast, the Nile, which also originates in a humid region, flows through an expansive arid landscape, where significant amounts of water evaporate or are withdrawn to sustain agriculture. Thus, climatic differences and human intervention can significantly influence the character of a river. Later, we will examine other factors that contribute to stream variability. River systems not only involve a network of stream channels but the entire drainage basin. Based on the dominant processes operating within them, river systems can be divided into three zones: sediment production—where erosion dominates, sediment transport, and sediment deposition. It is important to recognize that sediment is being eroded, transported, and deposited along the entire length of a stream, regardless of which process is dominant within each zone.

The zone of sediment production, where most of the sediment is derived, is located in the headwaters region of the river system. Much of the sediment carried by streams begins as bedrock that is subsequently broken down by weathering and then moved downslope by mass wasting and by way of sheet flow and rills. Bank erosion can also contribute significant amounts of sediment. In addition, scouring of the channel bed deepens the channel and adds to the stream’s sediment load.

Sediment acquired by a stream is transported through the channel network along sections called trunk streams. When trunk streams are in balance, the amount of sediment eroded from their banks equals the amount deposited elsewhere in the channel.

Although trunk streams rework their channels over time, they are not a source of sediment, nor do they accumulate or store it. When a river reaches the ocean or another large body of water, it slows, and the energy to transport sediment is greatly reduced. Most of the sediments accumulate at the mouth of the river to form a delta, are reconfigured by wave action to form a variety of coastal features, or are moved far offshore by ocean currents. Because coarse sediments tend to be deposited upstream, it is primarily the fine sediments (clay, silt, and fine sand) that eventually reach the ocean. Taken together, erosion, transportation, and deposition are the processes by which rivers move Earth’s surface materials and sculpt landscapes.

Drainage systems are interconnected networks of streams that form a variety of patterns. The nature of a drainage pattern can vary greatly from one type of terrain to another, primarily in response to the kinds of rock on which the streams developed and/or the structural pattern of joints, faults, and folds (see Chapter 10).

The most commonly encountered drainage pattern is the dendritic pattern (Figure streams resembles the branching pattern of a deciduous tree. In fact, the word dendritic means “treelike.” The dendritic pattern forms where the underlying material is relatively uniform. Because the surface material is essentially uniform in its resistance to erosion, it does not control the pattern of streamflow. Rather, the pattern is determined chiefly by the direction of slope of the land.

Radial Pattern When streams diverge from a central area like spokes from the hub of a wheel, the pattern is develops on isolated volcanic cones and domal uplifts.

develops when the bedrock is crisscrossed by a series of joints and/or faults. Because fractured rock tends to weather and erode more easily than unbroken rock, the geometric pattern of joints guides the paths of streams as they carve their valleys. drainage pattern in which tributary streams are nearly parallel to one another and have the appearance of a underlain by alternating bands of resistant and lessresistant rock and is particularly well displayed in the folded Appalachian Mountains, where both weak and strong strata outcrop in nearly parallel belts.

Drainage patterns Networks of streams form a variety of patterns.

develops on relatively uniform surface materials develops on isolated volcanic cones or domes develops in areas of alternating weak and resistant bedrock The river establishes its course on relatively uniform strata that cover a structural feature below.

As the stream erodes downward, it encounters and cuts through the resistant rock to create a water gap. By this process the river is superimposed on the ridge.

To fully understand the drainage pattern displayed by a stream, it is often useful to consider a stream’s entire history. For example, river valleys occasionally cut through a ridge or mountainous topography that lies across their path. This through a tectonic structure is called a water gap . Why do streams cut across such structures and not flow around them? One possibility is that a stream existed before the ridge or mountain was uplifted. In this situation, the stream, called an antecedent stream, eroded its bed downward at a pace equal to the rate of uplift. That is, the stream would maintain its course as folding or faulting gradually raised the structure across its path. 16.8). This can occur when folded beds or resistant rocks are buried beneath layers of relatively flat-lying sediments or sedimentary strata. Streams originating on the overlying strata establish their courses without regard to the structures below. Then, as the valley deepens, the river continues to cut its valley into the underlying structure. The folded Appalachians feature several superposed rivers, including the Potomac and the Susquehanna, which cut their channels through folded strata on their way to the Atlantic.

The Bighorn River is a superposed stream that created a water gap through Wyoming’s Sheep Mountain. 1. List several factors that cause infiltration and runoff to vary from place to place and time to time. 2. Draw a simple sketch of a drainage basin and a divide and label each. 3. What are the three main parts (zones) of a river 4. Prepare a simple sketch of the four drainage patterns discussed in this section. Briefly describe why streams exhibit each pattern. 5. Contrast antecedent and superposed streams.

Discuss streamflow and the factors that cause it to change. The water in river channels moves under the influence of gravity. In very slowly flowing streams, water moves in nearly straight-line paths parallel to the stream channel; this is called laminar flow. However, streams typically exhibit turbulent flow, in which the water moves in an erratic fashion characterized by a series of horizontal and vertical swirling motions. Strong turbulent behavior occurs in whirlpools and eddies, as well as in roiling whitewater rapids. Even streams that appear smooth on the surface often exhibit turbulent flow near the bottom and sides of the channel, where flow resistance is greatest. Turbulence contributes to a stream’s ability to erode its channel because it acts to lift sediment from the streambed.

locations across the stream’s channel. Some sluggish streams have flow velocities of less than 1 kilometer (0.62 mile) per hour, whereas stretches of some fast-flowing rivers may exceed 30 kilometers (19 miles) per hour.

Running the rapids in the Grand Canyon– an extreme example of turbulent flow. This water is not standing still. It is moving slowly toward the bottom of the image. The flow in the foreground is primarily laminar.

Gradient The slope of a stream channel, expressed as the vertical drop of a stream over a specified distance, River have very low, or gentle, gradients, about 10 centimeters or less per kilometer. By contrast, some mountain streams have channels that drop at a rate of more than 40 meters per kilometer—a gradient 400 times steeper than that of the lower Mississippi. Gradient also varies along the length of a particular channel. When the gradient is steeper, more gravitational energy is available to drive channel flow.

As water in a stream channel moves downslope, it encounters a significant amount of frictional resistance. The cross-sectional shape (a slice taken across the channel) determines, to a large extent, the amount of flow that comes in contact with the banks and bed of the channel. This measure is referred to as the wetted perimeter. The most efficient channel is one with the least wetted perimeter for its cross-sectional in shape: One is wide and shallow, the other is narrow and deep. Although the cross-sectional area of both is identical, the narrow and deep one has less water in contact with the channel (a smaller wetted perimeter) and therefore less frictional drag. As a result, if all other factors are equal, the water will flow more efficiently and at a higher velocity in a deep and narrow channel than in a wide and shallow channel.

Discharge Streams vary in size from small headwater creeks less than a meter wide to large rivers with widths of several kilometers. The size of a stream channel is largely determined by the amount of water supplied from the drainage basin. The measure most often used to compare the size of streams is discharge—the volume of water flowing past a certain point in a given unit of time. Discharge, usually measured in cubic meters per second or cubic feet America, the Mississippi, has an average discharge at its mouth of about 16,800 cubic meters (593,000 cubic feet) America’s mighty Amazon River, which discharges nearly 13 times more water than the Mississippi. GEOgraphics 16.1 presents more information on Earth’s major rivers.

The discharge of a river system changes over time because of variations in the amount of precipitation received by the drainage basin. Studies show that when discharge increases, the width, depth, and flow velocity of the channel all increase predictably. As we saw earlier, when the size of the channel increases, proportionally less water is in contact with the bed and banks of the channel. This reduces friction, which acts to retard the flow, resulting in an increase in the rate of streamflow.

Stream gaging United States has a dense network of stream gaging stations. To determine a channel’s discharge, it is necessary to survey the channel to determine its shape and calculate its well measures the stage, and a current meter determines flow velocity.

The drainage basin of the “Mighty Mississippi” covers about 40 percent of the lower 48 states and includes all or parts of 31 states and 2 Canadian America's largest river is just one-twelfth that of the Amazon.

The size of the drainage basin and the amount of rainfall it receives are the primary factors influencing discharge.

The flow of the Amazon accounts for about 15 percent of all the fresh water that flows into the oceans. Much of its huge drainage basin is tropical rainforest that receives 80 inches or more of rainfall each year.

1. Why is the Amazon’s discharge so large? 2. About how many times larger is the discharge of the Amazon than the second ranked river, the Congo?

Longitudinal profile California’s Kings River originates high in the Sierra Nevada and flows into the San Joaquin Valley. 1. Contrast laminar flow and turbulent flow. 2. Summarize the factors that influence flow 3. What is a longitudinal profile? 4. What typically happens to channel width, channel depth, flow velocity, and discharge between the headwaters and the mouth of a stream? Briefly explain why these changes occur.

One useful way of studying a stream is to examine its longitudinal profile. Such a profile is simply a crosssectional view of a stream from its source area (called the head, or headwaters) to its mouth, the point downstream where it empties into another water that the most obvious feature of a typical longitudinal profile is its concave shape—a result of the decrease in slope that occurs from the headwaters to the mouth. In addition, local irregularities exist in the profiles of most streams; the flatter sections may be associated with lakes or reservoirs, and the steeper sections are sites of rapids or waterfalls. The change in slope observed on most stream profiles is usually accompanied by an increase in discharge and channel size, as well as a reduction in sediment particle size. For example, data from successive gaging stations along most rivers show that, in humid regions, discharge increases toward the mouth. This should come as no surprise because, as we move downstream, more and more tributaries contribute water to the main channel. In the case of the Amazon, for example, about 1000 tributaries join the main river along its 6500-kilometer In order to accommodate the growing volume of water, channel size typically increases downstream as well. Recall that flow velocities are higher in large channels than in small channels. Furthermore, observations show a general decline in sediment size downstream, making the channel smoother and more efficient. Although the channel slope decreases—the gradient becomes less steep—toward a stream’s mouth, the flow velocity generally increases. This fact contradicts our intuitive assumptions of swift, narrow headwater streams and wide, placid rivers flowing across more subtle topography. Increases in channel size and discharge and decreases in channel roughness that occur downstream the average flow velocity is typically lower in headwater streams than in wide, placid-appearing rivers.

Work of Running Water Outline the ways in which streams erode, transport, and deposit sediment. Streams are Earth’s most important erosional agents. Not only do they have the ability to deepen and widen their channels, but streams also have the capacity to transport enormous quantities of sediment delivered to them by overland flow, mass wasting, and groundwater. Eventually, much of this material is deposited to create a variety of landforms.

Streams cut channels into bedrock through three main processes: quarrying, abrasion, and corrosion. Quarrying Quarrying involves the removal of blocks from the bed of a stream channel. This process is aided by fracturing and weathering that loosen the blocks sufficiently so they are movable during times of high flow rates. Quarrying is mainly a result of the impact forces exerted by flowing water. Abrasion The process by which the bed and banks of a bedrock channel are ceaselessly bombarded by particles carried into the flow is termed abrasion. The individual sediment grains are also abraded by their many impacts with the channel and with one another. Thus, by scraping, rubbing, and bumping, abrasion erodes a bedrock channel and simultaneously smooths and rounds the abrading particles. That is why smooth, rounded cobbles and pebbles are found in streams. Abrasion also results in a reduction in the size of the sediments transported by streams. Features common to some bedrock channels are circular depressions known as potholes, which are created by the abrasive action of particles swirling in fast-moving eddies. The rotational motion of sand and pebbles acts like a drill that bores the holes. As the particles wear down to nothing, they are replaced by new ones that continue to drill the streambed. Eventually, smooth depressions several meters across and deep may result. Corrosion Bedrock channels formed in soluble rock such as limestone are susceptible to corrosion—a process in which rock is gradually dissolved by the flowing water. Corrosion is a type of chemical weathering between the solutions in the water and the mineral matter that makes up the bedrock.

Abrasion by long-lived whirlpools armed with sand and pebbles creates bowl-shaped bedrock depressions called potholes.

All streams, regardless of size, transport some weathered rock material. Streams also sort the solid sediment they transport because finer, lighter material is carried more readily than larger, heavier particles. Streams transport their load of sediment in three ways: (1) in solution (dissolved load), (2) in suspension (suspended load), and (3) by sliding, skipping, or rolling along the bottom (bed load).

Settling velocity The speed at which a particle falls through still water is its settling velocity. Deposition of suspended particles occurs when their settling velocities are greater than the stream’s flow velocity.

of their load in suspension. Indeed, the muddy appearance created by suspended sediment is the most obvious portion of a stream’s load. Usually only very fine sand, silt, and clay particles are carried this way, but during flood stage, larger particles can also be transported in suspension. During flood stage, the total quantity of material carried in suspension also increases dramatically, verifiable by people whose homes have become sites for the deposition of this material. For example, during its flood stage, the Yellow River (Hwang Ho) of China is reported to carry an amount of sediment equal in weight to the water that carries it. Rivers such as this are appropriately described as “too thick to drink but too thin to cultivate.” The type and amount of material carried in suspension are controlled by two factors: the flow velocity and the settling velocity of each sediment grain. Settling velocity is defined as the speed at which a particle falls through a still fluid. The larger the particle, the more rapidly it settles toward the streambed. In addition to size, the shape and specific gravity of particles also influence settling velocity. Flat grains sink through water more slowly than spherical grains, and dense particles fall toward the bottom more rapidly than less-dense particles. The slower the settling velocity and higher the flow velocity, the longer a sediment particle will stay in suspension, and the farther it will be carried the flow. When water percolates through the ground, it acquires soluble soil compounds. Then it seeps through cracks and pores in bedrock, dissolving additional mineral matter. Eventually much of this mineral-rich water finds its way into streams. The velocity of streamflow has essentially no effect on a stream’s ability to carry its dissolved load; material in the solution goes wherever the stream goes. Precipitation of the dissolved mineral matter occurs when the chemistry of the water changes, when organisms create hard parts, or when the water enters an inland “sea,” located in an arid climate where the rate of evaporation is high.

This river’s muddy appearance is a result of suspended occurs as particles are propelled upward by collisions or lifted by the current and then carried downstream a short distance until gravity pulls them back to the bed of the stream. Particles that are too large or heavy to move by saltation either roll or slide along the bottom, depending on their shapes. The movement of bed load through a stream network tends to be less rapid and more localized than the glacially fed river in Norway determined that suspended sediments took only a day to exit the drainage basin, while the bed load required several decades to travel the same distance. Depending on the discharge and slope of the channel, coarse gravels may only be moved during times of high flow, while boulders move only during exceptional floods. Once set in motion, large particles are usually carried short distances. Along some stretches of a stream, bed load cannot be carried at all until it is broken into smaller particles.

solid particles is described using two criteria: capacity and competence. Capacity is the maximum load of solid particles a stream can transport per unit time. The greater the discharge, the greater the stream’s capacity for hauling sediment. Consequently, large rivers with high flow velocities have large capacities. Competence is a measure of a stream’s ability to transport particles based on size rather than quantity. stream’s competence increases proportionately to the square of its velocity. Thus, if the velocity of a stream doubles, the impact force of the water increases four times; if the velocity triples, the force increases nine times, and so forth. Hence, large boulders that are often visible in low water and seem immovable can, in fact, be transported during exceptional floods because of the stream’s increased competence. By now it should be clear why the greatest erosion and transportation of sediment occur during periods of high water associated with floods. The increase in discharge results in greater capacity; the increased velocity produces greater competency. Rising velocity makes the water more turbulent, and larger particles are set in motion. In the course of a few days, or perhaps just a few hours, a stream at flood stage can erode and transport more sediment than it does during several months of normal flow.

Deposition occurs whenever a stream slows, causing a reduction in competence. Put another way, particles are deposited when the flow velocity is less than the settling velocity. As a stream’s flow velocity decreases, sediment begins to settle, largest particles first. In this manner, stream transport provides a mechanism by which solid particles of various sizes are separated. This process, called sorting, explains why particles of similar size are deposited together. For example, you may have seen stretches of a riverbed consisting mainly of gravel or boulders, while sandbars may have dominated another part of the stream. The general term for sediment deposited by streams is alluvium. Many different depositional features are composed of alluvium. Some occur within stream channels, some occur on the valley floor adjacent to a channel, and some are found at the mouth of a stream. We will consider the nature of these features later in the chapter.

1. Describe two processes by which streams cut channels in bedrock. 2. In what three ways does a stream transport its load? Which part of the load moves most slowly? 3. Explain the difference between capacity and 4. What is settling velocity? What factors influence settling velocity? Does settling velocity affect the dissolved load?

he meandering White River in Arkansas is a tributary of the Mississippi River. brown. What part of the stream’s load gives it this color? land shown by the arrow, how would the river’s gradient change? formation of such a channel?

As the name suggests, bedrock channels are cut into the underlying strata and typically form in the headwaters of river systems where streams have steep slopes. The energetic flow tends to transport coarse particles that actively abrade the bedrock channel. Potholes are often visible evidence of the erosional forces at work. Steep bedrock channels often develop a sequence of steps and pools, relatively flat segments (pools) where alluvium tends to accumulate and steep segments (steps) where bedrock is exposed. The steep areas contain rapids or, occasionally, waterfalls. The channel pattern exhibited by streams cutting into bedrock is controlled by the underlying geologic structure. Even when flowing over rather uniform bedrock, streams tend to exhibit winding or irregular patterns rather than flowing in straight channels. Anyone who has gone whitewater rafting has observed the steep, winding nature of a stream flowing in a bedrock channel.

White River near Vernal, Utah Erosion of a cut bank along the Newaukum River in southwestern Washington State.

The cut bank forms on the outside of a meander where flow velocity and turbulence are greatest.

Erosion of cut bank As water slows on the inside of a meander, coarser material is deposited as a point bar.

Streams that transport much of their load in suspension generally move in sweeping bends called meanders. These streams flow in relatively deep, smooth channels and primarily transport mud (silt and clay), sand, and occasionally fine gravel. The lower Mississippi River exhibits this type of channel. Meandering channels evolve over time as individual bends migrate across the floodplain. Most of the erosion is focused at the outside of the meander, where velocity and turbulence are greatest. In time, the outside bank is undermined, especially during periods of high water. Because the outside of a meander is a zone of active erosion, it is often referred to as a cut bank. Debris acquired by the stream at the cut bank moves downstream, where the coarser material is generally deposited as point bars on the insides of bends. In this manner, meanders migrate laterally by eroding the outside of the bends and depositing sediment on the inside, moving sideways without appreciably changing their shape. In addition to migrating laterally, the bends in a channel also migrate down the valley. This occurs because erosion is more effective on the downstream (downslope) side of the meander. Sometimes the downstream migration of a meander is slowed when it reaches a more resistant bank material. This allows Eventually, the river may erode through the narrow neck of land, forming a new, shorter channel segment called a cutoff. Because of its shape, the abandoned bend is called an oxbow lake.

Some streams consist of a complex network of converging and diverging channels that thread their way among numerous islands or gravel bars. Because these channels have an interwoven appearance, they are called braided channels. Braided channels form where a large portion of a stream’s sediment load consists of coarse material (sand and gravel) and the stream has a highly variable discharge. Because the bank material is readily erodible, braided channels are wide and shallow. One setting in which braided streams form is at the end of glaciers, where there is a large seasonal variation in discharge. During the summer, large amounts of iceeroded sediment are dumped into the meltwater streams flowing away from the glacier. However, when flow is sluggish, the stream deposits the coarsest material as elongated structures called bars. This process causes the flow to split into several paths around the bars. During the next period of high flow, the laterally shifting channels erode and redeposit much of this coarse sediment, thereby transforming the entire streambed. In some braided streams, the bars have built semipermanent islands anchored by vegetation.

1. Are bedrock channels more likely to be found near the head or the mouth of a stream? 2. Describe or sketch the evolution of a meander, including how an oxbow lake forms. 3. Describe a situation that might cause a stream channel to become braided.

Stream Valleys Contrast narrow V-shaped valleys, broad valleys with floodplains, and valleys that display incised meanders or stream terraces.

It includes the valley floor, which is the lower, flatter area that is partially or totally occupied by the stream channel, and the sloping valley walls that rise above the valley floor on both sides. Alluvial channels often flow in valleys that have wide valley floors consisting of sand and gravel deposited in the channel and clay and silt deposited by floods. Bedrock channels, on the other hand, tend to be located in narrow V-shaped valleys. In some arid regions, where weathering is slow and rock is particularly resistant, narrow valleys having nearly vertical walls are also found. Such features are called slot canyons. Stream valleys exist on a continuum from narrow, steep-sided valleys to valleys that are so flat and wide that the valley walls are not discernible. Streams, with the aid of weathering and mass wasting, shape the landscape through which they flow. As a result, streams continuously modify the valleys they occupy.

Changes in base level act as a temporary base level. The stream concentrates its erosive energy on the resistant rock at the knickpoint. Eventually the river eliminates the knickpoint and reestablishes a smooth profile.

Resistant bed When a stream’s gradient is steep, the channel is well above base level and the dominant erosional process gradient increases significantly, a situation usually caused by variations in the erodibility of the bedrock into which a stream channel is cutting. Resistant beds create rapids by acting as a temporary base level upstream while allowing downcutting to continue downstream. Recall that, over time, erosion usually eliminates the resistant Waterfalls occur where streams make vertical drops. One type of waterfall is exemplified by Niagara Falls . These famous falls are supported by a resistant bed of dolostone that is underlain by less-resistant shale. As the water plunges over the lip of the falls, it erodes the less-resistant shale, undermining a section of overlying rock, which eventually breaks off. In this manner, the waterfall retains its vertical cliff while slowly, but continually, retreating upstream. Over the past 12,000 years, Niagara Falls has retreated more than 11 kilometers (7 miles) upstream.

As a stream approaches a graded condition—in which it primarily works to transport sediment—downcutting becomes less dominant. At this point the stream’s channel takes on a meandering pattern, and more of its energy is directed from side to side. As a result, the valley widens as the river cuts away at one bank and then the other.

Former position of Niagara Falls The Niagara River flows from Lake Erie to Lake Ontario. The falls have retreated upstream (toward Lake Erie) more than 11 kilometers (7 miles) during the last 12,000 years.

As the river plunges over the falls, it erodes the weaker rocks beneath the more resistant Lockport Dolostone. As a section of dolostone is undercut, it loses support and breaks off.

Development of an erosional floodplain Continuous side-to-side erosion by shifting meanders gradually produces a broad, flat valley floor. Alluvium deposited during floods covers the valley floor.

Well develo floodplain d The continuous lateral erosion caused by shifting meanders gradually produces a broad, flat valley floor covered with alluvium. This feature, called a floodplain, is appropriately named because when a river overflows its banks during flood stage, it inundates the floodplain. Over time the floodplain will widen to a point where the stream is actively eroding the valley walls in River, for example, the distance from one valley wall to another sometimes exceeds 160 kilometers (100 miles). When a river erodes laterally and creates a floodplain as described, it is called an erosional floodplain. Floodplains can be depositional as well. Depositional floodplains are produced by major fluctuations in conditions, such as changes in base level or climate. The floodT plain in California’s Yosemite Valley is one such feature; it was produced when a glacier gouged the valley floor about 300 meters (1000 feet) deeper than its former level. After the glacial ice melted, running water refilled the valley with alluvium. The Merced River currently winds across a relatively flat floodplain that forms much of the floor of Yosemite Valley.

Plateau, the river was meandering on a floodplain. During uplift of the plateau, the meanders downcut because of the steepening gradient.

Stream meandering on its floodplain Because of a relative drop in base level, the river erodes downward through previously deposited alluvium. Eventually a new floodplain forms. Terraces represent elevated remnants of the former floodplain.

These stream terraces developed along the Wind River in Wyoming When there is another relative drop in base level, a second set of terraces forms.

that was in balance with its base level. Then, a change in base level caused the stream to begin downcutting. One of two events likely occurred: Either the base level dropped, or the land on which the river was flowing was Plateau in the southwestern United States generated incised meanders on several rivers. As the plateau gradually rose, meandering rivers began downcutting because of their steepening gradient. After a river has adjusted in this manner, it may once again produce a floodplain at a level below the old one. The remnants of a former floodplain are sometimes present as relatively flat surfaces called terraces.

he Middle Fork of the Salmon River flows for about 175 kilometers (110 miles) through a wilderness area in central Idaho. (Photo by Michael Collier) bedrock channel? Explain. deepening or valley widening? near the mouth or the head of the river?

1. Define base level and distinguish between ultimate base level and local, or temporary, base level. 2. What is a graded stream? 3. Explain why V-shaped valleys often contain rapids and/or waterfalls. 4. Describe or sketch how an erosional floodplain 5. List two situations that would trigger the formation of incised meanders.

List the major depositional landforms associated with streams and describe the formation of these features. Recall that streams continually pick up sediment in one part of their channel and deposit it downstream. These small-scale channel deposits are called bars. Such features, however, are only temporary, as the material will be picked up again and eventually carried to the ocean. In addition to sand and gravel bars, streams also create other depositional features that have somewhat longer life spans. These include deltas, natural levees, and alluvial fans.

Deltas form where sediment-charged streams reach a temporary or ultimate base level and enter the relatively still waters of a lake, an inland sea, or the ocean (Figure 16.30). As the stream’s forward motion is slowed, sediments are deposited by the dying current, producing three types of beds. Foreset beds are composed of coarse particles that drop almost immediately upon entering the water to form layers that slope downcurrent from the delta front. The foreset beds are usually covered by thin, horizontal topset beds deposited during flood stage. The finer silts and clays settle away from the mouth in nearly horizontal layers called bottomset beds. As a delta grows outward from the shoreline, the stream’s gradient continually decreases. This circumstance eventually causes the channel to become choked with sediment. As a consequence, the river seeks shorter, the main channel dividing into several smaller ones, called distributaries, that carry water away from the main channel in varying paths to base level. After numerous shifts in the main flow from one distributary to the Formation of a simple delta Structure and growth of a simple delta that forms in relatively quiet waters.

Topset beds are deposited atop the foreset beds during next, a delta may grow into the triangular shape of the Greek letter delta (∆), although several other shapes exist. Differences in the configurations of shorelines and variations in the nature and strength of wave activity are responsible for the shape and structure of each delta. Many of the world’s great rivers have created massive deltas, each with its own peculiarities and typically more large sediment load may lack a delta because ocean waves and powerful currents quickly redistribute the material soon after it is deposited. The Columbia River in the Pacific Northwest is an example. In other cases, rivers do not carry sufficient quantities of sediment to build a delta. Ontario and its mouth in the Gulf of St. Lawrence.

delta because of the configuration of its distributaries, has been built by the Mississippi River over the past 500 years. At present, this active birdfoot delta has extended seaward almost as far as natural forces will allow. In fact, for many years the river has been “struggling” to cut through a narrow neck of land 16.31). If this were to happen, the Mississippi would abandon the lowermost 500 kilometers (300 miles) of its channel in favor of the Atchafalaya’s much shorter 225-kilometer (140-mile) route to In a concerted effort to keep the Mississippi on its present course, Gulf of Mexico a dam-like structure was erected at the site where the channel was control structure, and the river again threatened to shift. construct a massive auxiliary dam that was completed in the mid-1980s. For the time being, at least, the inevitable has been avoided, and the Mississippi River continues to flow past Baton Rouge and New Orleans on its way to the Gulf of Mexico.

Formation of a natural levee These gently sloping structures that parallel a river channel are created by repeated floods. Because the ground next to the channel is higher than the adjacent floodplain, back swamps and yazoo tributaries may develop.

Geological Survey, Louisiana has lost more than 5000 square kilometers (1900 square miles) of coastal land since the early 1930s. If wetland loss continues at this rate, another 3000 square kilometers (1170 square miles) will vanish by the year 2050. Why is this occurring? River regularly overflowed its banks in seasonal floods. Huge quantities of sediment were deposited atop the delta, which kept the land elevated above sea level. However, with settlement came flood-control efforts and the Columbia. It flows through the Yukon Territory and Sea, a distance of nearly 3200 kilometers (about 2000 channels as it crosses the delta. radiate across the delta? surrounding the delta. Are these sediments more likely sand and gravel or silt and clay? Explain. and the delta expands farther into the Bering Sea, which beds of the delta will these sediments become?

desire to maintain and improve navigation on the river. Artificial levees (earthen mounds built parallel to the river) were constructed to contain the rising river during flood stage. Over time the levees were extended all the way to the mouth of the Mississippi to keep the channel open to navigation. The effects have been straightforward: The levees prevent sediment from being dispersed onto the wetlands. As a result, sediment is not added in sufficient quantities to offset compaction, subsidence, and wave erosion. Thus, the size of the delta and the extent of the wetlands are shrinking. The problem has been exacerbated by a decline in the sediment load of the Mississippi, which has decreased approximately 50 percent over is due to sediment being trapped upstream by dams on the river’s many tributaries.

Meandering rivers that occupy valleys with broad floodplains tend to build natural levees (lever = to raise) that parallel their channels on both banks. Natural levees are built by years of successive floods. When a stream overflows onto the floodplain, the water flows over the surface as a broad sheet. Because the flow velocity drops significantly, the coarser portion of the suspended load is immediately deposited adjacent to the channel. As the water spreads across the floodplain, a thin layer of fine sediment is laid down over the valley floor. This uneven distribution of material produces the gentle, almost imperceptible, slope of the natural levee The natural levees of the lower Mississippi River rise 6 meters (20 feet) above the adjacent valley floor. The area behind a levee is characteristically poorly drained for the obvious reason that water cannot flow over the levee and into the river. Marshes called back swamps often result. When a tributary stream enters a river valley that has a substantial natural levee, it often flows for many kilometers through the back swamp before finding an opening where it enters the main river. Such streams are called yazoo tributaries, after the Yazoo River, which parallels the lower Mississippi River for more than 300 kilometers (185 miles).

Alluvial fans are fan-shaped deposits that accumulate along steep mountain fronts. When a stream with a steep gradient emerges onto a relatively flat lowland, its gradient drops, and it deposits a large portion of its sediment load. Although alluvial fans are more prevalent in arid climates (see Chapter 19 for a further discussion of alluvial fans), they are occasionally found in humid regions. Mountain streams, because of their steep gradients, carry much of their sediment load as coarse sand and gravel. Because alluvial fans are composed of these same coarse materials, water that flows across them readily soaks in. When a stream emerges from its valley onto an alluvial fan, its flow divides itself into several distributary channels. The fan shape is produced because the main flow swings back and forth between the distributaries from a fixed point where the stream exits the mountain. Between rainy periods in deserts, little or no water flows across an alluvial fan, which is evident in the many dry channels that cross its surface. Thus, fans in dry regions grow intermittently, receiving considerable water and sediment only during wet periods. As you learned in Chapter 15, steep canyons in dry regions are prime locations for debris flows. Therefore, as would be expected, many alluvial fans have debris-flow deposits interbedded with the coarse alluvium.

1. Sketch a cross section of a simple delta and distinguish among the three types of beds that compose it. 2. Explain why the Mississippi delta consists of seven coalescing subdeltas. 3. Briefly describe the formation of a natural levee. How is this feature related to back swamps and yazoo tributaries? 4. Describe the formation of an alluvial fan.

and Flood Control Summarize the various categories of floods and the common measures of flood Floods are serious and costly events that are among the most universally experienced natural hazards. Floods are part of the natural behavior of a stream and occur when the flow of a stream becomes so great that it exceeds the capacity of its channel and overflows its banks. Although floods are natural phenomena, the magnitude and frequency of flooding is often significantly influenced by human activities such as clearing forests, building cities, and constructing flood control structures such as dams and levees. The occurrence of floods is often linked to other natural hazards, including severe storms and mass-wasting processes such as debris flows.

Most floods are caused by atmospheric processes that can vary greatly in both time and space. An hour or less of intense thunderstorm rainfall can trigger flash floods in small valleys. By contrast, major floods in large river valleys often result from an extraordinary series of precipitation events over a broad region for many days or weeks. Common flood types include regional floods, flash floods, ice-jam floods, and dam-failure floods.

In April 2011, unrelenting storms brought record rains to the Mississippi watershed. The Ohio Valley, which makes up the eastern portion of the Mississippi’s drainage basin, received nearly 300 percent of its normal springtime precipitation. When that rainfall combined with water from the past winter’s large and extensive, rapidly melting snowpack, the Mississippi River and many of its tributaries began to swell to record levels by early May. The resulting floods were among the largest and most damaging in nearly a century. Like most other regional floods, these were associated with weather phenomena that could be forecast with a good deal of accuracy. This allowed adequate time to warn and evacuate thousands of people who were in harm’s way. Although economic losses approached $4 billion, loss of life was small.

Frozen rivers are especially susceptible to ice-jam floods. As the level of a stream rises, it breaks up ice and creates ice floes that can accumulate on channel obstructions. Jams of this nature create temporary ice dams across the channel. Water trapped upstream can rise rapidly and overflow the channel banks. When an ice dam fails, water behind the dam is often released with sufficient force to inflict considerable damage downstream. These floods are often associated with northwardflowing rivers in the Northern Hemisphere. The Red areas are especially susceptible because steep slopes can funnel runoff into narrow valleys with disastrous August 2011, when heavy rains from the remnants of Hurricane Irene swamped parts of the Northeast. The hilly and mountainous terrain of upstate New York and Vermont were hit especially hard. Flash floods washed out dozens of roads and bridges, isolating numerous small towns and rural areas. Urban areas are also susceptible to flash floods because a high percentage of the surface area is composed of impervious roofs, streets, and parking lots, where infiltration is minimal and runoff is rapid.

Northward-flowing Siberian rivers Ice-jam floods are relatively common in late spring and early summer in Siberia because its large rivers flow north into the Arctic Ocean.

River of the North mentioned earlier is an example. The Siberian region of Russia has several northwardflowing rivers, such as the Ob, Lena, and Yenisei, that frequently experience these floods. When spring arrives, ice melts in the warmer southern portions of a river and its drainage basin, while farther north the river remains frozen. Water flowing from the south “backs up” behind the frozen northern portion of the river.

In late August 2011, the Irene brought torrential rains that caused recordbreaking flash floods in Vermont and parts of upstate New York.

Floods Human interference with stream systems example is the failure of a dam or an artificial levee designed to contain small or moderate floods. When larger floods occur, the dam or levee may fail, resulting in the water behind it being released as a flash flood. The bursting of a dam in 1889 on the Little Conemaugh River caused the devastating Johnstown, Pennsylvania, flood that took more than 2200 lives.

Land-use planning in river basins requires an understanding of the frequency and magnitude of floods. For every river, a relationship exists between the size of a flood and the frequency with which it occurs. The larger the flood, the less often it is expected to occur. You may have heard the term 100-year flood. This describes the recurrence interval, which is an estimate of how often a event would be much smaller but would be four times more likely to occur than a 100-year flood. The phrase “100-year flood” does not mean that 100 years must pass between each flood of equal or greater magnitude. Floods happen irregularly! Rather, it means that there is a 1 percent (1 in 100) probability in a given year for a flood of that size. It is possible that a 100-year flood could occur 2 or 3 years in a row. It is also possible that such a flood might not occur over a span exceeding 100 years. In order to make a reasonable calculation, stream gage data must be collected for at least 10 to 30 years. The longer the record, the better the prediction will likely be. Other factors also influence the accuracy of flood recurrence estimates. Climate cycles that involve extensive drought or rainy periods are an example. Landuse changes, such as when adjacent rural areas become urbanized, typically require reevaluation of flood recurrence intervals.

Several strategies have been devised to eliminate or reduce the catastrophic impact of floods on our lives and environment. Engineering efforts include the construction of artificial levees, river channelization, and the building of flood-control dams.

Channelization involves altering a stream channel in order to make the flow more efficient. This may simply involve clearing a channel of obstructions or dredging a channel (removing sediment from the channel bed) to make it wider and deeper. Another alteration involves straightening, and thus shortening, a channel by creating artificial cutoffs. Shortening a stream increases the channel’s flow velocity. Engineers removed 16 meander bends on the lower Mississippi for the purpose of increasing the slope of the channel and thereby reducing the threat of flooding. This river, a vital transportation corridor, was shortened about 240 kilometers (150 miles). These efforts have been somewhat successful in reducing the maximum height of the river during flood stage. However, channel shortening led to increased gradients and accelerated erosion of bank material, both of which necessitated further intervention. Following the creation of artificial cutoffs, massive bank protection was installed along several stretches of the lower Mississippi. bank erosion occurred on the Blackwater River in Missouri, whose meandering course was shortened in 1910. Among the many effects of this project was a significant increase in the channel’s width due to increased velocity. One particular bridge over the river collapsed in 1930 because of bank erosion. During the following 17 years, the bridge was replaced three times, each time requiring a longer span.

Flood-control dams are built to store floodwater and then release it slowly, in a controlled manner. Since the 1920s, thousands of dams have been Many dams have significant non-flood-related functions, such as providing water for irrigated agriculture and for hydroelectric power generation. Many reservoirs are also major regional recreational facilities. Although dams are effective in reducing flooding and provide other benefits, their construction and maintenance also have significant costs and consequences. For example, reservoirs created by dams may cover valuable farmland, forests, historic sites, and scenic valleys. Large dams can also cause significant damage to river ecosystems that have developed over thousands of years. Furthermore, building dams is not a permanent solution to flooding. Sedimentation behind a dam gradually diminishes the volume of its reservoir, reducing the longterm effectiveness of this flood-control measure.

measures described so far employ structural solutions to “control” rivers. These solutions are typically expensive and often give those who reside on the floodplain a false sense of security. Many scientists and engineers advocate a nonstructural approach to flood control. They suggest that sound floodplain management, such as limiting certain activities or land uses, is an alternative to artificial levees, dams, and channelization. In high-risk flood areas, appropriate zoning regulations can be implemented to minimize development and promote safer, more appropriate land use.

1. List and distinguish among four types of floods. 2. Describe three basic flood-control strategies. What are some drawbacks of each? 3. What is meant by a nonstructural approach to flood control?

States. In some places, groundwater is being withdrawn much more rapidly than it is being replenished. (Photo by Debra idden from view, vast quantities of water exist in the cracks, crevices, and pore spaces of rock and soil. Groundwater can be found almost everywhere beneath Earth’s surface and is a major source of water worldwide. Groundwater is a valuable natural resource that provides about half of our drinking water and is essential to the vitality of agriculture and industry. In addition to its utility, groundwater plays a crucial role in sustaining streamflow between precipitation events—especially during protracted dry periods. Many ecosystems depend on groundwater discharge into streams, lakes, and wetlands. In some regions, large-scale development has caused groundwater levels to decline, resulting in water shortages, streamflow depletion, land subsidence, and increased pumping costs. Groundwater pollution is also a serious issue in some places.

Soil moisture; Water vapor in When we consider the entire hydrosphere, or all of Earth’s water, only about six-tenths of 1 percent is located underground. Nevertheless, this small percentage, stored in the rocks and sediments beneath Earth’s surface, is a vast quantity. When the oceans are excluded and only sources of freshwater are considered, the significance of groundwater becomes more apparent. freshwater in the hydrosphere. Clearly the largest volume occurs as glacial ice. Groundwater is ranked second, with slightly more than 30 percent of the total. However, when ice is excluded and just liquid water is considered, 96 percent of all freshwater is groundwater. Without question, groundwater represents the largest reservoir of freshwater that is readily available to humans. Its value in terms of economics and human well-being is incalculable.

New Mexico The dissolving action of acidic groundwater created these caverns. Later, groundwater deposited the limestone decorations. (Photo by Clint Farlinger) streamflow. Much of the water that flows in rivers is not direct runoff from rain and snowmelt. Rather, a large percentage of precipitation soaks into the ground and then moves slowly under the surface to stream channels. Groundwater is thus a form of storage that sustains streams during periods when rain does not fall. Therefore, when we see water flowing in a river during a dry period, it is rain that fell at some earlier time and was stored underground.

states, where annual precipitation is typically less than 20 inches. About 42 percent of the water used for irrigation is groundwater. Public and domestic uses include water for indoor and outdoor household purposes as well as water used for commercial purposes. Common indoor uses include drinking, cooking, bathing, washing clothes and dishes, and flushing toilets. If you are curious about how much water an average American uses each day for indoor are watering lawns and gardens. Water for domestic use may come from a public supply or may be self-supplied.* Practically all (98 percent) those whose water is selfsupplied rely on groundwater.

Sources and uses of freshwater Each day in the United States, we use 345 billion gallons of freshwater. Groundwater is the source of nearly one-quarter of the total. More groundwater is used for irrigation than for all other uses combined.

How we use water Water Works Association, daily indoor per capita use in an average single-family home is 69.3 gallons. By installing more efficient water fixtures and regularly checking for leaks, households could reduce this figure by about one-third.

Another category, aquaculture, involves water used 20 for fish hatcheries, fish farms, and shellfish farms. Many mining operations require significant quantities of water, as do industrial processes such as petroleum refining and the manufacture of chemicals, plastics, paper, steel, and 1. What percentage of Earth’s total freshwater supply is groundwater?

2. What share of Earth’s liquid freshwater is 3. List two geologic roles that groundwater plays. Prepare a sketch with labels that summarizes the distribution of water beneath Earth’s surface. Discuss the factors that cause variations in the water table and describe the interactions between groundwater and streams.

When rain falls on Earth’s land surface, some of the water runs off, some returns to the atmosphere by evaporation and transpiration, and the remainder soaks into the ground. This last path is the primary source of practically all subsurface water. The amount of water that takes each of these paths varies greatly both in time and space. Influential factors include steepness of slope, nature of the surface material, intensity of rainfall, and type and amount of vegetation. For example, heavy rains falling on steep slopes underlain by impervious materials will obviously result in a high percentage of the water running off. Conversely, rain falling steadily and gently on more gradual slopes composed of materials that are easily penetrated by the water means that a much larger percentage of water soaks into the ground.

Some of the water that soaks in does not travel far because it is held by molecular attraction as a surface film on soil particles. This near-surface zone is called the zone of soil moisture. It is crisscrossed by roots, voids left by decayed roots, and animal and worm burrows that enhance the infiltration of rainwater into the soil. Soil water is used by plants in life functions and transpiration. Some water also evaporates directly back into the Water that is not held as soil moisture percolates downward until it reaches a zone where all the open spaces in sediment and rock are completely filled with water. This is the zone of saturation (also called the phreatic zone). Water in the zone of saturation is called groundwater. The upper limit of this zone is known as the water table. Extending upward from the water table is the capillary fringe (capillus = hair).

Here groundwater is held by surface tension in tiny passages between grains of soil or sediment. The area above the water table that includes the capillary fringe and the zone of soil moisture is called the unsaturated zone (also known as the vadose zone). The pore spaces in this zone contain both air and water. Although a considerable amount of water can be present in the unsaturated zone, this water cannot be pumped by wells because it clings too tightly to rock and soil particles. By contrast, below the water table, the water pressure is great enough to allow water to enter wells, thus permitting groundwater to be withdrawn for use. We will examine wells more closely later in the chapter.

The steady drop in water level from late May to November is the result of water discharging from the aquifer to feed April 13–14 springs and streams but not 1.6 in. of rain being replaced by recharge.

Depth to water level, feet below land surface conjunction with state agencies maintains an extensive network of about 20,000 observation wells. This map shows the network of wells in Missouri.

Groundwater recharge and discharge at the Akers observation well in Shannon County, Missouri. The height of the water table in this well and many others in this region shows a steady decline between spring and fall. This occurs because recharge is low during these months. However, water continues to move through the aquifer to supply springs and streams in the area maintaining their flow even in dry years.

Mapping the water table The water table coincides with the water level in observation wells. (Based on subside and gradually approach the level of the valleys. However, new supplies of rainwater are usually added frequently enough to prevent this. Nevertheless, in times of extended drought, the water table may drop enough to the uneven water table are variations in precipitation and surface permeability from place to place.

Step 1 The locations of observation wells and the elevations of the water table above sea level are plotted on the map.

Step 2 Data points are used to guide the drawing of water-table contour lines. Groundwater flow lines can be added to show water movement in the upper portion of the zone of saturation. Groundwater moves perpendicular to the contours and down the slope of the water table.

through the streambed. The term losing stream is happens, the elevation of the water table must be lower than the surface of the stream. The third possibility is sections and loses in others. Losing streams can be connected to the groundwater system by a continuous saturated zone, or they can be disconnected from the groundwater system by an When the stream is disconnected, the water table may have a discernible bulge beneath the stream if the rate of water movement through the streambed and unsaturated zone is greater than the rate of groundwater movement away from the bulge. In some settings, a stream might always be a gaining stream or might always be a losing stream. However, in many situations, flow direction can vary a great deal along a stream; some sections receive groundwater, and other sections lose water to the groundwater system. Moreover, the direction of flow can change over a short time span due to storms adding water near the stream bank or when temporary flood peaks move down the separated from the groundwater system by the unsaturated zone, a bulge may form in the water table.

arshes are characterized by saturated, poorly drained soils. This wetland is located southwest of Fort McMurray, Alberta, Canada. (Photo by this image. marsh to disappear. Include one natural cause and one cause related to human activities.

Groundwater contributes to streams in most geologic and climatic settings. Even where streams are primarily losing water to the groundwater system, certain sections may receive groundwater inflow during some seasons. One study of 54 streams in all parts of the United States indicated that 52 percent of the streamflow was contributed by groundwater. The groundwater contribution ranged from a low of 14 percent to a maximum of 90 percent. Groundwater is also a major source of water for lakes and wetlands.

1. When rain falls on land, what factors influence the amount of water that soaks in? 2. Define groundwater and relate it to the water table. water table? Why? 4. Contrast a gaining stream and a losing stream.

Porosity demonstration Porosity is the percentage of the total volume of rock or sediment that consists of pore spaces.

The sediment-filled beaker now contains (1) the portion that will perco500 ml of water. Pore spaces (porosity) late downward under the influmust represent 50 percent of the volume ence of gravity (called specific of the sediment.

in sedimentary rocks, the amount of cementing material. For example, clay may have a porosity as high as 50 percent, whereas some gravels may have only 20 percent voids. Where sediments are poorly sorted, the porosity is reduced because the finer particles tend to fill the openings among the larger grains. Most igneous and metamorphic rocks, as well as some sedimentary rocks, are composed of tightly interlocking crystals such that the voids between the grains may be negligible. In these rocks, fractures must provide the porosity.

Porosity alone cannot measure a material’s capacity to yield groundwater. Rock or sediment may be very porous yet still not allow water to move through it. The pores must be connected to allow water flow, and they must be large enough to allow flow. Thus, the permeability (permeare = to penetrate) of a material—its ability to transmit a fluid—is also very important. Groundwater moves by twisting and turning through small interconnected openings. The smaller the pore spaces, the more slowly the water moves. This idea is clearly illustrated by examining the wateryielding potential of different materials in Table 17.1. Here groundwater is divided into two categories: yield) and (2) the part that is retained as a film on par1000 ml ticle and rock surfaces and in tiny openings (called specific retention). Specific yield indi500 ml cates how much water is actually available for use, whereas specific retention indicates how much water remains bound in the material. For example, the ability of a clay deposit to store water may be great, due to high porosity, but its pore spaces are so small that water is unable to move through it. Thus, the clay’s porosity is high but because its permeability is poor, it has a very low specific yield. Impermeable layers that hinder or prevent water movement are termed aquitards (aqua = water, tard = slow). Clay is a good example. On the other hand, larger particles, such as sand or gravel, have larger pore spaces. Therefore, the water moves through with relative ease. Permeable rock strata or sediment that transmit groundwater freely are called aquifers (aqua = water, fer = carry). Sands and gravels are common In summary, porosity is not always a reliable guide to the amount of surface water that can be stored as groundwater, and permeability is significant in determining the rate of groundwater movement and the quantity of water that might be pumped from a well.

1. Distinguish between porosity and permeability. 2. What is the difference between an aquifer and an Sketch and describe a simple groundwater flow system. Discuss how groundwater movement is measured and the different scales of movement.

The movement of water in the atmosphere and on the land surface is relatively easy to visualize, but the movement of groundwater is not. Near the beginning of the chapter, we mentioned the common misconception that groundwater occurs in underground rivers that resemble surface streams. Although subsurface streams do exist, they are not common. Rather, as you learned in the preceding sections, groundwater exists in the pore spaces and fractures in rock and sediment. Thus, contrary to any impressions of rapid flow that an underground river might evoke, the movement of most groundwater is exceedingly slow, from pore to pore.

flow system—a three-dimensional body of Earth material saturated with moving groundwater. It shows groundwater moving along flow paths from recharge areas, where groundwater is being replenished, to a discharge area along a stream where groundwater is flowing back to the surface. Discharge also occurs at springs, lakes, or wetlands, and in coastal areas, as groundwater seeps into bays or the ocean. Transpiration by plants whose roots extend to near the water table is another form of groundwater discharge. Wells, where groundwater is being pumped to the surface, are artificial discharge areas.

Groundwater movement Arrows show paths of groundwater movement through uniformly permeable material.

The looping flow lines result from the downward pull of gravity and the tendency of groundwater to move toward areas of reduced pressure.

Hydraulic gradient The hydraulic gradient is determined by measuring the difference in elevation between two points on the water table (h1 2 h2) divided by the distance between them, d. Wells are used to determine the height of the water table.

h1 – h2 Hydraulic gradient = tendency of water to move toward areas of reduced pressure. As a result, water at any given height is under greater pressure beneath a hill than beneath a stream channel, and the water tends to migrate toward points of lower pressure.

The foundations of our modern understanding of groundwater movement began in the mid-nineteenth century with the work of the French scientist-engineer Hypothetical groundwater flow system The diagram includes subsystems at three different scales. Variations in surface topography and subsurface geology can produce a complex situation. The horizontal scale of the figure could range from tens to hundreds of kilometers.

Henri Darcy. One of the experiments Darcy carried out showed that the velocity of groundwater flow is proportional to the slope of the water table: The steeper the slope, the faster the water moves (because the steeper the slope, the greater the pressure difference between two points). The water table slope is known as the hydraulic gradient and can be expressed as follows: hydraulic gradient 5 h12h2 where h1 is the elevation of one point on the water table, h2 is the elevation of a second point, and d is the horizontal distance between the two points. Darcy also experimented with different materials, such as coarse sand and fine sand, by measuring the rate of flow through sediment-filled tubes that were tilted at varying angles. He found that flow velocity varied with the permeability of the sediment: Groundwater flows more rapidly through sediments having greater permeability than through materials having lower permeability. This factor is known as hydraulic conductivity and is a coefficient that takes into account the permeability of the aquifer and the viscosity of the fluid. To determine discharge (Q)—that is, the actual volume of water that flows through an aquifer in a specified time—the following equation is used: where d cross-sectional area of the aquifer. This expression has come to be called Darcy’s law, in honor of the pioneering French scientist-engineer. Using this equation, if you know an aquifer’s hydraulic gradient, conductivity, and cross-sectional area, you can calculate its discharge.

Different Scales of The geographic extent of groundwater flow systems varies from a few square kilometers or less to tens of thousands of square kilometers. The length of flow paths ranges from a few meters to tens and sometimes hundreds cross section of a hypothetical region in which a deep groundwater flow system is overlain by and connected to several, more shallow local flow systems. The subsurface geology exhibits a complicated arrangement he drainage basin of the Republican River occupies portions of Colorado, Nebraska, considered semiarid. In 1943, the three states made a legal agreement regarding sharing the river’s water. In 1998, Kansas went to court to force farmers in southern Nebraska to substantially reduce the amount of groundwater used for irrigation. Nebraska officials claimed that the farmers were not taking water from the Republican River and thus were not violating the 1943 agreement. The court ruled in favor of Kansas.

groundwater in southern Nebraska should be considered part of the Republican River system. basin influence the flow of a river?

of high-hydraulic-conductivity aquifer units and lowhydraulic-conductivity aquitard units. represent water movement in several local groundwater systems that occur in the upper water table aquifer. The groundwater systems are separated by groundwater divides at the center of the hills, and they discharge into the nearest surface water body. Beneath these most shallow systems, red arrows show water movement in a somewhat deeper system in which groundwater does not discharge into the nearest surface water body but into a more distant one. Finally, the black arrows show groundwater movement in a deep regional system that lies beneath the more shallow ones and is connected to them.

Discuss water wells and their relationship to the water table. Sketch and label a simple artesian system. According to the National Groundwater Association, there are more than 16 million water wells for all purposes in the United States. Private household wells constitute the largest share—more than 13 million. About 500,000 new residential wells are drilled each year.

Cone of depression For most small domestic wells, the cone of depression is negligible. When wells are heavily pumped, the cone of depression can be large and may lower the water table such that nearby shallower wells may be left dry.

from a well, the water table around the well may be lowered. This effect, termed drawdown, decreases with increasing distance from the well. The result is a depression in the water table, roughly conical in shape, known as a cone of depression. Because the cone of depression increases the hydraulic gradient near the well, groundwater will flow more rapidly toward the opening. For most small domestic wells, the cone of depression is negligible. However, when wells are heavily pumped for irrigation or for industrial purposes, the withdrawal of water can be great enough to create a very wide and steep cone of depression. This may substantially lower the water table in an area and cause nearby shallow wells to Digging a successful well is a familiar challenge for people in areas where groundwater is the primary source of supply. One well may be successful at a depth of 10 meters (33 feet), whereas a neighbor may have to go twice as deep to find an adequate supply. Still others may be forced to go deeper or try a different site altogether. When subsurface materials are heterogeneous, the amount of water that a well can provide may vary a great deal over short distances. For example, when two nearby wells are drilled to the same level and only one is successful, it may be because there is a perched water table beneath one forms where an aquitard is situated above the main water table. Massive igneous and metamorphic rocks provide a second example. These crystalline rocks are usually not very permeable, except where they are cut by many intersecting joints and fractures. Therefore, when a well drilled into such rock does not intersect an adequate network of fractures, it is likely to be unproductive.

Perched water table Artesian systems These groundwater systems occur where an inclined aquifer is surrounded by impermeable beds (aquitards). Such aquifers are called confined aquifers. The photo shows a flowing artesian well.

This well was unsuccessful because it missed the perched water table and was not deep enough to reach the main water table.

and gradually dips into the ground toward the east. When the aquifer was first tapped, water poured from the ground surface, creating fountains many meters high. In some places the force of the water was sufficient Area of flowing artesian wells to power waterwheels. Such scenes no longer u l stl lC eS occur because thousands ree nds h ale n e of additional wells now tap g La is o the same aquifer. This has depleted the reservoir and lowered the water table in 100 Miles the recharge area. As a con0 100 Kilometers sequence, the pressure has dropped to the point where South Dakota is a good many wells have stopped flowing altogether and now have to be pumped. example of this (Figure On a different scale, city water systems can be 17.18). In the western considered examples of artificial artesian systems part of the state, the . The water tower, into which water is edges of a series of pumped, would represent the area of recharge, the sedimentary layers have been bent up to the surface along the flanks of the pipes the confined aquifer, and the faucets in homes the flowing artesian wells. Sandstone, is sandwiched between impermeable strata system This geologic Dakota shows the major Sandstone artesian system.

City water systems City water systems can be considered artificial artesian systems.

1. Define drawdown and relate this to cone of Pressure surface (level to which water will rise) depth. Why was one successful and the other not? 3. Sketch a simple cross section of an artesian system with a flowing well. Label aquitards, aquifers, and the pressure surface.

Pressure moves water through pipe In 1900, when this well was drilled near Woonsocket in eastern South Dakota, a “gusher” of water resulted. The stream of water from a 3-inch pipe reached a height of nearly 30 meters (100 feet). Thousands of additional situation that was responsible for this fountain of water. freely at the surface but must be pumped. Suggest a likely reason.

Distinguish among springs, hot springs, and geysers. The phenomena described in this section often arouse people’s curiosity and wonder. The fact that springs, hot springs, and geysers seem rather mysterious is not difficult to understand, for here is water (sometimes very hot water) flowing or spewing from the ground in all kinds of weather, in seemingly inexhaustible supply, but with no obvious source.

Not until the middle of the seventeenth century did the French physicist Pierre Perrault invalidate the age-old assumption that precipitation could not adequately account for the amount of water emanating from springs and flowing in rivers. Over several years, Perrault computed the quantity of water that fell on France’s Seine River basin. He then calculated the mean annual runoff by measuring the river’s discharge. After allowing for the loss of water by evaporation, he showed that there was sufficient water remaining to feed the springs. Thanks to Perrault’s pioneering efforts and the measurements by many afterward, we now know that the source of springs is water from the zone of saturation and that the ultimate source of this water is precipitation. Whenever the water table intersects Earth’s surface, a natural outflow of groundwater results, and we call this a spring. Springs often form when an aquitard blocks the downward movement of groundwater and causes the water to move laterally. Where the permeable bed crops out, a 17.16, which shows a perched water table intersecting a Springs, however, are not confined to places where a perched water table creates a flow at the surface. Many geologic situations lead to the formation of springs because subsurface conditions vary greatly from place to place. Even in areas underlain by impermeable crystalline rocks, permeable zones may exist in the form of fractures or solution channels. If these openings fill with water and intersect the ground surface along a slope, a spring results.

Distribution of hot springs and geysers Note the concentration in the West, where igneous activity has been most recent.

Geysers are intermittent hot springs or fountains in which columns of water are ejected with great force at various intervals, often rising 30 to 60 meters (100 to 200 feet) into the air. After the jet of water ceases, a column of steam rushes out, usually with a thunderous roar. Perhaps the most famous geyser in the world is Old Faithful in Yellowstone National Park. The great abundance, diversity, and spectacular nature of geysers and other thermal features in Yellowstone undoubtedly was the primary reason for its becoming the first national park in the United States. Geysers are also found in other parts of the world, notably New Zealand and Iceland. In fact, the Icelandic word geysa, meaning “to gush,” gives us the name geyser.

How Geysers Work Geysers occur where extensive underground chambers exist within hot igneous rocks. cool groundwater enters these chambers, it is heated by the surrounding rock. At the bottom of the chambers, the water is under great pressure because of the weight of the overlying water. This great pressure prevents the water from boiling at the normal surface at the bottom of a 300-meter (1000-foot) water-filled will boil. The heating causes the water to expand, and as a result, some is forced out at the surface. This loss of water reduces the pressure on the remaining water turns to steam, and the geyser erupts. Following eruption, cool groundwater again seeps into the chamber, and the cycle begins anew.

Geyser Deposits When groundwater from hot springs and geysers flows out at the surface, material in solution is often precipitated, producing an accumulation of chemical sedimentary rock. The material deposited at any given place commonly reflects the chemical makeup of the rock through which the water circulated. When the water contains dissolved silica, a material called siliceous sinter, or geyserite, is deposited around the spring. When the water contains dissolved calcium carbonate, a form of limestone called travertine, or calcareous tufa, is deposited. The latter term is used if the material is spongy and porous. Springs in Yellowstone National Park are more spectacular than most others. As the hot water flows upward through a series of channels and then out at the surface, The boiling point is higher at the bottom because pressure is high due to the weight of all the water above.

Some of the bottom water flashes into steam. The expanding steam triggers an eruption. Then the water flows back in and the whole process begins anew.

geyser can form if the underground plumbing does not allow heat to be readily distributed by convection. (https://goo.gl/qzYxyy) expands causing some to flow out at the top. This outflow reduces the pressure on the water at the bottom.

springs contain sulfur, which gives water a poor taste and Egg Spring, Nevada. 1. Describe some circumstances that lead to the formation of a spring.

the reduced pressure allows carbon dioxide to separate and escape from the water. The loss of carbon dioxide causes the water to become supersaturated with calcium carbonate, which then precipitates. In addition to containing dissolved silica and calcium carbonate, some hot National Park, Arkansas, and at Warm Springs, 3. What is the source of heat for most hot springs and geysers? How is this reflected in the distribution of these features? 4. Describe what occurs to cause a geyser to erupt.

Like many of our other valuable natural resources, groundwater is being exploited at an increasing rate. In some areas, overuse threatens the groundwater supply. In other places, groundwater withdrawal has caused the ground and everything resting on it to sink. Still other localities are concerned with possible contamination of the groundwater supply. Many natural systems tend to establish a condition of equilibrium. The groundwater system is no exception. The water table’s height reflects a balance between the rate of recharge and the rate of discharge and withdrawal. Any imbalance will either raise or lower the water table. Long-term imbalances can lead to a significant drop in the water table if there is either a decrease in recharge due to prolonged drought or an increase in groundwater discharge or withdrawal (see GEOgraphics 17.1). Because of its high porosity, excellent permeability, and States, accumulated enough freshwater to fill Lake Huron.

Many believe that groundwater is an endlessly renewable resource because it is continually replenished by rainfall and melting snow. But in some regions, groundwater has been and continues to be treated as a nonrenewable resource. Where this occurs, the water available to recharge the aquifer falls significantly short of the amount being withdrawn. The High Plains aquifer provides one example . Underlying about 111 million acres (450,000 square kilometers [174,000 square miles]) in parts of eight western states, it is one of the largest and States. It accounts for about 30 percent of all groundwater withdrawn for irrigation in the country. Mean annual precipitation on the High Plains is modest—ranging from about 40 centimeters (16 inches) in western portions to about 71 centimeters (28 inches) in eastern parts. Evaporation rates, on the other hand, are high— ranging from about 150 centimeters (60 inches) in the cooler northern parts of the region to 265 centimeters (105 inches) in the warmer southern parts. Because evaporation rates are high relative to precipitation, there is little rainwater to recharge the aquifer. Thus, in some parts of the region where intense irrigation has been practiced for an extended period, groundwater depletion Geological Survey estimates that since 1950, water storage in the High Plains aquifer has declined about 267 million acre feet (about 87 trillion gallons), with 60 percent of the total decline having occurred in Texas.

As you will see later in this chapter, surface subsidence can result from natural processes related to groundwater. However, the ground may also sink ral recharge processes can replace it. This effect is particularly pronounced in areas underlain by thick layers of unconsolidated sediments. As the water is withdrawn, the water pressure drops, and the weight of the overburden is transferred to the 100 miles sediment. The greater pressure packs the sediment 0 50 100 kilometers grains tightly together, and the ground subsides. Many areas illustrate land subsidence caused by years, water in storage in the High Plains aquifer declined by about excessive pumping of groundwater from relatively 267 million acre feet (about 87 trillion gallons) with 60 percent of the total decline occurring in Texas.

In many coastal areas, the groundwater resource is being threatened by the encroachLevel of land ment of saltwater. To understand this problem, after 52 years let us examine the relationship between fresh of heavy 17.29 shows a cross section that illustrates this relationship in a coastal area underlain the San Joaquin Valley of California, where subsidence by permeable homogeneous materials. Freshwater is approached 9 meters (30 feet) in some areas. less dense than saltwater, so it floats on the saltwater Many other cases of land subsidence due to groundwater and forms a large lens-shaped body that may extend to pumping exist in the United States, including in portions considerable depths below sea level. In such a situation, if the water table is 1 meter (3 feet) above sea level, the base of the freshwater body will extend to a depth of about 40 meters (130 feet) below sea level. Stated another way, the depth of the freshwater below sea level is about 40 times greater than the elevation of the water table above sea level. Thus, when excessive pumping lowers the water table by a certain amount, the bottom of the freshwater zone will rise by 40 times that amount. Therefore, if groundwater withdrawal continues to exceed recharge, at some point, the elevation of the saltwater will be sufficiently high that the saltwater will be drawn into wells, thus contaminating the freshwater supply. This is called saltwater intrusion or saltwater contamination. Deep wells and wells near the shore are usually the first to be affected. In urbanized coastal areas, the problems created by excessive pumping are compounded by a decrease in the rate of natural recharge. As more and more of the surface is covered by streets, parking lots, and buildings, surface runoff increases and infiltration into the soil is If excessive pumping lowers the water table, the base of the freshwater zone will rise 40 times that amount. The result may be saltwater contamination of wells.

Because freshwater is less dense than saltwater, it floats on the saltwater and forms a lens-shaped body that may extend to considerable depths below sea level.

The pollution of groundwater is a serious matter, particularly in areas where aquifers provide a large part of the water supply. One common source of groundwater pollution is sewage. Its sources include an ever-increasing number of septic tanks, as well as inadequate or broken sewer systems and farm wastes. If sewage water that is contaminated with bacteria enters the groundwater system, it may become purified through natural processes. The harmful bacteria may be mechanically filtered by the sediment through which the water percolates, destroyed by chemical oxidation, and/or assimilated by other organisms. For purification to occur, however, the aquifer must be of the correct composition. For example, extremely permeable aquifers (such as highly fractured crystalline rock, coarse gravel, or cavernous limestone) have such large openings that contaminated groundwater may travel long distances without being filtered and cleansed. In this case, the water flows too rapidly and is not in contact with the surrounding system is connected to the recharge basin. Following rains, water collects in the basin and slowly infiltrates to the water table.

Infiltration through unsaturated zone Comparing two aquifers In this example, the limestone aquifer allowed the contamination to reach a well, but the sandstone aquifer did not.

Changing direction Drawdown at the heavily pumped well changed the slope of the water table, which led to the contamination of the small well.

Although the contaminated water has traveled more than 100 meters slope may even be reversed. This could lead to the conbefore reaching Well 1, the water moves too rapidly through the tamination of wells that yielded unpolluted water cavernous limestone to be purified.

before heavy pumping began. Also recall that the rate of groundwater movement increases as the slope of the water table gets steeper. This could Septic produce problems because a faster rate of movement allows less time Well 1 delivering contaminated water for the water to be purified in the aquifer before it is pumped to the Other sources and types of also threaten groundtable Time: Days or we water supplies. These include widely used substances such as highway salt, fertilizers that are spread across the land surface, and As the discharge from the septic tank percolates through the pesticides. In addition, a wide array of chemipermeable sandstone, it moves more slowly and is purified in cals and industrial materials may leak a relatively short distance. from pipelines, storage tanks, landfills, and holding ponds. Some of these pollutants are classified as hazardous, meaning that they are either flammable, corrosive, explosive, or toxic. Well 2 delivering clean water In landfills, potential contaminants are heaped onto mounds or spread directly over the ground. As rainwater through the refuse, it Time: Months may dissolve a variety of organic and inorganic materials. If the leached material reaches the material long enough for purification to occur. This is the water table, it will mix with the groundwater and contaminate the supply. Similar problems may result from leakage of shallow excavations called holding ponds into which a On the other hand, when the aquifer is composed of variety of liquid wastes are disposed. sand or permeable sandstone, it can sometimes be puriBecause groundwater movement is usually slow, fied after traveling only a few dozen meters through it. The openings between sand grains are large enough to fact, contamination is sometimes discovered only permit water movement, yet the movement of the water after drinking water has been affected and people is slow enough to allow ample time for its purification become ill. By this time, the volume of polluted water may be very large, and even if the source of contamiSometimes sinking a well can lead to groundwater nation is removed immediately, the problem is not pollution problems. If the well pumps a sufficient quantity solved. Although the sources of groundwater contamiof water, the cone of depression will locally increase the nation are numerous, there are relatively few solutions. slope of the water table. In some instances, the original Originally the outflow from the septic tank moved away from the small well.

The heavily pumped well changed the slope of the water table, causing contaminated groundwater to flow toward the small well.

Once the source of the problem has been identified and eliminated, the most common practice is simply to abandon the water supply and allow the pollutants to be flushed away gradually. This is the least costly and easiest solution, but the aquifer must remain unused for many years. To accelerate this process, polluted water is sometimes pumped out and treated. Following removal of the tainted water, the aquifer is allowed to recharge naturally, or in some cases the treated water or other freshwater is pumped back in. This process is costly, time-consuming, and may be risky because there is no way to be certain that all of the contamination has been removed. Clearly, the most effective solution to groundwater contamination is prevention.

1. Describe the problem associated with pumping groundwater for irrigation in the southern High 2. Explain why ground may subside after groundwater is pumped to the surface. 3. Which aquifer would be most effective in purifying polluted groundwater: coarse gravel, sand, or cavernous limestone? 4. Describe a significant problem that may arise when groundwater is heavily pumped at a coastal site.

Explain the formation of caverns and the development of karst topography. Groundwater dissolves rock. This fact is key to understanding how caverns and sinkholes form . Soluble rocks, especially limestone, underlie millions of square kilometers of Earth’s surface, and it is in these rocks that groundwater carries on its important role as an erosional agent. Limestone is nearly insoluble in pure water but is quite easily dissolved by water containing small quantities of carbonic acid, and most groundwater contains this acid. It forms because rainwater readily dissolves carbon dioxide from the air and from decaying plants. When groundwater comes in contact Kentucky’s Mammoth Cave with limestone, the carbonic acid area Portions of Kentucky are underlain by limestone. reacts with the calcite (calcium carDissolution by groundwater has bonate) in the rocks to form calcium created a landscape characterbicarbonate, a soluble material that is ized by caves and sinkholes. (Photo by Michael Collier) then carried away in solution.

Cave decorations Speleothems are of many types, including stalactites, stalagmites, and columns. live soda-straw stalactite Stalagmites and stalactites Caverns National Park. (Photo by Deposit Photos/Glow small, some have spectacular dimensions. Caverns in southeastern New Mexico are famous examples. The Mammoth Cave system is the most extensive in the world, with more Caverns are impressive in a different way. Here we find the Big Room at Carlsbad Caverns has an area equivalent to 14 Capitol building.

Cavern Development Most caverns are created at or just below the water table, in the zone of saturation. Here acidic groundwater follows lines of weakness in the rock, such as joints and bedding planes. As time passes, the dissolving process slowly creates cavities and gradually enlarges them into caverns. Material that is dissolved by the groundwater is eventually discharged into streams and carried to the ocean. In many cases, cavern development has occurred at several levels, with the current cavern-forming activity occurring at the lowest elevation. This situation reflects the close relationship between the formation of major subterranean passages and the river valleys into which they drain. As streams cut their valleys deeper, the water table drops as the elevation of the river drops. Consequently, during periods when surface streams are rapidly downcutting, surrounding groundwater levels drop rapidly, and cave passages are abandoned by the water while the passages are still relatively small in cross-sectional area. Conversely, when the entrenchment of streams is slow or negligible, there is time for large cave passages to form.

How Dripstone Forms Certainly the features that arouse the greatest curiosity for most cavern visitors are the stone formations that give some caverns a wonderland appearance. These are not erosional features, like the cavern itself, but depositional features created by the seemingly endless dripping of water over great spans of time. Recall from our discussion of hot springs that the calcium carbonate left behind produces the limestone we call travertine. These cave deposits, however, are also commonly called dripstone, an obvious reference to their mode of origin. Although the formation of caverns takes place in the zone of saturation, the deposition of dripstone is not possible until the caverns are above the water table in the unsaturated zone. As soon as the chamber is filled with air, the stage is set for the decoration phase of cavern building to begin.

Many areas of the world have landscapes that, to a large extent, have been shaped by the dissolving power of groundwater. Such areas are said to exhibit karst topography, named for the Krs Plateau in Slovenia, located along the northeastern shore of the Adriatic Sea, where such topography is strikingly developed. In the United States, karst landscapes occur in many areas that are underlain by limestone, including portions of Kentucky, Tennessee, Alabama, southern Indiana, and central and northern Florida. Generally, arid and semiarid areas are too dry to develop karst topography. When these features exist in such regions, they are likely to be remnants of a time when rainier conditions prevailed.

Tower karst in China One of the best-known and most distinctive regions of tower karst development is along the Li River in the Guilin District of southeastern China. The painting “Peach Garden Land of Immortals” clearly depicts this distinctive landscape. Qiu Ying) fractures grow in size, soil subsides into the widening voids, from which it is This small sinkhole formed suddenly when the roof of a cavern collapsed, removed by groundwater eliminating the backyard of this house flowing in the passages in Lake City, Florida. below. These depressions are usually shallow and have gentle slopes. In contrast, sinkholes can also form abruptly and without warning when the roof of a cavern collapses under its own weight. Typically, the depressions sinks. In the limestone areas created in this manner of Florida, Kentucky, and southern Indiana, are steep-sided and deep. there are tens of thousands of these depresWhen they form in popusions, varying in depth from just 1 or 2 lous areas, they may repmeters (3 or 7 feet) to more than 50 meters resent a serious geologic (165 feet). hazard. Such a situation is Sinkholes commonly form in two shown in the lower photo of ways. Some develop gradually over many years, without any physical disturbance In addition to a to the rock. In these situations, the limesurface pockmarked by stone immediately below the soil is dissinkholes, karst regions solved by downward-sweeping rainwater that is freshly characteristically show a striking lack of surface draincharged with carbon dioxide. With time, the bedrock age (streams). Following rainfall, the runoff is quickly surface is lowered, funneled belowground through sinks. It then flows and the fractures into through caverns until it finally reaches the water table. which the water seeps Where streams do exist at the surface, their paths are are enlarged. As the usually short. The names of such streams often give Groundwater was responsible for creating these sinkholes west of Timaru on New Zealand’s South Island.

a clue to their fate. In the Mammoth Cave area of Sinking Creek, and Sinking Branch. Some sinkholes become plugged with clay and debris, creating small lakes or ponds.

Tower Karst Some regions of karst development exhibit landscapes that look very different from the One striking example is an extensive region in southern China that is described as exhibiting tower karst. because the landscape consists of a maze of isolated steep-sided hills that rise abruptly from the ground. Each is riddled with interconnected caves and passageways. This type of karst topography forms in wet tropical and subtropical regions having thick beds of highly jointed limestone. Here groundwater has dissolved large volumes of limestone, leaving only these residual towers. Karst development occurs more rapidly in tropical climates due to the abundant rainfall and the greater availability of carbon dioxide from the decay of lush tropical vegetation. The extra carbon dioxide in the soil means there is more carbonic acid for dissolving limestone. Other tropical areas of advanced karst development include portions of Puerto Rico, western Cuba, and northern Vietnam.

1. How does groundwater create caverns? 2. What causes cavern formation to stop at one level (depth) but continue or begin at a lower level? 3. How do stalactites and stalagmites form? 4. Describe two ways in which sinkholes form.

National Park. (Photo by Michael Collier) a strong influence on the nature and intensity of Earth’s external processes. This fact is dramatically illustrated in this chapter because the existence and extent of glaciers is largely controlled by Earth’s changing climate. Like the running water and groundwater that were the focus of the preceding two chapters, glaciers represent a significant erosional process. These moving masses of ice are responsible for creating many unique landforms and are part of an important link in the rock cycle in which the products of weathering are transported and deposited as Today glaciers cover nearly 10 percent of Earth’s land surface; however, in the recent geologic past, ice sheets were three times more extensive, covering vast areas with ice thousands of meters thick. Many regions still bear the marks of these glaciers. The landscapes of such diverse places as the Alps, Cape Cod, and Yosemite Valley were Lakes, and the fiords of Norway and Alaska all owe their existence to glaciers. Glaciers, of course, are not just a phenomenon of the geologic past. As you will see, they are still sculpting the landscape and depositing debris in many regions today.

Explain the role of glaciers in the hydrologic and rock cycles and describe the different types of glaciers, their characteristics, and their present-day distribution. Glaciers are a part of two fundamental cycles in the Earth system: the hydrologic cycle and the rock cycle. The water of the hydrosphere is constantly cycled through the atmosphere, biosphere, and geosphere. Time and time again, water evaporates from the oceans into the atmosphere, precipitates on the land, and flows in rivers and underground back to the sea. However, when precipitation falls at high elevations or high latitudes, the water may not immediately make its way toward the sea. Instead, it may become part of a glacier. Although the ice will eventually melt, allowing the water to continue its path to the sea, water can be stored as glacial ice for many tens, hundreds, or even thousands of years. the accumulation, compaction, and recrystallization not; glaciers move very slowly. Like running water, groundwater, wind, and waves, glaciers are dynamic erosional agents that accumulate, transport, and deposit sediment. As such, glaciers are among the agents that perform a basic function in the rock cycle. Although glaciers are found in many parts of the world today, most are located in remote areas, either near Earth’s poles or in high mountains.

Valley glacier This tongue of ice, also called an alpine glacier, is still eroding the Alaskan landscape. Dark stripes of sediment within these glaciers are called medial moraines. This is Johns Hopkins Glacier National Park. (Photo by Michael Collier) valley glaciers can be long or short, wide or narrow, single or with branching tributaries. Generally, alpine glaciers are longer than they are wide. Some extend for just a fraction of a kilometer, whereas others go on for many tens of kilometers. The west branch of the Hubbard Glacier, for example, runs through 112 kilometers (nearly 70 miles) of mountainous terrain in Alaska and the Yukon Territory.

In contrast to valley glaciers, ice sheets exist on a much larger scale. The low total annual solar radiation reaching the poles makes these regions hospitable to great ice accumulations. Presently both of Earth’s polar regions support ice sheets: Greenland in the Northern Hemisphere and Antarctica in the Southern Hemisphere .

Ice sheets The only present-day ice sheets are those covering Greenland and Antarctica. Their combined areas represent almost 10 percent of Earth’s land area.

The area of the Antarctic Ice Sheet is almost 14 million square kilometers (5,460,000 square miles). Ice shelves occupy an additional 1.4 million square kilometers (546,000 square miles).

melted away. These alternating glacial and interglacial periods have occurred over and over again. Greenland and Antarctica Some people mistakenly think that the North Pole is covered by glacial ice, but this is not the case. The ice that covers the Arctic Ocean is sea ice—frozen seawater. Sea ice floats because ice is less dense than liquid water. Although sea ice never completely disappears from the Arctic, the area covered with sea ice expands and contracts with the seasons. The thickness of sea ice ranges from a few centimeters for new ice to 4 meters (13 feet) for sea ice that has survived for years. By contrast, glaciers can be hundreds or thousands of meters thick. Glaciers form on land, and in the Northern Hemisphere, Greenland supports an ice sheet. Greenland extends between about 60 and 80 degrees north latitude. This largest island on Earth is covered by an imposing ice sheet that occupies 1.7 million square kilometers (more than 660,000 square miles), or about 80 percent of the island. Averaging nearly 1500 meters (5000 feet) thick, the ice extends 3000 meters (10,000 feet) above the island’s bedrock floor in some In the Southern Hemisphere, practically all of Antarctica is covered by two huge ice sheets that extend over an area of more than 13.9 million square kilometers (5.4 million square miles). Because of the proportions of these huge features, they are often called continental ice sheets. There is more about Antarctica and its ice sheets in GEOgraphics 18.1. The combined areas of presentday continental ice sheets represent almost 10 percent of Earth’s land area. These enormous masses flow out in all directions from one or more snow-accumulation centers and completely obscure all but the highest areas of underlying terrain. Even sharp variations in the topography beneath a glacier usually appear as relatively subdued undulations on the surface of the ice. Such topographic differences, however, affect the behavior of the ice sheets, especially near their margins, by guiding flow in certain directions and creating zones of faster and slower movement.

Ice shelves An ice shelf forms when a glacier or an ice sheet flows into the adjacent ocean.

In shallow water, the ice shelf is In deeper water the ice shelf floats.

As ice melts, material transported by the glacier is released and falls to the ocean floor. The rocks are called dropstones.

Icebergs produced by the breakup of ice shelf adjacent ice sheet, and they are also nourished by snowfall on their surfaces and the freezing of seawater to their bases. Antarctica’s ice shelves extend over Shelves are the largest, with the Ross Ice Shelf alone covering an area approximately the size of Texas (see shown that some ice shelves are unstable and breaking apart. For example, during a 35-day span in February and March 2002, an ice shelf on the eastern side of Shelf, broke apart and separated from the continent. Thousands of icebergs were set adrift in the adjacent Weddell Sea. The event was captured in satellite imagery. This was not an isolated happening but part of a trend related to accelerated climate change. apart by 2020.

Va t n a j ö k u l l ice cap Ice caps completely bury the underlying terrain but are much smaller than ice sheets.

What if the ice melted? The discharge at the mouth of the Mississippi River is 17,300 cubic meters (593,000 cubic feet) per second. If Antarctica's ice sheets melted at a suitable rate, they could maintain the flow of the Mississippi River for more than 50,000 years! If all of the continent's ice were to melt, sea level would rise by an estimated 56 meters (more than 180 feet). Antarctica's ice represents about 65 percent of Earth's entire supply of freshwater.

Vinson Massif is the highest peak at 4892 meters (16,050 feet). Most of the mountains are buried beneath the continent's huge ice sheets.

1. Is the glacial ice thickest in East Antarctica or West Antarctica? 2. If all of Antarctica’s ice were to melt, about how much would sea level rise?

scientific research station. It is the largest installation on the continent, capable of supporting more than 1200 residents. The total population at all research stations is about 4000 in summer and 1000 in winter. There are no permanent (indigenous) human residents on the continent.

Piedmont glacier Piedmont glaciers occur where valley glaciers exit a mountain range onto broad lowlands.

individual piedmont glaciers vary greatly. Among the largest is the broad Malaspina Glacier along the coast of southern Alaska. It covers thousands of square kilometers of the flat coastal plain at the foot of the lofty St. Elias Range.

1. Where are glaciers found today? What percentage of Earth’s land surface do they cover? When a valley glacier is no longer confined, it spreads out to become a piedmont glacier.

Piedmont glaciers occupy broad lowlands at the bases of steep mountains and form when one or more alpine glaciers emerge from the confining walls of mountain valleys. Here the advancing ice spreads out to form a broad lobe. The sizes of 2. Describe how glaciers fit into the hydrologic cycle. What role do they play in the rock cycle? 3. List and briefly distinguish among four types of 4. What is the difference between an ice sheet and an ice shelf? How are they related?

Describe how glaciers move, the rates at which they move, and the significance of the glacial budget. Snow is the raw material from which glacial ice originates; therefore, glaciers form in areas where more snow falls in winter than melts during the summer. Glaciers develop in the high-latitude polar realm because, even though annual snowfall totals are modest, temperatures are so low that little of the snow melts. Glaciers can form in mountains because temperatures drop with an increase in altitude. So even near the equator, glaciers may form at elevations above about 5000 meters (16,400 feet). For example, Tanzania’s Mount Kilimanjaro, which is located practically astride the equator at an altitude of 5895 meters (19,336 feet), has glaciers at its summit. The elevation above which snow remains throughout the year varies with latitude. Near the equator, this boundary occurs high in the mountains, whereas in the vicinity of the 60th parallel, it is at or near sea level. Before a glacier is created, however, snow must be converted into glacial ice.

When temperatures remain below freezing following a snowfall, the fluffy accumulation of delicate hexagonal crystals soon changes. As air infiltrates the spaces between the crystals, the extremities of the crystals evaporate, and the water vapor condenses near the centers of the crystals. In this manner, snowflakes become smaller, thicker, and more spherical, and the large pore spaces disappear. As air is forced out, what was once light, fluffy snow is recrystallized into a much denser mass of small grains having the consistency of coarse sand. This granular recrystallized snow is called firn and is commonly found making up old snow banks near the end of winter. As more snow is added, the pressure on the lower layers gradually increases, compacting the ice grains at depth. Once the thickness of ice and snow exceeds 50 meters (165 feet), the weight is sufficient to fuse firn into a solid mass of interlocking ice crystals. Glacial ice has now been formed. The rate at which this transformation occurs varies. In regions where the annual snow accumulation is great, burial is relatively rapid, and snow may turn to glacial ice in a matter of a decade or less. Where the yearly addition of snow is less abundant, burial is slow, and the transformation of snow to glacial ice may take hundreds of years.

The movement of glacial ice is generally referred to as flow. The fact that glacial movement is described in this way seems paradoxical; how can a solid flow? The way in which ice moves is complex and is of two basic types. The first of these, plastic flow, involves movement within the ice. Ice behaves as a brittle solid until the pressure upon it is equivalent to the weight of about 50 meters (165 feet) Ice in the zone of fracture is of ice. Once that load is surcarried along "piggyback" style. passed, ice behaves as a plastic material, and flow begins. Below a depth of about 50 meters (160 feet), Such flow occurs because of ice behaves plastically the molecular structure of ice. Glacial ice consists of lay- (deforms without breaking) and gradually ers of molecules stacked one of fra upon the other. The bonds between layers are weaker Basal slip occurs than those within each layer. episodically. Ice in Therefore, when a stress contact with the valley exceeds the strength of the floor remains fixed as stress builds to the bonds between the layers, point that the glacier the layers remain intact and lurches forward. slide over one another. equally important mechanism of glacial movement conOther factors may also contribute to the presence sists of an entire ice mass slipping along the ground. With of meltwater deep within a glacier. Temperatures may the exception of some glaciers located in polar regions be increased by plastic flow (an effect similar to heating where the ice is probably frozen to the solid bedrock floor, due to friction), by heat added from Earth below, and most glaciers are thought to move by this sliding process, by the refreezing of meltwater that has seeped down called basal slip. In this process, meltwater probably acts from above. This last process relies on the fact that as as a hydraulic jack and perhaps as a lubricant that helps water changes state from liquid to solid, heat (termed the ice move over the rock. The source of the liquid water latent heat of fusion) is released. is related in part to the fact that the melting point of ice decreases as pressure increases. Therefore, deep within a types of glacial motion. This vertical profile through a glacier, the ice may be at the melting point even though glacier also shows that not all the ice flows forward at the same rate. Frictional drag with the bedrock floor causes the lower portions of the glacier to move more slowly.

Crevasses As a glacier moves, internal stresses cause large cracks to develop in the brittle upper portion of the glacier, called the zone of fracture. Crevasses can extend to depths of 50 meters (165 feet) and can make travel across glaciers dangerous.

in cracks called crevasses. These gaping cracks may extend to depths of 50 meters (160 feet) and can make travel across glaciers dangerous. Below this depth, plastic flow seals them off.

The slowest movement occurs along divides. Lambert Glacier drains about 900,000 square kilometers (500,000 square miles) of East Antarctica.

Divide separating glacier basins. Divides are generally over mountains that shape the flow of ice.

Snow is the raw material from which glacial ice originates; therefore, glaciers form in areas where more snow falls in winter than melts during the summer. Glaciers are constantly gaining and losing ice.

year; on the other hand, ice in some interior regions creeps along at less than 2 meters (6.5 feet) per year. Movement of some glaciers is characterized by occasional periods of extremely rapid advance called surges, followed by periods of much slower movement.

Only about 20 percent or less of an iceberg protrudes above the waterline. means by which these masses lose ice. The relatively flat icebergs produced here can be several kilometers across of irregularly shaped icebergs are produced by outlet glaciers flowing from the margins of the Greenland ice sheet. Atlantic, where they can be hazardous to navigation.

About 200 years ago Bear Glacier extended to the end moraine at the bottom of the image.

End moraine marking the farthest advance of a continues to flow forward. In the case of a receding glacier, the ice still flows forward but not rapidly enough 18.9. As the line of stakes within the Rhône Glacier continued to move downvalley, the terminus of the glacier slowly retreated upvalley.

glaciers in Montana’s Glacier National Park. Today only 37 remain. Because glaciers are sensitive to changes in temperature and precipitation, they provide clues about changes in climate. With few exceptions, valley glaciers around the world have been retreating at unprecedented rates over the past century. Bear Glacier is one example (Figure example. Many valley glaciers have disappeared altogether. For example, 150 years ago, there were 147 2. How rapidly does glacial ice move? Provide some 3. What are crevasses, and where do they form? 4. Relate the glacial budget to the two zones of a 5. Under what circumstances will the front of a glacier advance? Retreat? Remain stationary?

his photo shows an iceberg floating in the ocean near the coast of Greenland. (Photo by Andrzej about these features, explain the common phrase “It’s only the tip of the iceberg.” sea level be affected?

Discuss the processes of glacial erosion. Identify and describe major topographic features created by glacial erosion. Glaciers are capable of great erosion. For anyone who has observed the terminus of an alpine glacier, the evidence of its erosive force is clear. The release of rock material of various sizes from the ice as it melts leads to the conclusion that the ice has scraped, scoured, and torn rock from the floor and walls of the valley and carried it downvalley. It should be pointed out, however, that in mountainous regions, mass-wasting processes also make substantial contributions to the sediment load of a glacier. Once rock debris is acquired by a glacier, the enormous competence of ice will not allow the debris to settle out Evidence of glacial erosion As the terminus of a glacier wastes away, it deposits large quantities of sediment. This close-up view shows the rock debris dropped by the melting ice. The glacier clearly acquired a significant quantity of rock debris as it advanced across the landscape. (Photo by Michael within the glacier as the ice melts. Indeed, as a medium of sediment transport, ice has no equal. Consequently, glaciers can carry large blocks that no other erosional agent could possibly budge. Although today’s glaciers are of limited importance as erosional agents, many landscapes that were modified by the widespread glaciers of the Ice Age still reflect, to a high degree, the work of ice.

The rock debris dropped by melting ice is a jumbled mixture of different size sediments. Glaciers erode the land primarily in two ways: plucking and abrasion. First, as a glacier flows over a fractured bedrock surface, it loosens and lifts blocks of rock and incorporates them into the ice. This process, known as plucking, occurs when meltwater penetrates the cracks and joints of bedrock beneath a glacier and freezes. As the water expands, it exerts tremendous leverage that pries the rock loose. In this manner, sediment of all sizes becomes part of the glacier’s load.

Glacially polished granite in California’s Yosemite National Park. Glacial abrasion created the scratches and grooves in this bedrock.

Erosional landforms created by alpine glaciers The unglaciated terrain looks very different than it looked before glaciation. You can see several of the landforms Granite and Glaciers (page Miller; hanging valley photo by John Warden/SuperStock) degree of landscape modification in glaciated regions can vary greatly.

As hikers walk up a glacial trough, they may pass a series of bedrock depressions on the valley floor, probably created by plucking and then scouring by the abrasive force of the ice. If these depressions are filled with water, The Latin name means “our Father” and is a reference to a string of rosary beads.

Fiords The coast of Norway is known for its many fiords. Frequently these ice-sculpted inlets of the sea are hundreds of meters deep. (Satellite images “drowned” glacial troughs that became submerged as the ice left the valleys and sea level rose following the Ice Age. The depths of fiords may exceed 1000 meters (3300 feet). However, the great depths of these flooded troughs are only partly explained by the post–Ice Age rise in sea level. Unlike the situation governing the downward erosional work of rivers, sea level does not act as base level for glaciers. As a consequence, glaciers are capable of eroding their beds far below the surface of the sea. For example, a 300-meter- (1000-foot-) thick glacier can carve its valley floor more than 250 Columbia, Greenland, New Zealand, Chile, and Alaska all have coastlines characterized by fiords.

Glacier National Park. Lake St. Mary occupies a glacial trough. (Photo by Dan valley compare to its shape prior to glaciation? ridge indicated by the arrow?

1. How do glaciers acquire their load of sediment? 2. What are some visible effects of glacial erosion? 3. What factors influence a glacier’s ability to erode? 4. How does a glaciated mountain valley differ in appearance from a mountain valley that was not glaciated? Describe the features created by valley 5. Relate fiords to glacial troughs.

Long before the theory of an extensive Ice Age was ever proposed, much of the soil and rock debris covering portions of Europe was recognized as having come from somewhere else. At the time, these “foreign” materials were believed to have been “drifted” into their present positions by floating ice during an ancient flood. As a consequence, the term drift was applied to this sediment. Although rooted in an incorrect concept, this term was so well established by the time the true glacial origin of the debris became widely recognized that it remained part of the basic glacial vocabulary. Today glacial drift is an allembracing term for sediments of glacial origin, no matter how, where, or in what shape they were deposited.

Glacial till is an unsorted mixture of many different sediment sizes.

Glacial till Unlike sediment deposited by running water and wind, material deposited directly by a 18.15 provides an example of till being deposited at the terminus of a glacier. (Top photo by Michael Collier; bottom examination of glacial till often reveals cobbles that have been scratched as they were dragged along by the ice.

Geologists divide glacial drift into two distinct types: (1) materials deposited directly by the glacier, which are known as till, and (2) sediments laid down by glacial meltwater, called stratified drift.

Glacial Till As glacial ice melts and drops its load of rock fragments, till is deposited. Unlike moving water scratched and polished as a result of being dragged along by the glacier. Such pieces help distinguish till from other deposits that are a mixture of different sediment sizes, such as material from a debris flow or a rockslide. Boulders found in the till or lying free on the surface are called glacial erratics if they are different from the bedrock below. Of course, this means that they must have been derived from a source outside the area where they are found. Although the source for most erratics is unknown, the origin of some can be determined. In many cases, boulders were transported as far as 500 kilometers (300 miles) from their source area and, in a few instances, more than 1000 kilometers (600 miles). Therefore, by studying glacial erratics as well as the mineral composition of the remaining till, geologists are sometimes able to trace the path of a lobe of ice. In portions of New England and other areas, erratics dot pastures and farm fields. In fact, in some places, these large rocks were cleared from fields and piled to make fences and walls. Keeping the fields clear, however, is an ongoing chore because each spring, newly exposed erratics appear. Wintertime frost heaving lifts them to the surface. Stratified Drift As the name implies, stratified drift is sorted according to the size and weight of the particles. Ice is not capable of sorting sediment the way running water can. Therefore, stratified drift is not deposited directly by the glacier the way till is, but instead reflects the sorting action of glacial Some deposits of stratified drift are made by streams issuing directly from the glacier. Other stratified deposits involve sediment that was originally laid down as till and later picked up, transported, and redeposited by meltwater beyond the margin of the ice. Accumulations of stratified drift often consist largely of sand and gravel because the meltwater is not capable of moving larger material and because the finer rock flour remains suspended and is commonly carried far from the glacier. Evidence that stratified drift consists primarily of sand and gravel can be seen in many areas where these deposits are actively mined as aggregate for road work and other construction projects.

End moraines of the Great Lakes region End moraines deposited during the most recent (Wisconsinan) stage are the most prominent.

Common depositional landforms This diagram depicts a hypothetical area affected by ice sheets in the recent geologic past. photo by Carlyn Iverson/Science Source; braided river photo by Michael Collier) (https://goo.gl/7TDPkt) near Milwaukee is a particularly picturesque example. Island. This linear strip of glacial sediment extending northeastward from New York City is part of an end moraine complex that stretches from eastern Pennsylvania to Cape Cod, Massachusetts. glaciation and after the retreat of ice sheets. This figure depicts landscape features such as the end moraines just described as well as depositional landforms, similar to what might be encountered if you were traveling in the upper Midwest or New England. You will be referred to this figure several times as you read the following paragraphs on glacial deposits.

kilometer long. The steep side of the hill faces the direction from which the ice advanced, whereas the gentler, longer slope points in the direction the ice moved. Drumlins are not found as isolated landforms but rather occur in clusters called drumlin fields. One such cluster, east of Rochester, New York, is estimated to contain about 10,000 drumlins. Although drumlin formation is not fully understood, the streamlined shape of drumlins indicates that they were molded in the zone of plastic flow within an active glacier. It is believed that many drumlins originate when glaciers advance over previously deposited drift and reshape the material.

Much of the material acquired and transported by a glacier is ultimately deposited by streams of glacial meltwater flowing on, within, beneath, and beyond a glacier. This sediment is termed stratified drift. Unlike glacial till, stratified drift shows some degree of sorting. There are two basic categories of features composed of stratified drift: Ice-contact deposits accumulate on, within, or immediately adjacent to a glacier. Outwash sediment, or simply outwash, is material deposited by meltwater streams beyond the terminus of a glacier.

of the drumlin field shown on the Palmyra, New York, 7.5-minute topographic map. North is at the top. The drumlins are steepest on the north side, indicating that the ice advanced from this direction.

example is Walden Pond near Concord, Massachusetts. It is here that Henry David Thoreau lived alone for 2 years in the 1840s and about which he wrote his famous book Walden; or, Life in the Woods.

Ice-Contact Deposits When the melting terminus of a glacier shrinks to a critical point, flow virtually stops, and the ice becomes stagnant. Meltwater that flows over, within, and at the base of the motionless ice lays down deposits of stratified drift. Then, as the supporting ice melts away, the stratified sediment is left behind in the form of hills, terraces, and ridges. Such accumulations are collectively termed ice-contact deposits and are classified according to their shapes. When the ice-contact stratified drift is in the form of a mound or steep-sided hill, it is called a kame (see depressions on top of the ice. Others originate as deltas or fans built outward from the ice by meltwater streams. Later, when the stagnant ice melts away, these various accumulations of sediment collapse to form isolated, irregular mounds. When glacial ice occupies a valley, kame terraces may be built along the sides of the valley. These features commonly are narrow masses of stratified drift laid down between the glacier and the side of the valley by meltwater streams that drop debris along the margins of the shrinking ice mass. sinuous ridge composed largely of sand and gravel. Some are more than 100 meters high, with lengths in excess of 100 kilometers. The dimensions of many others are far less spectacular. Known as eskers, these ridges are deposited by meltwater rivers flowing within, on top of, and beneath a mass of motionless, stagnant glacial ice the torrents of meltwater in the ice-banked channels, but only the coarser material can settle out of the turbulent stream.

1. What term can be applied to any glacial deposit? Distinguish between till and stratified drift. 2. How are medial moraines and lateral moraines related? In what kind of setting do these features 3. Contrast end moraine and ground moraine. Relate these features to the budget of a glacier. 4. Sketch a profile (side view) of a drumlin. Include an arrow to indicate the direction from which the ice advanced. 5. Distinguish between outwash deposits and icecontact deposits.

his is a ridge of glacial drift that was deposited Fiords National Park. (Photo by Michael Collier) deposit of till? Explain. (accumulation versus ablation) as this ridge of sediment the one pictured here?

Describe and explain several important effects of Ice Age glaciers other than erosional and depositional landforms. In addition to the massive erosional and depositional work carried out by Ice Age glaciers, the ice sheets had other effects, sometimes profound, on the landscape. For example, as the ice advanced and retreated, animals and plants were forced to migrate. This led to stresses that some organisms could not tolerate. Hence, a number of plants and animals became extinct. Other effects of Ice Age glaciers that are described in this section involve adjustments in Earth’s crust due to the addition and removal of ice, and sea-level changes associated with the formation and melting of ice sheets. The advance and retreat of ice sheets also led to significant changes in the routes taken by rivers. In some regions, glaciers acted as dams that created large lakes. When these ice dams failed, the effects on the landscape were profound. In areas that today are deserts, lakes of another type, called pluvial lakes, formed.

In areas that were major centers of ice accumulation, such as Scandinavia and the Canadian Shield, the land has been slowly rising over the past several thousand years. Uplifting of almost 300 meters (1000 feet) has occurred in the Hudson Bay region. This, too, is the result of the continental ice sheets. But how can glacial ice cause such vertical crustal movement? We now In northern Canada and Scandinavia, where the greatest accumulation of glacial ice occurred, the added weight caused downwarping of the crust.

understand that the land is rising because the added weight of the 3-kilometer- (2-mile-) thick mass of ice caused downwarping of Earth’s crust. For example, scientists have determined that Antarctica’s ice sheets depress Earth’s crust by an estimated 900 meters (3000 feet) or more in some places. Following the removal of this immense load, the crust adjusts by gradually rebounding upward.* * For a detailed explanation of this concept, termed isostatic adjustment, see the discussion of isostasy in the section “Vertical Movements of the Crust” in Chapter 14.

Ever since the ice melted, there has been gradual uplift or rebound of the crust. Crustal subsidence and rebound These simplified diagrams illustrate subsidence and rebound resulting from the addition and removal of continental ice pattern of rivers. Quaternary ice sheets played a major role in creating this pattern.

One of the most interesting and perhaps dramatic effects of the Ice Age was the fall and rise of sea level that accompanied the advance and retreat of the glaciers. Although the total volume of glacial ice today is great, exceeding 25 million cubic kilometers, during the Last Glacial Maximum the volume of glacial ice amounted to about 70 million cubic kilometers, or 45 million cubic kilometers more than at present. Because we know that the snow from which glaciers are made ultimately comes from the evaporation of ocean water, the growth of ice sheets must have caused a significant worldwide drop in sea level. Indeed, estimates suggest that sea level was as much as 100 meters (330 feet) lower than it is today. Thus, land that is presently flooded by the oceans was dry. The Atlantic coast of the United States lay more than 100 kilometers (60 miles) to the east of New York City, France and Britain were joined where the famous English Channel is today, Strait, and Southeast Asia was tied by dry land to the islands of Indonesia. Conversely, if the water currently locked up in the Antarctic ice sheet were to melt completely, sea level would rise by an estimated 60 or 70 meters. Such an occurrence would flood many densely populated coastal areas.

Maximum extent of glaciation Changing rivers The advance and retreat of ice sheets caused major changes in the routes followed by rivers in the central United States.

pattern was very different from today, and the Great Lakes did not exist. During the Last Glacial Maximum, the shoreline extended out onto the present-day continental shelf.

shows the familiar present-day pattern of rivers in the Ice Age. The pattern is very different from the present. This remarkable transformation of river systems resulted from the advance and retreat of the ice sheets. Notice that prior to the Ice Age, a significant part of Moreover, the Mississippi River did not follow the present Iowa–Illinois boundary but rather flowed across westcentral Illinois, where the lower Illinois River flows today. The preglacial Ohio River barely reached to the presentday state of Ohio, and the rivers that today feed the Ohio in western Pennsylvania flowed north and drained into the North Atlantic. The Great Lakes were created by glacial erosion during the Ice Age. Prior to the Pleistocene epoch, (600 feet) deep at its lowest point, and Cayuga Lake is nearly 135 meters (450 feet) deep—and the beds of both lakes lie below sea level. The depth to which the glaciers carved these basins is much greater. There are hundreds of feet of glacial sediment in the deep rock troughs below the lake beds.

Ice sheets and alpine glaciers can act as dams to create lakes by trapping glacial meltwater and blocking the flow of rivers. Some of these lakes are relatively small, short-lived impoundLake Canandaigua ments. Others can be large and exist for hundreds or thousands of years. the Ice Age in North America. It came into existence about 12,000 years ago and lasted for about 4500 years. With Plains generally slope upward to the west. As the terminus of the ice sheet receded northeastward, meltwater was trapped between New York’s Finger Lakes The long, narrow basins occupied the ice on one side and the sloping land on the other, causby these lakes were created when ice sheets scoured these scape. Such water bodies are termed proglacial lakes, referring to their position just beyond the outer limits of a the basins occupied by these huge lakes were lowlands glacier or an ice sheet. The history of Lake Agassiz is comwith rivers that ran eastward to the Gulf of St. Lawrence. plicated by the dynamics of the ice sheet, which, at various The large Teays River was a significant feature prior times, readvanced and affected lake levels and drainage West Virginia across Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois, and it dis- level of the lake and the position of the ice sheet. charged into the Mississippi River not far from present-day Peoria. This river valley, which would have rivaled the Mis- beaches, now many kilometers from any water, mark sissippi in size, was completely obliterated during the Pleistocene, buried by glacial deposits hundreds of Hudson Bay feet thick. Today the sands and gravels in the buried Teays valley make it an important aquifer.

This prehistoric proglacial lake in western Montana periodically broke through the ice dam that created it. This resulted in huge floods (megafloods) that shaped the landscape of eastern Washington State.

Lake Missoula was up to 300 kilometers (185 miles) long and held more water than present-day Lake Ontario.

Pluvial lakes During the Ice Age, the Basin and Range region experienced a wetter climate than it has today. Many basins turned into large lakes.

While the formation and growth of ice sheets was an obvious response to significant changes in climate, the existence of the glaciers themselves triggered imporThe towering mass of rushing water from each megaflood stripped away layers of sediment tant climatic changes in the and soil and cut deep canyons (coulees) into the underlying layers of basalt to create the regions beyond their marChanneled Scablands. gins. In arid and semiarid former shorelines. Several modern river valleys, including areas on all the continents, temperatures were lower and the Red River and the Minnesota River, were originally cut thus evaporation rates were lower, but at the same time, by water entering or leaving the lake. Present-day remnants precipitation totals were moderate. This cooler, wetter of Lake Agassiz include Lake Winnipeg, Lake Manitoba, Lake Winnipegosis, and Lake of the Woods. The sediments North America the greatest concentration of pluvial lakes occurred in the vast Basin and Range region of Nevada and Utah. By far the largest of the lakes in this region was Lake Bonneville. With maximum depths The Great Salt Lake exceeding 300 meters (1000 feet) and an area of 50,000 is a remnant of Lake square kilometers (20,000 square miles), Lake Bonneville As the ice sheets waned, the climate again grew more arid, and the lake levels lowered in response. Although most of the lakes completely disappeared, a few small remnants of Lake Bonneville remain, the Great Salt Lake being the largest and best known.

Lake Bonneville was nearly the size of present-day Lake 1. List and briefly describe five effects of Ice Age glaciers aside from the formation of major erosional and depositional features.

120 mi 120 km level has changed since the Last Glacial Maximum. identify three major changes to the flow of rivers in the central United States during the Ice Age. 4. Contrast proglacial lakes and pluvial lakes. Give an example of each.

Briefly discuss the development of glacial theory and summarize current ideas on the causes of ice ages. In the preceding pages, we mentioned the Ice Age, a time when ice sheets and alpine glaciers were far more extensive than they are today. As noted, there was a time when the most popular explanation for what we now know to be glacial deposits was that the materials had been drifted in by means of icebergs or perhaps simply swept across the landscape by a catastrophic flood. What convinced geologists that an extensive ice age was responsible for these deposits and many other glacial features?

Where was the ice? This map shows the maximum extent of ice sheets in the Northern Hemisphere during the Ice Age.

Causes of Ice Ages has been learned about glacier formation and movement, the extent of glaciers past and present, and the features created by glaciers, both erosional and depositional. However, the causes of ice ages are not completely understood. Although widespread glaciation has been rare in Earth’s history, the Ice Age that encompassed most of the Quaternary period is not the only glacial period for which records exist. Earlier glaciations are indicated by deposits called tillite, a sedimentary rock formed when glacial till becomes lithified. Such deposits, found in strata of several different ages, usually contain striated rock fragments, and some overlie grooved and polished bedrock surfaces or are associated with sandstones and conglomerates that show features of outwash deposits. For example, our Chapter 2 discussion Tillite When glacial till is lithified, it becomes the sedimentary rock known as tillite. Tillite strata are evidence for ice ages that occurred prior to the Quaternary period. (Photo by Brian Roman) of evidence supporting the continental drift hypothesis the first approximately 2 billion years ago and the second about 600 million years ago. Any theory that attempts to explain the causes of ice ages must successfully answer two basic questions: r What causes the onset of glacial conditions? For continental ice sheets to have formed, average temperature must have been somewhat lower than at present, and perhaps substantially lower than throughout much of geologic time. Thus, a successful theory would have to account for the cooling that finally leads to glacial conditions. r What caused the alternating glacial and interglacial stages that have been documented for the Quaternary period? Whereas the first question deals with long-term trends in temperature on a scale of millions of years, this question relates to much shorter-term changes. Although the scientific literature contains many hypotheses related to possible causes of glacial periods, we will discuss only a few major ideas to summarize current thought.

The shape of Earth's orbit changes during a cycle that spans about 100,000 years. It gradually changes from nearly circular to more elliptical and then back again. This diagram greatly exaggerates the amount of change.

The continents as they appear today. The white areas indicate where evidence of the late Paleozoic ice sheets exists. move landmasses to high latitudes, where the formation of ice sheets is possible.

altering the transport of heat and moisture and consequently the climate as well. Because the rate of plate movement is very slow—a few centimeters annually— appreciable changes in the positions of the continents occur only over great spans of geologic time. Thus, climate changes triggered by shifting plates are extremely gradual and happen on a scale of millions of years.

Today the axis of rotation is tilted about 23.5 degrees to the plane of Earth's orbit. During a cycle of 41,000 years, this angle varies from 21.5 to 24.5 degrees.

Earth's axis wobbles like a spinning top. Consequently, the axis points to different spots in the sky during a cycle of about 26,000 years.

Orbital variations Periodic variations in Earth’s orbit are linked to alternating glacial and interglacial conditions during the Ice Age.

Ice cores contain clues to shifts in climate This scientist is slicing an ice core from Antarctica for analysis. He is wearing protective clothing and a mask to minimize contamination of the sample. Chemical analyses of ice cores can provide important data about past climates. Science Source) deep-sea sediments containing certain climatically sensitive microorganisms were analyzed to establish a chronology of temperature changes going back nearly a half-million years. This time scale of climate change was then compared to astronomical calculations of eccentricity, obliquity, and precession to determine whether a correlation existed. Although the study was very involved and mathematically complex, the conclusions were straightforward: The researchers found that major variations in climate over the past several hundred thousand years were closely associated with changes in the geometry of Earth’s orbit; that is, cycles of climate change were shown to correspond closely with the periods of obliquity, precession, and orbital eccentricity. More specifically, the authors stated: “It is concluded that changes in the earth’s orbital geometry are the fundamental cause of the succession of Quaternary ice ages.”* To briefly summarize the ideas just described, plate tectonics theory provides an explanation for the widely spaced and nonperiodic onset of glacial conditions at various times in the geologic past, whereas the theory proposed and his colleagues furnishes an explanation for the alternating glacial and interglacial episodes of the Quaternary.

Other Factors Variations in Earth’s orbit correlate closely with the timing of glacial–interglacial cycles. However, the variations in solar energy reaching Earth’s surface caused by these orbital changes do not adequately explain the magnitude of the temperature changes that occurred during the most recent Ice Age. Other factors must also have contributed. One factor involves variations in the composition of the atmosphere. Other influences are related to changes in the reflectivity of Earth’s surface and in ocean circulation. Let’s take a brief look at these factors. Chemical analyses of air bubbles trapped in glacial Pacemaker of the Ice Ages,” Science 194 (1976): 1121–1132.

atmosphere contained less carbon dioxide and methane than the post–Ice Age atmosphere. Carbon dioxide and methane are important “greenhouse” gases, which means they trap radiation emitted by Earth and contribute to atmospheric heating. When the amount of carbon dioxide and methane in the atmosphere increases, global temperatures rise, and when there is a reduction in these gases, as occurred during the Ice Age, temperatures fall. Therefore, reductions in the concentrations of greenhouse gases help explain the magnitude of the temperature drop that occurred during glacial times. Although scientists know that concentrations of carbon dioxide and methane dropped, they do not know what caused the drop. As often occurs in science, observations gathered during one investigation yield information and raise questions that require further analysis and explanation. Obviously, whenever Earth enters an ice age, extensive areas of land that were once ice free are covered with ice and snow. In addition, a colder climate causes the area covered by sea ice (frozen surface seawater) to expand. Ice and snow reflect a large portion of incoming solar energy back to space. Thus, energy that would have warmed Earth’s surface and the air above is lost, and global cooling is reinforced. Yet another factor that influences climate during glacial times relates to ocean currents. Research has shown that ocean circulation changes during ice ages. For example, studies suggest that the warm current that transports large amounts of heat from the tropics toward higher latitudes in the North Atlantic was significantly weaker during the Ice Age. This would lead to a colder climate in Europe, amplifying the cooling attributable to orbital variations. In conclusion, we emphasize that the ideas just discussed do not represent the only possible explanations for ice ages. Although interesting and attractive, these proposals are certainly not without critics, nor are they the only possibilities currently under study. Other factors may be, and probably are, involved.

Age climate cycles? 2. About what percentage of Earth’s land surface has been affected by glaciers during the Quaternary period? 3. Where were ice sheets more extensive during the Ice Age: the Northern Hemisphere or the Southern Hemisphere? Why? 4. How does the theory of plate tectonics help us understand the causes of ice ages? Does this theory explain alternating glacial/interglacial climates during the Ice Age? 5. Briefly summarize the climate change hypothesis that involves variations in Earth’s orbit.

These huge sand dunes are among the tallest on Earth. Some approach 300 meters (nearly 1000 feet) high. They are located in the Namib Desert, a coastal desert in southern Africa. (Photo by FRIEDRICHSMEIER/Alamy) a strong influence on the nature and intensity of Earth’s external processes. This was clearly demonstrated in the preceding chapter on glaciers. Desert landscapes and their development provide another excellent example of the strong link between climate and geology. The word desert literally means “deserted” or “unoccupied.” For many dry regions this is an appropriate description, although where water is available in deserts, plants and animals thrive. Nevertheless, the world’s dry regions are probably the least familiar land areas on Earth outside the polar realm. As you will see, arid regions are not dominated by a single geologic process. Rather, the effects of tectonic forces, running water, and wind are all apparent. Because these processes combine in different ways from place to place, the appearance of desert landscapes varies a great deal as well.

Describe the general distribution of Earth’s dry lands and explain why deserts form in the subtropics and middle latitudes. Desert landscapes frequently appear stark. Their profiles are not softened by a continuous carpet of soil and abundant plant life. Instead, barren rocky outcrops with steep, angular slopes are common. At some places the rocks are tinted orange and red. At others they are gray and brown and streaked with black. For many visitors, desert scenery exhibits a striking beauty; to others, the terrain seems bleak. No matter which feeling is elicited, it is clear that deserts are very different from the more humid places where most people live.

We all recognize that deserts are dry places, but just what is meant by the term dry? That is, how much rain defines the boundary between humid and dry regions? Sometimes it is arbitrarily defined by a single rainfall figure, such as 25 centimeters (10 inches) per year of precipitation. However, the concept of dryness is a relative one that refers to any situation in which an ongoing water deficiency exists.

Dry Climates Climatologists define dry climate as a climate in which yearly precipitation is not as great as the potential loss of water by evaporation. Therefore, dryness is not only related to annual rainfall totals but is also a function of evaporation, which in turn is closely dependent on temperature. As temperatures climb, potential evaporation also increases. As little as 15 to 25 centimeters (6 to 10 inches) of precipitation per year may be sufficient to support coniferous forests in northern Scandinavia or Siberia, where evaporation into the cool, humid air is slight and a surplus of water remains in the soil. However, the same amount of rain falling on Nevada or Iran supports only a sparse vegetative cover because evaporation into the hot, dry air is great. So, clearly, no specific amount of precipitation can serve as a universal boundary for dry climates. The dry regions of the world encompass about 42 million square kilometers (16 million square miles), a surprising 30 percent of Earth’s land surface. No other climate category covers so large a land area. Within water-deficient regions, two climatic types are commonly recognized: desert, or arid, and steppe, or semiarid. The two share many features; their differences are primarily a matter of degree. The steppe is a marginal and more humid variant of the desert and is a transition zone that surrounds the desert and separates it from bordering humid climates. The world map of the distribution of desert and steppe regions shows that dry lands are concentrated in the subtropics and in the middle latitudes .

Dry climates Arid and semiarid climates cover about 30 percent of Earth’s land surface. The dry West is commonly divided into four deserts, two of which extend into Mexico.

and soil resources. Desertification occurs when deforestation and overgrazing reduce or completely remove the tree and plant cover that anchors the soil. In some regions, intensive and unsustainable farming practices destroy the natural vegetation and deplete soil nutrients. Wind and water erosion aggravate the damage by carrying away topsoil. When drought occurs on these lands without sufficient vegetation to hold the soil against erosion, the destruction can be irreversible. Desertification is occurring in many places but is parA. Subtropical deserts ticularly serious in the region and steppes are centered south of the Sahara Desert between 20° and 30° north and south latitude known as the Sahel.

Subtropical Deserts and Steppes in association with the subtropical high-pressure belts. Dry subsiding air inhibits cloud formation and precipitation.

The heart of the subtropical dry climates lies in the vicinities of the unbroken desert environment stretching for more than 9300 kilometers (5800 miles) from Africa to the dry lands of northwestern India. In addition to this single great expanse, the Northern Hemisphere contains another, much smaller area of subtropical desert and steppe in northern Mexico and the southwestern United States.

In the Southern Hemisphere, dry climates dominate Australia. Almost 40 percent of the continent is desert, and much of the remainder is steppe. In addition, arid and semiarid areas occur in southern Africa and make a limited appearance in coastal Chile and Peru.

tro Westerlies l high Desert, the adjacent Arabian Desert and the Kalahari and Namib deserts are clearly visible as tan-colored, cloud-free zones. The band of clouds across central Africa and the adjacent oceans coincides with the equatorial low-pressure belt.

Subtropical deserts The distribution of subtropical deserts and steppes is closely related to the global distribution of air pressure.

When moving air meets a mountain barrier, it is forced to rise. Clouds and precipitation on the windward side often result. Coast Range deserts are adjacent to the ocean, their yearly rainfall totals are among the lowest in the world. The aridity of these coastal areas is intensified because the lower air is chilled by the cold offshore waters. When air is cooled from below, it resists the upward movement needed for cloud formation and precipitation. In addition, the cold current often chills the air enough to cause fog to form. Thus, not all subtropical deserts are sunny and hot. Cold offshore currents cause west coast subtropical deserts to be relatively cool places that sometimes are foggy. The Atacama along the west coast of South America has the distinction of being the world’s driest desert. The average rainfall at the Atacama’s wettest locations Arica, a coastal town near Chile’s border with Peru, the average annual rainfall is a mere 0.5 millimeter (0.02 inch). Further inland, some stations have never recorded rainfall.

Unlike their low-latitude counterparts, middle-latitude deserts and steppes are not controlled by the subsiding air masses associated with zones of high pressure. Instead, many of these dry lands exist because they are sheltered in the deep interiors of large landmasses. They are far removed from the ocean, which is the ultimate source of moisture for cloud formation and precipitation. One well-known example is the Gobi Desert of central The presence of high mountains across the paths of prevailing winds is Air descending the leeward side another factor that separates middlelatitude arid and semiarid areas from is much drier. Sierra Nevada water-bearing, maritime air masses. Mountains force the air masses to lose much of their water. The mechanism is straightforward: As prevailing winds meet mounBasin tain barriers, the air is forced to ascend. When air rises, it expands and cools, a process that can produce clouds and precipitation. The windward sides of mountains, therefore, often have high precipitation. By contrast, the leeward sides of mountains are usually much drier. This situation exists because air reaching the leeward side has lost much of its moisture, and if the air descends, it is compressed 19.1 Distribution and Causes of Dry Lands and warmed, making cloud formation even less likely. The dry region that results on this leeward 19.4, which shows the distribution of precipitation in western Washington State, is a good example. When prevailing winds from the Pacific Ocean to the west (left) meet the mountains, rainfall totals are high. By comparicm son, precipitation on the leeward (eastern) side of the mountains is rela250–404 America, the foremost mountain barriers to mois25–49 ture from the Pacific are Asia, the great Himalayan chain prevents the summertime monsoon flow of moist Indian Ocean air from reaching the interior of the Because the Southern Hemisphere lacks extensive land areas in the middle latitudes, only small areas of desert and steppe occur in this latitude range, existing primarily near the southern tip of South America in the The middle-latitude deserts provide an example of how tectonic processes affect climate. Rainshadow deserts exist because of the mountains produced when plates collide. Without such mountain-building episodes, wetter climates would prevail where many dry regions exist today.

Olympic 50 Mountains 150 1. Explain why the boundary between humid and dry climates cannot be defined by a single rainfall 2. How extensive are the desert and steppe regions of Earth? 3. What is the primary cause of subtropical deserts and steppes? How do cold ocean currents influence some subtropical deserts? 4. Why do middle-latitude dry regions exist? What role do mountains play? 5. In which hemisphere (Northern or Southern) are middle-latitude deserts most common? Explain.

Summarize the geologic roles of weathering, running water, and wind in arid and semiarid climates. The angular hills, the sheer canyon walls, and the desert surface of pebbles or sand contrast sharply with the rounded hills and curving slopes of more humid places. To a visitor from a humid region, a desert may seem to have been shaped by forces different from those operating in well-watered areas. However, although the contrasts may be striking, arid and humid landscapes do not reflect different processes. They merely disclose the differing effects of the same processes that operate under contrasting climatic conditions.

Ephemeral stream This National Park in southern Dorling Kindersley, Ltd) in humid regions, but practically all desert streambeds are dry most of the time. Deserts have intermittent Recall from Chapter 6 that water plays an important role in streams, or ephemeral streams (ephemero = shortchemical weathering. Consequently, chemical weathering lived), which means they carry water only in response to processes are not as prominent in regions with dry climates specific episodes of rainfall. as in wetter regions. In humid regions, relatively fineA typical ephemeral stream might flow only a few textured soils support an almost continuous cover of vegdays or perhaps just a few hours during the year, foletation that mantles the surface. The slopes and rock edges lowing sporadic rains. In some years the channel might are rounded, reflecting the strong influence of chemical carry no water at all. This fact is obvious even to the weathering in a humid climate. By contrast, much of the casual traveler who notices numerous bridges with no weathered debris in deserts consists of unaltered rock and streams beneath them or numerous dips in the road mineral fragments—the result of mechanical weatherwhere dry channels cross. When the rare heavy showing processes. In dry lands, rock weathering of any type ers do come, however, so much rain falls in such a is greatly reduced because of the lack of moisture and the short time that all of it cannot soak in. Because desert scarcity of organic acids from decaying plants. However, vegetative cover is sparse, runoff is largely unhindered chemical weathering is not completely lacking in deserts. and consequently rapid, often creating flash floods Over long spans of time, clays and thin soils do form, and along valley floors. These floods are quite unlike floods many iron-bearing silicate minerals oxidize, producing the sippi may take several days to reach its crest and then subside. But desert floods arrive suddenly and subside quickly. Because much surface material in a desert is The Role of Water not anchored by vegetation, the amount of erosional Deserts have scant precipitation and few major rivers. work that occurs during a single short-lived rain event is Nevertheless, water plays an important role in shaping landscapes in dry regions. Permanent streams are normal impressive. In the dry western United States, different names are used for ephemeral streams, including wash and arroyo. In other parts of the world, a dry desert stream may be a wadi (Arabian PenAn ephemeral stream shortly insula and North Africa), a after a heavy shower. donga (South America), or a Although such floods are short-lived, they cause large nullah (India). The satellite amounts of erosion. Humid regions are notable for their integrated drainage systems. But in arid regions, streams usually lack an extensive system of tributaries. In fact, a basic charMost of the time desert acteristic of desert streams stream channels are dry. is that they are small and die out before reaching the sea. Because the water table is areas. Roads dip into washes which can rapidly fill with water following a heavy rain.

*See Chapter 16 for more information on flash flooding. usually far below the surface, few desert streams Following a rainy period, The wadi in its usual can draw upon it as streams do in humid regions freshly sprouted vegetation dry state. ply of water, the combination of evaporation and infiltration soon depletes the stream. The few permanent streams that do cross arid regions, such as the Colorado and Nile Rivers, originate outside the desert, often in well-watered mountains. Here the water supply must be great, or the stream will lose all its water as it crosses the desert. For example, after the Nile leaves its headwaters in the lakes and mountains of central Africa, it traverses almost 3000 kilometers (1900 miles) of the Sahara without a single tributary. By contrast, in humid regions the discharge of a river grows as it flows downstream because tributaries and groundwater contribute additional water along the way. It should be emphasized that running water, although infrequent, nevertheless does most of the erosional work in deserts. This is contrary to the common 1. How does the rate of rock weathering in dry belief that wind is the most important erosional agent climates compare to the rate in humid regions? sculpturing desert landscapes. Although wind erosion 2. What is an ephemeral stream? is indeed more significant in dry areas than elsewhere, most desert landforms are carved by running water. As you will see in Section 19.4, the main role of wind crosses a desert, does the river’s discharge increase or decrease? How does this compare to is the transport and deposition of sediment, which crea river in a humid area? ates and shapes the ridges and mounds we call dunes. Other misconceptions about deserts are presented in 3. What is the most important erosional agent in GEOgraphics 19.1.

Landscape evolution in the Basin and Range region As erosion of the mountains and deposition in the basins continue, relief diminishes.

Playa in Death Valley These dry, flat lake beds on the floor of the basin are typically composed of silt and clay. Sometimes, as in this example, they are encrusted with salt. (Photo by Michael With the ongoing erosion of the mountain mass and the accompanying sedimentation, the local relief continues to diminish. Eventually, nearly the entire mountain mass is gone. Thus, by the late stages of erosion, the mountain areas are reduced to a few large bedrock knobs projecting above the surrounding sediment-filled basin. These isolated erosional remnants on a late-stage desert landscape are called inselbergs, a German word meaning “island mountains.” Each of the stages of landscape evolution in an arid Basin and Range region. Recently uplifted mountains in an early stage of erosion are found in southern Oregon and northern Nevada. Death Valley, California, and southern Nevada fit into the more advanced middle stage, whereas the late stage, with its inselbergs, can be Valley that shows many of the features just described. The image was taken in February 2005, shortly after a rare heavy rain. As has occurred many times over thousands of years, a wide, shallow playa lake formed in the lowest spot. By May 2005, only 3 months after the storm, the valley floor had returned to being a dry, saltencrusted playa.

1. What is meant by interior drainage? 2. Describe the features and characteristics associated with each stage in the evolution of a mountainous desert. 3. Where in the United States can each stage of desert landscape evolution be observed?

List and describe the ways that wind transports sediment. Moving air, like moving water, is turbulent and able to pick up loose debris and transport it to other locations. Just as in a stream, the wind velocity increases with height above the surface. Also as with a stream, wind transports fine particles in suspension, while heavier ones are carried as bed load. However, the transport of sediment by wind differs from that of running water in two significant ways. First, wind’s lower density compared to water renders it less capable of picking up and transporting coarse materials. Second, because wind is not confined to channels, it can spread sediment over large areas, as well as high into the atmosphere. Transporting sand The bed load that wind carries consists of sand grains that move by bouncing along the surface. Sand never travels far from the surface, even when winds are very strong. (Photo by resting particles. At first the sand rolls along the surface. When a moving sand grain strikes another grain, one or both of them may jump into the air. Once in the air, the grains are carried forward by the wind until gravity pulls them back toward the surface. When the sand hits the surface, it either bounces back into the air or dislodges other grains, which then jump upward. In this manner, a chain reaction is established, filling the air near the ground with saltating sand grains in a short period of time. Bouncing sand grains never travel far from the surface. Even when winds are very strong, the height of the saltating sand seldom exceeds 1 meter and usually is no greater than 0.5 meter. Some sand grains are too large to be thrown into the air by impact from other particles. When this is the case, the energy provided by the impact of the smaller saltating grains drives the larger grains forward. Estimates indicate that between 20 and 25 percent of the sand transported in a sandstorm is moved in this way.

Unlike sand, finer particles of dust can be swept high into the atmosphere by the wind. Because dust is often composed of rather flat particles that have large surface areas compared to their weight, it is relatively easy for turbulent air to counterbalance the pull of gravity and keep these fine particles airborne for hours or even days. South America. Each year such plumes transport about 40 million tons of dust from the Sahara to the Amazon Basin.

Resources Conservation Service; Although both silt and clay can be carried in suspension, silt commonly makes up the bulk of the suspended load because the reduced level of chemical weathering in deserts provides only small amounts of clay. Fine particles are easily carried by the wind, but they are not so easily picked up to begin with. This is because wind velocity is practically zero within a very thin layer close to the ground. Thus, the wind cannot lift the sediment by itself. Instead, the dust must be ejected or spattered into the moving air by bouncing sand grains or other disturbances. This idea is illustrated nicely by a dry, unpaved country road on a windy day. When the road is undisturbed, the wind raises little dust. However, as a car or truck moves over the road, the layer of silt is kicked up, creating a thick cloud of dust. Although the suspended load is usually deposited relatively near its source, high winds are capable of carrying large quantities of dust great distances. In the 1930s, silt that was picked up in Kansas was transported to New England 1. Describe the way in which wind transports sand. When winds are strong, how high above the surface can sand be carried? 2. How does wind’s suspended load differ from its bed load?

Describe the processes and features associated with wind erosion. Compared to running water and glaciers, wind is a relatively insignificant erosional agent. Recall that even in deserts, most erosion is performed by intermittent running water, not by wind. Wind erosion is more effective in arid lands than in humid areas because in humid places moisture binds particles together, and vegetation anchors the soil. For wind to be an effective erosional force, dryness and scant vegetation are important prerequisites. When such circumstances exist, wind may pick up, transport, and deposit great quantities of fine sediment. During the 1930s, parts of the Great Plains experienced vast dust storms (see GEOgraphics 6.3, page 204). The plowing under of the natural vegetative cover for farming, followed by severe drought, exposed the land to wind erosion, giving the area its Dust Bowl label.

In this example, deflation has removed about 1.2 meters (4 feet) of soil–the distance from the man's outstretched arm to his feet.

Weathered pebbles and cobbles on Wind-blown silt accumulates and sifts downward through coarse particles concentration of larger particles at the surface gradually increases as the finer particles are blown away. Eventually the surface is completely covered with pebbles and cobbles too large to be moved by the wind. Studies have shown that the process explanation for all environments in which desert pavement exists. For example, in many places, desert pavement is underlain by a relatively thick layer of silt that contains few if any pebbles and cobbles. In such a setting, deflation of fine sediment could not leave behind a layer of coarse particles. Geologists have also found that in some areas, the pebbles and cobbles composing desert pavement have all been exposed at the surface for about the same length of time. This would not up the pavement reach the surface over an extended time span, as deflation gradually removes the fine material. suggests that pavement develops on a surface that initially consists of coarse particles. Over time, protruding cobbles trap fine, windblown grains that settle and sift downward through the spaces between the larger surface stones. The process is aided by infiltrating rainwater. In this model, the cobbles composing the pavement were never buried. Moreover, it successfully explains the lack of coarse particles beneath the desert pavement.

Like glaciers and streams, wind also erodes by abrasion. In dry regions as well as along some beaches, windblown sand cuts and polishes exposed rock surfaces. Desert pavement Abrasion sometimes creates interestingly shaped stones called ventifacts (Figure Desert pavement stone that is exposed to the prevailing wind is abraded, deflation ends leaving it polished, pitted, and with sharp edges. If the wind is not consistently from one direction, or if the pebble becomes reoriented, it may have several faceted Unfortunately, abrasion is often given credit for Silt continues to accumulate and lift accomplishments beyond its desert pavement capabilities. Such features as Ventifacts are stones that are shaped and polished by sandblasting.

Yardangs are usually small, wind-sculpted landforms that are aligned parallel with the wind.

Shaped by the wind The sandblasting effect of the 1. Why is wind erosion relatively more important in dry regions than in humid areas? 2. What factor limits the depths of blowouts? 3. Briefly describe two hypotheses used to explain the formation of desert pavement. 4. What are yardangs and ventifacts?

Ica Valley contains yardangs that approach 100 meters (330 feet) in height and several kilometers in length. Some yardangs in the desert of Iran reach 150 meters (nearly 500 feet) in height.

his satellite image shows a large plume of windblown sediment covering large portions of Iran, Afghanistan, and Pakistan in March 2012. The airborne material is thick enough to completely hide the area beneath it. On either side of the plume, skies are mostly clear.

balanced rocks that stand high atop narrow pedestals and intricate detailing on tall pinnacles are not the results of abrasion. Sand seldom travels more than 1 meter above the surface, so the wind’s sandblasting effect is obviously limited in vertical extent. In addition to creating ventifacts, wind erosion is responsible for creating much larger features, called yardangs (from the Turkistani word yar, meaning “steep landform that is oriented parallel to the prevailing wind features that stand less than 5 meters (16 feet) high and no more than about 10 meters (33 feet) long. Because the sand-blasting effect of wind is greatest near the ground, these abraded bedrock remnants are usually narrower at their base. Sometimes yardangs are large features. Peru’s responsible for producing this plume? more likely bed load or suspended load? one pictured here as “sandstorms.” Is that an appropriate description? Why or why not?

Discuss dune formation and movement and distinguish among different dune types. Explain how loess deposits differ from deposits of sand. Although wind is relatively unimportant in producing erosional landforms, significant depositional landforms are created by the wind in some regions. Accumulations of windblown sediment are particularly conspicuous in the world’s dry lands and along many sandy coasts. Wind deposits are of two distinctive types: (1) mounds and ridges of sand from the wind’s bed load, which we call dunes, and (2) extensive blankets of silt, called loess, that once were carried in suspension.

grains moving with the wind come to rest in these wind shadows. As the accumulation of sand continAs is the case with running water, wind drops its load of ues, it becomes a more imposing barrier to the wind sediment when velocity falls and the energy available for and thus a more efficient trap for even more sand. If transport diminishes. Thus, sand begins to accumulate there is a sufficient supply of sand and the wind blows wherever an obstruction across the path of the wind steadily for a long enough time, the mound of sand slows its movement. Unlike many deposits of silt, which grows into a dune. form blanketlike layers over large areas, winds comMany dunes have an asymmetrical profile, with the monly deposit sand in mounds or ridges called dunes leeward (sheltered) slope being steep and the windward . Moving air encountering an object, such as a a good example. Sand moves up the gentler slope on the clump of vegetation or a rock, sweeps around and over windward side by saltation. Just beyond the crest of the the object, leaving a “shadow” of slower-moving air dune, where the wind velocity is reduced, the sand accubehind the obstacle and a smaller zone of quieter air mulates. As more sand collects, the slope steepens, and just in front of the obstacle. Some of the saltating sand eventually some of it slides under the pull of gravity. In this way, the leeward slope of the dune, called the slip face, maintains an angle of about 34 degrees, the angle of repose for loose dry sand. (Recall from Chapter 15 that the angle of repose is the steepest angle at which loose material remains stable.) Continued sand accumulation, coupled with periodic slides down the slip face, results in the slow migration of the dune in the direction of air movement. As sand is deposited on the slip face, layers form that are inclined in the direction the wind is blowing. These sloping layers are called Strong winds move sand up the cross-beds. When the dunes are relatively gentle windward slope. eventually buried under other layers of sediment and become part of the sedimentary rock record, White Sands National their asymmetrical shape is destroyed, but the Monument The dunes at this cross-beds remain as testimony to their origin. landmark in southeastern New Mexico are composed Nowhere is cross-bedding more prominent than of gypsum. The dunes slowly in the sandstone walls of Zion Canyon in southern migrate with the wind. (Photos by Michael Collier) (http://goo.gl/m8eYBH) For some areas, moving sand is troublesome. East, valuable oil rigs must be protected from encroaching dunes. In some cases, fences are As sand built sufficiently upwind of the dunes to stop their at the dune migration. As sand continues to collect, however, crest, the the fences must be built higher. In Kuwait protecslope steepens and some of tive fences extend for almost 10 kilometers the sand slides (6 miles) around one important oil field. Migrating down the steep dunes can also pose a problem to the construction slip face.

Sand grains deposited on the slip face at the angle of repose create the cross bedding of dunes. and maintenance of highways and railroads that cross sandy desert regions. For example, to keep a portion of Highway 95 near Winnemucca, Nevada, open to traffic, sand must be taken away about three times a year. Each time, between 1500 and 4000 cubic meters of sand are removed. Attempts at stabilizing the dunes by planting different varieties of grasses have been unsuccessful because the meager rainfall cannot support the plants.

Dunes are not just random heaps of windblown sediment. Rather, they are accumulations that usually assume observed: “Instead of finding chaos and disorder, the observer never fails to be amazed at a simplicity of form, broad assortment of dune forms exists, generally simplified to a few major types for discussion. Of course, gradations exist among different forms, and there are also irregularly shaped dunes that do not fit easily into any category. Several factors influence the form and size that dunes ultimately assume. These include wind direction and velocity, availability of sand, and amount of vegetation present. Six basic dune types are with arrows indicating wind directions.

Cross bedding is an obvious characteristic of the Navajo Sandstone in Zion National Park, Utah. These dunes form where supplies of sand are limited and the surface is relatively flat, hard, and lacking vegetation. They migrate slowly with the wind at a rate of up to 15 meters (50 feet) per year. Their size is usually modest, with the largest barchans reaching heights of about 30 meters (100 feet), while the maximum spread between their tips approaches 300 meters (1000 feet). When the wind direction is nearly constant, the crescent form of these dunes is nearly symmetrical. However, when the wind direction is not perfectly fixed, one tip becomes larger than the other.

Types of sand dunes Factors that influence the form and size of dunes include wind direction and velocity, the availability of sand, and the amount of vegetation. (https://goo.gl/fuZU6X) coastal dunes are of this type. In addition, transverse dunes are common in many arid regions where the extensive surface of wavy sand is sometimes called a sand sea. In some parts of the Sahara and Arabian Deserts, transverse dunes reach heights of 200 meters (660 feet), are 1 to 3 kilometers (0.6 to 2 miles) across, and can extend for distances of 100 kilometers (60 miles) or more. There is a relatively common dune form that is intermediate between isolated barchans and extensive waves of transverse dunes. Such dunes, called barchanoid dunes, form scalloped rows of sand oriented at right angles to barchans that have been positioned side by side.

Longitudinal Dunes Long ridges of sand that form more or less parallel to the prevailing wind where sand supplies are moderate are called longitudinal dunes quadrant of the compass. Although the smaller types are only 3 or 4 meters high and several dozens of meters long, in some large deserts, longitudinal dunes can reach Arabia, and central Australia, these dunes may approach a height of 100 meters (330 feet) and extend for distances of more than 100 kilometers (62 miles). Parabolic Dunes Unlike the other dune types described thus far, parabolic dunes form where vegetation partially covers the sand. The shape of these dunes resembles the shape of barchans except that their tips point into the dunes often form along coasts where there are strong onshore winds and abundant sand. If the sand’s sparse vegetative cover is disturbed at some spot, deflation creates a blowout. Sand is then transported out of the depression and deposited as a curved rim, which grows higher as deflation enlarges the blowout.

Star Dunes Confined largely to parts of the Sahara and Arabian Deserts, star dunes are isolated hills of name is derived from the fact that the bases of these dunes resemble multipointed stars. Usually three or four sharp-crested ridges diverge from a central high point that in some cases may approach a height of 90 meters (300 feet). As their form suggests, star dunes develop where wind directions are variable.

more than 100 meters (330 feet) have This vertical bluff near the Loess In some regions, the surface is been measured. It is this fine, buffMississippi River in southern mantled with deposits of windblown Illinois is about 3 meters River (Huang Ho) its name. (10 feet) high. In the United States, deposits of loess are significant in many areas, Iowa, Missouri, and Illinois, as well as portions of the Columbia Plateau in the Pacific Northwest. The correlation between the distribution of loess and important farming regions in the Midwest and eastern Washington State is not just a coincidence because soils derived from this wind-deposited sediIn parts of China, loess has sufficient structural strength to permit excavation of cave-like dwellings. ment are among the most fertile in the Unlike the deposits in China, which originated in deserts, the loess in the United States and Europe is an indirect product of glaciation. Its source is deposits of stratified drift. During the retreat of the ice sheets, many river valleys were choked with sediment deposited by meltwater. Strong westerly winds sweeping across the barren floodplains picked up the finer sediment and dropped it as a blanket on the eastern sides of the valleys. Such an origin is confirmed by the fact that loess deposits are thickest and coarsest on the leeward side of such major glacial 1. How do sand dunes migrate? drainage outlets as the Mississippi and Illinois Rivers 2. List and briefly distinguish among basic dune and rapidly thin with increasing distance from the valtypes. leys. Furthermore, the angular, mechanically weathered particles composing the loess are essentially the 3. How do loess deposits differ from sand deposits? same as the rock flour produced by the grinding action 4. How are some loess deposits related to glaciers? of glaciers.

his is an aerial view of the Preston Mesa dunes in northern Arizona. is shown here? these dunes. Add an arrow to show the prevailing wind direction and label the dune’s slip face. surface. Describe this process.

The lower portion of this aerial view shows a sand spit and a small portion of a beach along the shore of Nantucket, an island off the coast of Cape Cod. Offshore shoals (sandbars) are also conspicuous features. (Photo by Michael Collier) waters of the ocean are constantly in motion. Winds generate surface currents, the gravity of the Moon and Sun produces tides, and density differences create deep-ocean circulation. Further, waves carry the energy from storms to distant shores, where their impact erodes the land. Shorelines are dynamic environments. Their topography, geologic makeup, and climate vary greatly from place to place. Continental and oceanic processes converge along the shore to create landscapes that frequently undergo rapid change. When it comes to the deposition of sediment, shore areas are transition zones between marine and continental environments.

Explain why the shoreline is considered a dynamic interface and identify the basic parts of the coastal zone. Nowhere is the restless nature of the ocean’s water more noticeable than along the shore—the dynamic interface among air, land, and sea. An interface is a common boundary where different parts of a system interact. This is certainly an appropriate designation for the coastal zone. Here we can see the rhythmic rise and fall of tides and observe waves constantly rolling in and breaking. Sometimes the waves are low and gentle. At other times they pound the shore with awesome fury.

Cape Cod and Point Vineyard (left), and Nantucket (right). Although waves constantly modify this coastal landscape, they are not responsible for creating it. Rather, the original size and shape of Cape Cod resulted from the positioning of moraines and other glacial materials deposited during the Quaternary Ice Age (see Photo Researchers, Inc.) the Point Reyes area north of San Francisco. The 5.5-kilometer- (3.4-mile-) long south-facing cliffs are exposed to the full force of Ocean. Nevertheless, this promontory retreats slowly because it is formed from highly resistant bedrock.

Present-day Shorelines The nature of present-day shorelines is not just the result of the relentless attack of the land by the sea. Rather, the shore has a complex character that results from multiple geologic processes. For example, practically all coastal areas were affected by the worldwide rise in page 558). As the sea encroached landward, the shoreline retreated, becoming superimposed upon existing landscapes that had resulted from such diverse processes as stream erosion, glaciation, volcanic activity, and the forces of mountain building.

Human Activity The coastal zone is experiencing intensive human activity. About half of the world’s human population lives on or within about 100 kilometers (60 miles) of a coast. Such large numbers of people so near the shore means that hurricanes and tsunamis place millions at risk. Unfortunately, people often treat the shoreline as if it were a stable platform on which structures can safely be built. This attitude inevitably leads to conflicts between people and nature. As you will see, many coastal landforms, especially beaches and barrier islands, are relatively fragile, short-lived features that are inappropriate sites for development. a good example. In the years to come, coastal areas will be even more vulnerable because sea level is rising due to human-induced climate change. There is more about this in Chapter 21.

This beach on Florida’s Sanibel Island consists of shells and shell fragments. The black sands on this beach in Hawaii were derived from the weathering of nearby basaltic lava flows.

affected by storm waves. By contrast, the coast extends inland from the shore as far as ocean-related features can be found. The coastline marks the coast’s seaward edge, whereas the inland boundary is not always obvious or easy to determine. the foreshore and the backshore. The foreshore is the area that is exposed when the tide is out (low tide) and submerged when the tide is in (high tide). The backshore is landward of the high-tide shoreline. It is usually dry, being affected by waves only during storms. Two other zones are commonly identified. The nearshore zone lies between the low-tide shoreline and the line where waves break at low tide. Seaward of the nearshore zone is the offshore zone.

Beaches For many, a beach is the sandy area where people lie in the sun and walk along the water’s edge. Technically, a beach is an accumulation of sediment found along the landward margin of an ocean or a lake. Along straight coasts, beaches may extend for tens or hundreds of kilometers. Where coasts are irregular, beach formation may be confined to the relatively quiet waters of bays. Beaches consist of one or more berms, which are relatively flat platforms often composed of sand that are adjacent to coastal dunes or cliffs and marked by a change in slope at the seaward edge. Another part of the beach is the beach face, which is the wet, sloping surface that extends from the berm to the shoreline. Where beaches are sandy, sunbathers usually prefer the berm, whereas joggers prefer the wet, hard-packed sand of the beach face.

Beaches are composed of whatever material is locally abundant. The sediment for some beaches is derived from the erosion of adjacent cliffs or nearby coastal mountains. Other beaches are built from sediment delivered to the coast by rivers. Although the mineral makeup of many beaches is dominated by durable quartz grains, other minerals may be dominant. For example, in areas such as southern Florida, where there are no mountains or other sources of rock-forming minerals nearby, most beaches are composed of shell fragments and the remains of organisms on volcanic islands in the open ocean are composed of weathered grains of the basaltic lava that comprise the islands or of coarse debris eroded from coral reefs that Regardless of the composition, the material that comprises the beach does not stay in one place. Instead, crashing waves are constantly moving it. Thus, beaches can be thought of as material in transit along the shore.

1. Why is the shoreline described as being an 2. Distinguish among shore, shoreline, coast, and 3. What is a beach? Distinguish between beach face and berm.

List and discuss the factors that influence the height, length, and period of a wave and describe the motion of water within a wave. Ocean waves are caused by energy traveling along the interface between ocean and atmosphere, often transferring energy from a storm far out at sea over distances of several thousand kilometers. That’s why even on calm days, the ocean still has waves that travel across its surface. When observing waves, always remember that you are watching energy travel through a medium (water). If you make waves by tossing a pebble into a pond, or by splashing in a pool, or by blowing across the surface of a cup of coffee, you are imparting energy to the liquid, and the waves you see are visible evidence of the energy passing through. Wind-generated waves provide most of the energy that shapes and modifies shorelines. Where the land and sea meet, waves that may have traveled unimpeded for hundreds or thousands of kilometers suddenly encounter a barrier that will not allow them to advance farther and must absorb their energy. Stated another way, the shore is the location where a practically irresistible force confronts an almost immovable object. The conflict that results is never-ending and sometimes that they topple over, forming ocean breakers called For a particular wind speed, there is a maximum fetch and duration of wind beyond which waves will no longer increase in size. This is because the waves are losing as much energy through the breaking of whitecaps as they are receiving from the wind. When the maximum fetch and duration are reached for a given wind velocity, the waves are said to be “fully developed.” When wind stops or changes direction, or if waves leave the stormy area where they were created, they continue on unrelated to local winds. The waves also undergo a gradual change to swells, which are lower and longer and may carry a storm’s energy to distant shores. Because many independent wave systems exist at the same time, the sea surface acquires a complex, irregular pattern. Hence, the sea waves we watch from the shore are often a mixture of swells from faraway storms and waves created by local winds.

Wave basics An idealized nonbreaking wave, showing its basic parts and the movement of water with increasing depth.

Surf zone (breakers form) Velocity decreases (wave height increases) diminish, the wave steadily grows higher. Finally, a critical point is reached when the wave is too steep to support 20.7, right), causing water to advance up the shore. The turbulent water created by breaking waves is called surf. On the landward margin of the surf zone, the swash—the turbulent sheet of water from collapsing breakers—moves up the slope of the beach. When the energy of the swash has been expended, the water flows back down the beach toward the surf zone as 1. List three factors that determine the height, length, and period of a wave. 2. Describe the motion of a floating object as a wave 3. How do a wave’s speed, wavelength, and height change as the wave moves into shallow water and Explain how waves erode and how waves move sediment along the shore. During calm weather, wave action is minimal. However, just as streams do most of their work during floods, so too do waves accomplish most of their work during storms. The impact of high, storminduced waves against the shore can be awesome in its violence. The discussion of hurricanes later in the chapter serves to reinforce this fact.

Each breaking wave may hurl thousands of tons of water against the land, sometimes causing the ground to literally tremble. The forces exerted by Atlantic waves in wintertime, for example, average nearly 10,000 kilograms per square meter (more than 2000 pounds per square foot). The force during storms is even greater. It is no wonder that cracks and crevices are quickly opened in cliffs, seawalls, breakwaters, and anything else that is subjected to these enormous shocks. Water is forced into his surfer is enjoying a ride on a large wave along the coast of Maui. (Photo by Getty Images) created this wave? prior to the time when this photo was taken? Is that true of the wave in this photo? Explain.

Movement Perpendicular to the Shoreline If you stand ankle deep in water at the beach, you will see that sand down the beach face. Along many beaches, light wave activity is the rule during the summer. Therefore, a wide sand berm gradually develops. During winter, when storms are frequent and more powerful, strong wave activity erodes and months to build can be dramatically narrowed in just a few hours by the high-energy waves created by a strong winter storm.

Smooth, rounded rocks along the shore are an obvious reminder that abrasion can be intense in the surf zone. This sandstone cliff at Gabriola Island, British Columbia, was undercut by wave action.

As these waves approach nearly straight on, refraction causes the wave energy to be concentrated at headlands (resulting in erosion) and dispersed in bays (resulting in deposition).

Result: waves bend so that they strike the shore more directly Wave refraction at Rincon Point, California what degree erosion, sediment transport, and deposition Longshore Transport Although waves are refracted, will take place. most still reach the shore at some angle, however slight. Waves seldom approach the shore straight on. Consequently, the uprush of water from each breaking Rather, most waves move toward the shore at an wave (the swash) is at an oblique angle to the shoreline. angle. However, when they reach the shallow water However, the backwash is straight down the slope of the of a smoothly sloping bottom, they are bent and tend beach. The effect of this pattern of water movement is to to become parallel to the shore. Such bending occurs transport sediment in a zigzag pattern along the beach because the part of the wave nearest the shore reaches face. This movement is called beach drift, shallow water and slows first, whereas the end that is still and it can transport sand and pebbles hundreds or even in deep water continues forward at its full speed. The net thousands of meters each day. However, a more typical result is a wave front that may approach nearly parallel to rate is 5 to 10 meters per day. the shore, regardless of the original direction of the wave. Because of refraction, wave impact is Path of sand concentrated against the sides and ends of headlands that project into the water, whereas Net movement wave attack is weakened in bays. of sand grains This differential wave attack along irregular coastlines is As the waves reach the shalt low water in front of the ore c headland sooner than they do in adjacent bays, they are bent more nearly parallel to the protruding land and strike Beach drift occurs as incoming waves it from all three sides. By carry sand at an angle up the beach, while the water from spent waves carries contrast, refraction in the it directly down the slope of the beach. bays causes waves to diverge Similar movements occur offshore in the and expend less energy. In surf zone to create the longshore current. these zones of weakened ore cu wave activity, sediments can These waves approaching the beach at a slight accumulate and form sandy beaches. Over a long angle near Oceanside, California, produce a period, erosion of the headlands and deposition longshore current moving from left to right. in the bays will straighten an irregular shoreline.

Rip current These concentrated movements of water flow opposite the direction of breaking waves. (Photo by (downhill). Longshore currents change direction because the direction that waves approach the beach changes seasonally. Nevertheless, longshore currents generally flow southward along both the Atlantic and Pacific shores of the United States.

Rip Currents Rip currents are concentrated movements of water that flow in the opposite direction of breaking waves. (Sometimes rip currents are incorrectly called rip tides, although they are unrelated to tidal phenomena.) Most of the backwash from spent waves finds its way back to the open ocean as an unconfined flow across the ocean bottom called sheet flow. However, sometimes a portion of the returning water moves seaward in the form of surface rip currents. Rip currents do not travel far beyond the surf zone before breaking up, and they can be recognized by the way they interfere with incoming waves or by the sediment that is often suspended within. They can be hazardous to swimmers, who, if caught in them, can be carried out away from shore. The best strategy for exiting a rip current is to swim parallel to the shore for a few tens of meters.

1. Why do waves approaching the shoreline often 2. What is the effect of wave refraction along an irregular coastline? 3. Describe the two processes that contribute to longshore transport.

Describe the features typically created by wave erosion and those resulting from sediment deposited by longshore transport processes. Although the same processes cause change along every coast, not all coasts respond in the same way. Interactions among different processes and the relative importance of each process depend on local factors. The factors include (1) the proximity of a coast to sediment-laden rivers, (2) the degree of tectonic activity, (3) the topography and composition of the land, (4) prevailing winds and weather patterns, and (5) the configuration of the coastline and nearshore areas. Features that originate primarily because of erosion are called erosional features, whereas accumulations of sediment produce depositional features.

Many coastal landforms owe their origin to erosional processes. Such erosional features are common along the rugged and irregular New England coast and along the steep shorelines of the west coast of the United States.

Terraces As the name implies, wave-cut cliffs originate in the cutting action of the surf against the base of coastal land. As erosion progresses, rocks overhanging the notch at the base of the cliff crumble benchlike surface, called a wave-cut platform, is left behind by the receding cliff (Figure 20.13, left). The platform broadens as wave attack continues. Some debris produced by the breaking waves remains along the water’s edge as sediment on the beach, and the remainder is transported farther seaward. If a wavecut platform is uplifted above sea level by tectonic right). Marine terraces are easily recognized by their gentle seaward-sloping shape and are often desirable sites for coastal roads, buildings, or agriculture.

Coastal Massachusetts along the coast of Martha’s Vineyard. International Space Station, shows Cod. Can you pick out this feature on dominant direction of the longshore current. The term baymouth bar is applied to a sandbar that completely crosses a bay, sealing it off tombolo (tombolo = mound), a ridge of sand that connects an island to the mainland or to another island, forms in much the same manner as a spit.

Eventually the arch falls in, leaving an isolated remnant, or sea stack, on the wave-cut platform will be consumed by the action of the waves.

Sea arch Sea arch shore represent zones of relatively quiet water that allow Barrier islands form in several ways. Some originated as spits that were severed from the mainland by wave erosion or by the general rise in sea level after the last episode of glaciation. Others are created when turbulent waters in the line of breakers heap up sand scoured from the ocean bottom. Because these sand barriers rise above normal sea level, the sand likely piles up as a result of the work of storm waves at high tide. Finally, some barrier islands may be former sand dune ridges that originated along the shore during the last glacial period, when sea level was lower. When the ice sheets melted, sea level rose and flooded the area behind the beach–dune complex.

The Evolving Shore are irregular, although the degree of and reason for the irregularity may vary considerably from place to place.

Along a coastline that is characterized by varied geology, the pounding surf may at first increase its irregularity because the waves will erode the weaker rocks more easily than the stronger ones. However, if a shoreline remains tectonically stable, marine erosion and deposition will eventually produce a straighter, more regular irregular coast. As waves erode the headlands, creating cliffs and a wave-cut platform, sediment is carried along the shore. Some material is deposited in the bays, while other debris is formed into spits and baymouth bars. At the same time, rivers fill the bays with sediment. Ultimately, a generally straight, smooth coast results.

1. How is a marine terrace related to a wave-cut 2. Describe the formation of each labeled feature in 3. List three ways that a barrier island may form.

America’s Coasts Distinguish between emergent and submergent coasts. Contrast the erosion problems faced on the Atlantic and Gulf coasts with those along the Pacific coast.

The shoreline along the Pacific coast of the United States is strikingly different from that of the Atlantic and Gulf coast regions (see GEOgraphics 20.1). Some of the differences are related to plate tectonics. The west coast represents the leading edge of the North American plate, and because of this, it experiences active uplift and deformation. By contrast, the east coast is far from any active plate boundary and relatively quiet tectonically. Because of this basic geologic difference, the nature of shoreline erosion problems along America’s opposite coasts is different.

Emergent Coasts In some areas, the coast is clearly emergent because rising land or a falling water level exposes wave-cut cliffs and platforms above sea level. Excellent examples include portions of coastal California, where uplift has occurred in the recent geologic past. The Angeles, seven different terrace levels exist, indicating seven episodes of uplift. The ever-persistent sea is now cutting a new platform at the base of the cliff. If uplift follows, it too will become an elevated marine terrace. Other examples of emergent coasts include regions that were once buried beneath great ice sheets. When glaciers were present, their weight depressed the crust, and when the ice melted, the crust began gradually to spring back. Consequently, prehistoric shoreline features Bay region of Canada is such an area; portions of it are still rising at a rate of more than 1 centimeter per year. Submergent Coasts In contrast to the preceding land or change the volume of ocean basins must be taken into account. The myriad factors that influence coastal areas make shoreline classification difficult. Many geologists classify coasts based on the changes that have occurred with respect to sea level. This commonly used classification divides coasts into two general categories: emergent and submergent. Emergent coasts develop because an area experiences either uplift or a drop in sea level. Conversely, submergent coasts are created when sea level rises or the land adjacent to the sea subsides.

To save the famous candy-striped landmark, the National Park Service authorized moving the structure. After the $12 million move, it is expected to be safe for 50 years or more.

Hatteras lighthouse After the failure of a number of efforts to protect this 21-story lighthouse, the nation’s tallest, from being destroyed due to a receding shoreline, the structure finally had to be moved. PhotoEdit Inc.; bottom photo by flooded by the postglacial rise in sea level and transformed into a highly irregular coastline. Keep in mind that most coasts have complicated geologic histories. With respect to sea level, at various times many coasts have emerged and then submerged. Each time, they may retain some of the features created during the previous situation.

In contrast to the broad, gently sloping coastal plains of the Atlantic and Gulf coasts, much of the Pacific coast is characterized by relatively narrow beaches that are backed by steep cliffs and mountain ranges. Recall that America’s western margin is a more rugged and tectonically active region than the eastern margin. Because uplift continues, a rise in sea level in the west is not so readily apparent. Nevertheless, like the shoreline erosion problems facing the Atlantic coast’s barrier islands, west coast difficulties also stem largely from the alteration of a natural system by people. Oceanus 28 (No. 3, Fall 1985): p. 22 © Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute.

level rises at an increasing rate in the years to come, increased shoreline erosion and sea-cliff retreat should be expected along many parts of the Pacific coast. Coastal vulnerability to sea-level rise is examined in more detail as part of a discussion of the possible consequences of global warming in Chapter 21.

Pacific Coast Wave refraction along the coast of Cove. These steep cliffs are a sharp contrast to typical scenes along the Atlantic and Gulf coasts. (Photo by Michael Collier) 1. Are estuaries associated with submergent or emergent coasts? Explain. 2. What observable features would lead you to classify a coastal area as emergent? 3. Briefly describe what happens when storm waves strike an undeveloped barrier island. 4. How might building a dam on a river that flows to the sea affect a coastal beach?

Describe the basic structure and characteristics of a hurricane and the three broad categories of hurricane destruction. Many view the weather in the tropics with favor—and rightfully so. Places such as islands in the South Pacific and the Caribbean are known for their lack of significant day-to-day variations. Warm breezes, steady temperatures, and rains that occur as heavy but brief tropical showers are expected. It is ironic that these relatively tranquil regions occasionally produce some of the world’s most violent storms. Once formed, these storms carry severe conditions far from the tropics.

Profile of a Hurricane amount of energy produced by a typical hurricane in just a single day is truly immense. To get the engine started, a large quantity of warm, moist air is required, and a continuous supply is needed to keep it going.

The eye wall surrounds the eye and is the most intense part of the storm requirement explains why hurricane formation over the relatively cool waters of the South Atlantic and eastern South Pacific is extremely rare. For the same reason, few hurricanes form poleward of 20 degrees latitude. Although water temperatures are sufficiently high, hurricanes do not develop within about 5 degrees of the equator because the Coriolis effect (a force related to Earth’s rotation that gives storms their “spin”) is too hurricanes form.

Pressure Gradient Hurricanes are intense lowpressure centers, which means that as you move toward Whirling tropical cyclones—the greatest storms on Earth—occasionally have wind speeds exceeding 300 kilometers (185 miles) per hour. In the United States they are known as hurricanes, in the western Pacific they are called typhoons, and in the Indian Ocean they are simply called cyclones. No matter which name is used, these storms are among the most destructive of natural disasters. The vast majority of hurricane-related deaths and damage are caused by relatively infrequent yet powerful storms. Of course, the deadliest and most costly storm Mississippi, and Alabama. Although hundreds of thousands of people fled before the storm made landfall, thousands of others were caught by the storm. In addition to the human suffering and tragic loss of life left in the wake of Hurricane Katrina, the financial losses caused by the storm are practically incalculable. Our coasts are vulnerable. People are flocking to live within 75 kilometers (45 miles) of a coast, placing millions at risk. Moreover, the potential costs of property damage are incredible. As sea level continues to rise in coming decades, low-lying, densely populated coastal areas will become even more vulnerable to the destructive effects of major storms.

Sea-surface temperatures Among the necessary ingredients for a hurricane is warm ocean satellite image from June 1, 2010, shows sea-surface temperatures at the beginning of hurricane season.

the center of the storm, air pressure gets lower and lower. Such storms are said to have a very steep pressure gradient. Pressure gradient refers to how rapidly the pressure changes per unit distance and is shown on a map with isobars, lines of equal pressure. Just as the spacing of contour lines on a topographic map indicates how steep or gentle a slope is, the spacing of isobars on a weather chart shows how rapidly air pressure is changing. Closely spaced isobars indicate a steep pressure generates the rapid, inward-spiraling winds of a hurricane. As the air rushes toward the center of the storm, its velocity increases. This is similar to skaters with their arms extended spinning faster as they pull their arms in close to their bodies.

Storm Structure As the inward rush of warm, moist surface air approaches the core of the storm, it turns upward and ascends in a ring of cumulonimbus cloud towers. This doughnut-shaped wall of intense convective activity surrounding the center of the storm is called the eye wall. It is here that the greatest wind speeds and heaviest rainfall occur. Surrounding the eye wall are curved bands of clouds that trail away in a spiral fashion. Near the top of the hurricane, the airflow is outward, carrying the rising air away from the storm center, thereby providing room for more inward flow at the surface. zone about 20 kilometers (12.5 miles) in diameter where precipitation ceases and winds subside. It offers a brief but deceptive break from the extreme weather in the enormous curving wall clouds that surround it. The air within the eye gradually descends and heats by compression, making it the warmest part of the storm. Although many people believe that the eye is characterized by clear blue skies, this is usually not the case because the subsidence in the eye is seldom strong enough to produce cloudless conditions. Although the sky appears much brighter in this region, scattered clouds at various levels are common.

Storm surge destruction Texas, on September 16, 2008, 3 days after Hurricane Ike came ashore. At landfall the storm had sustained winds of 165 kilometers (105 miles) per hour. The extraordinary storm surge caused most of the damage shown 175 kilometers (109 miles) per hour is moving toward the shore at 50 kilometers (31 miles) per hour. In this case, the net wind speed on the right side of the advancing storm is 225 kilometers (140 miles) per hour. On the left side, the hurricane’s winds are blowing opposite the direction of storm movement, so the net winds are away from the coast at 125 kilometers (78 miles) per hour. Along the shore facing the left side of the oncoming hurricane, the water level may actually decrease as the storm makes landfall.

The torrential rains that accompany most hurricanes bring a third significant threat: flooding. Whereas the effects of storm surge and strong winds are concentrated in coastal areas, heavy rains may affect places hundreds of kilometers from the coast for up to several days after the storm has lost its hurricane-force winds. In September 1999, Hurricane Floyd brought flooding rains, high winds, and rough seas to a large portion Wind Damage Destruction caused by wind is perhaps of the Atlantic seaboard. More than 2.5 million people the most obvious of the classes of hurricane damage. Debris such as signs, roofing materials, and small items left evacuated their homes from Florida north to the Carolinas and beyond. It was the largest peacetime evacuation outside become dangerous flying missiles in hurricanes. For some structures, the force of the wind is sufficient to cause total ruin. Mobile homes are particularly vulnerable. on already saturated ground created devastating inland flooding. Altogether Floyd dumped more than 48 centiHigh-rise buildings are also susceptible to hurricane-force meters (19 inches) of rain on Wilmington, North Carowinds. Upper floors are most vulnerable because wind lina, with 33.98 centimeters (13.38 inches) falling in a speeds usually increase with height. Recent research single 24-hour span. suggests that people should stay below the 10th floor of Another well-known example is Hurricane Camille a building but remain above any floors at risk for flood(1969). Although this storm is best known for its exceping. In regions with good building codes, wind damage is tional storm surge and the devastation it North Carolina brought to coastal areas, the greatest numAn approaching hurricane This hypothetical ber of deaths associated with this storm Northern Hemisphere hurricane, with peak occurred in the Blue Ridge Mountains of winds of 175 kilometers (109 miles) per hour, rric ent Hu vem ph d a n of Virginia 2 days after Camille’s landfall. is moving toward the coast at 50 kilometers m 0k Sp ectio ane dir urric ent (31 miles) per hour. On the right side of the Many places received more than 25 centio d e h vem t w h = Win t sid h mo kph advancing storm, the 175-kilometer-per-hour Ne 5 kp he meters (10 inches) of rain. 22 t t ri 5 k winds blow in the same direction as the movement of the storm (50 kilometers per hour). Therefore the net wind speed on the right side of the storm is 225 kilometers (140 miles) per hour toward the coast. On the left side, the hurricane’s winds are blowing opposite the direction of storm movement, so the net winds of 125 kilometers (78 miles) per hour are away from the coast. Storm surge will be greatest along the part of the coast hit by the right side of the advancing hurricane.

Detecting and Tracking from a hurricane—just a day’s striking distance away—may experience clear skies and virtually no wind. Before the age of weather satellites, such a situation made it difficult to warn people of impending history came as a result of a hurricane that struck an unprepared Galveston, Texas, on September 8, 1900. The strength of the storm, together with the lack of adequate warning, caught the population by surprise and took the lives of 8000 people . In the United States, early warning systems have greatly reduced the number of deaths caused by hurricanes. At the same time, however, an astronomical rise has occurred in the amount of property damage, primarily due to the rapid population growth and accompanying development in coastal areas.

Aftermath of the historic Galveston hurricane The storm struck an unsuspecting and unprepared city on September 8, 1900. It was blocks were swept clean, and mountains of debris accumulated around the few remaining buildings.

local forecast centers are able to track the storm and provide short-term warnings for floods, tornadoes, and high winds for specific areas. used for observing hurricanes has been the development of meteorological satellites. Vast areas of open ocean must be observed in order to detect a hurricane. Before satellites, this was an impossible task. Today instruments aboard satellites can detect a potential storm even before it develops its characteristic circular cloud pattern. In recent years two methods of using satelliteacquired data to monitor hurricane intensity have been method uses satellites to identify areas of extraordinary cloud development, called hot towers, in the eye wall of an approaching hurricane.

1. What factors influence where and when hurricane formation takes place? 2. Distinguish between the eye and eye wall of a 3. What are the three broad categories of hurricane damage? Which one is responsible for the greatest number of hurricane-related deaths? 4. Which side of an advancing hurricane in the Northern Hemisphere has the strongest winds and highest storm surge—right or left? Explain. 5. List three tools that provide data used to track and analyze hurricanes.

Aircraft Reconnaissance When a hurricane is within range, specially instrumented aircraft can fly directly into a threatening storm and accurately measure details of its position and current state of development. Data transmission can be made directly from an aircraft in the midst of a storm to the forecast center. The data collected are critical in analyzing the current characteristics needed to forecast the future behavior of a storm.

Hot towers This Tropical Rainfall acquired early on August 28, 2005. The cutaway view of the inner portion of the storm shows cloud height on one side and rainfall rates on the other. Two hot towers (in red) are visible: one in an outer rain band and the other in the eye wall. The eye wall tower rises 16 kilometers (10 miles) above the ocean surface and is associated with an area of intense rainfall. Towers this tall near the core often indicate that a storm is intensifying. Katrina grew from a category 3 to a category 4 storm soon after this image his satellite image shows Cyclone Favio as it came ashore along the coast of Mozambique, Africa, on February 22, 2007. This powerful storm was moving from east to west. Since it is a Southern Hemisphere storm, the cloud pattern shows that the winds circulate in a clockwise spiral instead of Hemisphere. Portions of the cyclone had sustained winds of 203 kilometers (126 miles) per hour as it made landfall.

Summarize the ways in which people deal with shoreline erosion problems. Compared with natural hazards such as earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, and landslides, shoreline erosion is often perceived to be a more continuous and predictable process that may cause relatively modest damage to limited areas. In reality, the shoreline is a dynamic place that can change rapidly in response to natural forces. Exceptional storms are capable of eroding beaches and cliffs at rates that greatly exceed the long-term average. Such bursts of accelerated erosion not only significantly affect the natural evolution of a coast but also can have a profound impact on people who reside in the coastal zone. Erosion along our coasts causes significant property damage. Huge sums are spent annually not only to repair damage but also to prevent or control erosion. Already a problem at many sites, shoreline erosion is certain to become an increasingly serious problem as extensive coastal development continues. During the past 100 years, growing affluence and increasing demands for recreation have brought unprecedented development to many coastal areas. As both the number and the value of buildings have increased, so too have efforts to protect property from storm waves by stabilizing the shore. Also, controlling the natural migration of sand is an ongoing struggle in many coastal areas. Such interference can result in unwanted changes that are difficult and expensive to correct.

Structures built to protect a coast from erosion or to prevent the movement of sand along a beach are collectively known as hard stabilization. Hard stabilization can take many forms and often results in predictable yet unwanted outcomes. Hard stabilization includes jetties, groins, breakwaters, and seawalls.

Jetties Since relatively early in America’s history, a principal goal in coastal areas has been the development and maintenance of harbors. In many cases, this has involved the construction of jetty systems. Jetties are usually built in pairs and extend into the ocean at the entrances to rivers and harbors. With the flow of water confined to a narrow zone, the ebb and flow caused by the rise and fall of the tides keep the sand dam against which the longshore current and beach drift deposit sand. At the same time, wave activity removes sand on the other side. Because the other side is not receiving any new sand, there is soon no beach at all.

Jetties interrupt the movement of sand causing deposition on the upcurrent side.

Beach Nourishment One approach to stabilizing shoreline sands without hard stabilization is beach nourishment. As the term implies, this practice involves adding large quantities of sand to the beach system. Extending beaches seaward makes buildings along the shoreline less vulnerable to destruction by storm waves and enhances recreational uses. Without sandy beaches, tourism suffers. The process of beach nourishment is straightforward. Sand is pumped by dredges from offshore or trucked from inland locations. The “new” beach, however, will not be the same as the former beach. Because replenishment sand is from somewhere else, typically not another beach, it is new to the beach environment. The new sand is often different in size, shape, sorting, and composition. Such differences pose problems in terms of erodibility and the kinds of life the new sand will support. Beach nourishment is not a permanent solution to the problem of shrinking beaches. The same processes that removed the sand in the first place will eventually remove the replacement sand as well. Nevertheless, the number of nourishment projects has increased in recent years, and many beaches, especially along the Atlantic coast, have had their sand replenished many times. Virginia Beach, Virginia, has been nourished more than 50 times. Beach nourishment is costly. For example, a modest project might involve 38,000 cubic meters (50,000 holds about 7.6 cubic meters (10 cubic yards) of sand. So this small project would require about 5000 dumptruck loads. Many projects extend for many miles. Nourishing beaches typically costs millions of dollars per mile.

Seawall Seabright in northern New Jersey once had a broad, sandy beach. (16 to 18 feet) high and 8 kilometers (5 miles) long was built to protect the town and the railroad that brought tourists to the beach. After the wall was built, the beach narrowed Macia/Science Source) adopted for river floodplains following the devastating 1993 Mississippi River floods, in which vulnerable structures are either abandoned or relocated on higher, safer ground. changing land use occurred on New York’s Staten Island following Hurricane Sandy in 2012. The state turned some vulnerable shoreline areas of the island into waterfront parks. The parks act as buffers to protect inland homes and businesses from strong storms while providing the community with needed open space and access to recreational Land use changes can be controversial. People with significant nearshore investments want to rebuild and defend coastal developments from the erosional wrath of the sea. Others, however, argue that with sea level rising, the impact of coastal storms will get worse in the decades to come, and vulnerable or oft-damaged structures should be abandoned or relocated to improve personal safety and reduce costs. Such ideas will no doubt be the focus of much study and debate as states and communities evaluate and revise coastal land-use policies.

Offshore sand pouring onto the beach 1. List at least three examples of hard stabilization and describe what each is intended to do. How does each affect distribution of sand on a beach? 2. What are two alternatives to hard stabilization, and what are the potential problems associated with each?

Although known for centuries, tides were not explained satisfactorily until Sir Isaac Newton applied the law of gravitation to them. Newton showed that there is a mutual attractive force between two bodies and that because oceans are free to move, they are deformed by this force. Hence, ocean tides result from the gravitational attraction exerted upon Earth by the Moon and, to a lesser extent, by the Sun.

Idealized tidal bulges caused by the Moon If Earth were covered to a uniform depth with water, there would be two tidal bulges: one on the side of Earth facing the Moon (right) and the other on the opposite side of Earth (left). Depending on the Moon’s position, tidal bulges may be inclined relative to Earth’s equator. In this situation, Earth’s rotation causes an observer to experience two unequal high tides during a day.

that one high tide experienced by an observer in the Northern Hemisphere is considerably higher than the high tide half a day later. In contrast, a Southern Hemisphere observer would experience the opposite effect.

The primary body that influences the tides is the Moon, which makes one complete revolution around Earth every 29.5 days. The Sun, however, also influences the tides. It is far larger than the Moon, but because it is much farther Near the times of new and full moons, the Sun and Moon are aligned, and their forces on tides are added tide-producing bodies causes larger tidal bulges (higher high tides) and deeper tidal troughs (lower low tides), producing a large tidal range. These are called the spring tides (springen = to rise up), which have no connection with the spring season but occur twice a month, during the time when the Earth–Moon–Sun system is aligned. Conversely, at about the time of the first and third quarters of the Moon, the gravitational forces of the Moon and Sun act on Earth at right angles, and each partially offsets daily tidal range is less. These are called neap tides (nep = scarcely or barely touching), and they also occur twice each month. Each month, then, there are two spring tides and two neap tides, each about 1 week apart.

Spring and neap tides Earth–Moon–Sun positions influence the tides.

Lunar tide Third quarter third-quarter position, the tidal bulges produced by the Moon are at right angles to the bulges created by the Sun and the tidal range is smaller.

water heights, or both. In this case, there are usually two high and two low tides each day, with high tides of different heights and low tides of different heights. Such tides are prevalent along the Pacific coast of the United States and in many other parts of the world.

Tidal current is the term used to describe the horizontal flow of water that accompanies the rise and fall of the tide. These water movements induced by tidal forces can be important in some coastal areas. Tidal currents flow in one direction during a portion of the tidal cycle and reverse their flow during the remainder. Tidal currents that advance into the coastal zone as the tide rises are called flood currents. As the tide falls, seaward-moving water generates ebb currents. Periods of little or no current, called slack water, separate flood and ebb. The areas affected by these alternating tidal currents are of the coastal zone, tidal flats vary from narrow strips seaward of the beach to extensive zones that may extend for several kilometers.

Gulf of California 1.2 tidal pattern (lower right) shows one high tide and one low tide each tidal (upper right) shows two high tides and two low tides of approximately equal heights during each pattern (left) shows two high tides and two low tides of unequal heights during each tidal day.

Because this tidal delta has developed on the landward side of the inlet, it is called a flood delta.

through narrow inlets. Here they constantly scour the small entrances to many good harbors that would otherwise be blocked. Sometimes deposits called tidal deltas are created by tidal currents. They may develop either as flood deltas landward of an inlet or as ebb deltas on the seaward side of an inlet. Because wave activity and longshore currents are reduced on the sheltered landward side, flood deltas are more common and more current moves rapidly through an inlet. As the current emerges from the narrow passage into more open waters, it slows and deposits its load of sediment.

1. Explain why an observer can experience two unequal high tides during a single day. 2. Distinguish between neap tides and ebb tides. 3. Contrast flood current and ebb current.

Glaciers are sensitive to changes in temperature and precipitation and therefore provide clues about changes in climate. Like most glaciers and ice sheets worldwide, Margerie Glacier in Alaska’s Glacier Bay National Park, is losing mass and retreating. (Photo by Don Paulson/AGE Fotostock) a significant impact on people, and we are learning that people also have a strong influence on climate. Today global climate change caused by humans is a major environmental issue. Unlike changes in the geologic past, which were natural variations, modern climate change is dominated by human influences that are sufficiently large that they exceed the bounds of natural variability. Moreover, these changes are likely to continue for many centuries. The effects of this venture into the unknown with climate could be very disruptive not only to humans but to many other life-forms as well. The latter portion of this chapter examines the ways in which humans may be changing global climate.

List the major parts of the climate system and some connections between climate and geology. The term weather refers to the state of the atmosphere at a given time and place. Changes in the weather are frequent and sometimes seemingly erratic. In contrast, climate is a description of aggregate weather conditions, based on observations over many decades. Climate is often defined simply as “average weather,” but this definition is inadequate because variations and extremes are also important parts of a climate description.

Throughout this book you have frequently been reminded that Earth is a complex system that consists can produce changes in any or all of the other parts— often in ways that are neither obvious nor immediately apparent. Key to understanding climate change and its causes is the fact that climate is related to all parts of the Earth system. We must recognize that there is a climate system that derives its energy from the Sun and includes the atmosphere, hydrosphere, geosphere, biosphere, and cryosphere. The first four were discussed in Chapter 1; the cryosphere refers to the portion of Earth’s surface where water is in solid form. This includes snow, glaciers, sea ice, freshwater ice, and frozen ground (termed permafrost). The climate system involves the exchanges of energy and moisture that occur among the five spheres. These exchanges link the atmosphere to the other spheres so that the whole functions as an extremely complex interactive unit. Changes in the climate system do not occur in isolation. Rather, when one part of the climate system changes, the other components react. The major components of the climate system are The climate system provides a framework for the study of climate. The interactions and exchanges among the parts of the climate system create a complex network that links the five spheres. As you will see, because the climate system involves all of Earth’s spheres, data from many sources are used to study and decipher climate change.

in amount and type of cloud in amount of icecovered in amount of outgoing in solar Changes in in amount of evaporationprecipitation in amount of sea ice has experienced wide swings in climate, from ice ages to conditions associated with subtropical coal swamps or desert dunes. Time scales for climate change vary from decades to millions of years. Chapter 22 “Earth’s Evolution Through Geologic Time,” documents many of these shifts in climate.

Climate Change Explain why unraveling past climate changes is important and discuss several ways in which such changes are detected.

Climate not only varies from place to place but is also naturally variable over time. During the great expanse of Earth history, and long before humans were roaming the planet, there were many shifts—from warm to cold and from wet to dry and back again.

Earth’s climate system Schematic view showing some important components of Earth’s climate system. Many interactions occur among the various components on a wide range of space and time scales, making the system extremely complex.

Relative climate change during the Cenozoic era During the past 65 million years, Earth’s climate shifted from being a warm “greenhouse” to being a cool “icehouse.” Climate is not stable when viewed over long time spans. Earth has experienced several back-andforth shifts between warm and cold.

climates are found even at high latitudes. During icehouse conditions, global climate is cool enough to support ice sheets at one or both poles. Earth’s climate has gradually transitioned between these two categories only a few times in the past 541 million years, the span known as the Phanerozoic (“visible life”) eon. The rocks and deposits of the Phanerozoic eon contain abundant fossils that document major environmental and evolutionary trends. The most recent transition occurred during the Cenozoic era. The early Cenozoic was a time of greenhouse climates like those the dinosaurs experienced during the preceding Mesozoic era. By about 34 million years ago, permanent ice sheets were present at the South Pole, ushering in icehouse conditions. Climate warmed during the Miocene epoch (about 20 million years ago) as mammal populations reached their greatest diversity. Climate then cooled. In North America, the lush “greenhouse” forests (there were palm trees in Wyoming and banana trees in Oregon) were replaced by open grasslands. Grassland ecosystems are better suited for a cooler, drier “icehouse” climate. By 2 million years ago (the start of the Quaternary epoch), Earth’s climate was cold enough to support vast ice sheets at both poles. In the Northern Hemisphere ice River, then subsequently retreated to Greenland. For the past 800,000 years, this cycle of ice advance and retreat has occurred about every 100,000 years. The last major ice sheet advance reached a maximum about 18,000 years ago. How do we know about these changes? What are the causes? The next sections take a look at how scientists decipher Earth’s climate history. Later we will explore some significant natural causes of climate change.

Ancient bristlecone pines Some of these Mountains are more than 4000 years old. The study of tree-growth rings is one way that scientists reconstruct past climates. (Photo by Bill Stevenson/Alamy) climate of the past in order to assess the current and potential future climate in the context of natural climate variability.

We know that the parts of the Earth system are linked so that a change in one part can produce changes in any or all of the other parts. In this section, you will see how changes in atmospheric and oceanic temperatures are reflected in the nature of life in the sea. Most seafloor sediments contain the remains of organisms that once lived near the sea surface (the ocean– atmosphere interface). When such near-surface organisms die, their shells slowly settle to the floor of the ocean, where they become part of the sedimentary record. These seafloor sediments are useful recorders of worldwide climate change because the numbers and types of organisms living near the sea surface change with the climate. For this reason, scientists are tapping the huge reservoir of data in seafloor sediments. The sediment cores gathered by drilling ships and other research vessels have provided invaluable data that have significantly expanded our knowledge and understanding of past climates.

One notable example of how seafloor sediments add Age. The records of temperature changes contained in cores of sediment from the ocean floor have proven critical to our present understanding of this recent span of Earth history. There is more about this topic in the section “Causes of Ice Ages” in Chapter 18.

Ice cores: Important sources of climate data Laboratory is a physical plant for storing and studying cores of ice taken from glaciers around the world. These cores represent a long-term record of material deposited from the atmosphere. The lab enables scientists to conduct examinations of ice cores, and it preserves the integrity of these samples in a repository for the study of global climate change and past environmental conditions.

in shells of certain microorganisms buried in deep-sea a time when ice sheets were growing larger. are low. Therefore, the heavy isotope is more abundant in the precipitation of warm eras and less abundant during colder periods. Using this principle, scientists studying the layers of ice and snow in glaciers have been able to determine past temperature changes.

(Photo by USGS/National Ice Core showing temperature variations over the past 40,000 years, is derived from oxygen isotope analysis of ice cores recovered from the Greenland ice sheet.

Ice cores are an indispensable source of data for reconstructing past climates. Research based on vertical cores taken from the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets has changed our basic understanding of how the climate system works. Scientists collect samples by using a drilling rig, the drill head into the ice, and an ice core is extracted. In this way, cores that sometimes exceed 2000 meters (6500 feet) in length and may represent more than 200,000 years of climate history are acquired for study Scientists are able to produce a record of changing air temperatures and snowfall by means of the oxygen Air bubbles trapped in the ice also record variations in atmospheric composition. Changes in carbon dioxide and methane are linked to fluctuating temperatures. The cores also include atmospheric fallout such as wind-blown dust, volcanic ash, pollen, and modern-day pollution.

Tree Rings: Archives of Environmental History rings can be a very useful source of proxy data on past climates. Every year, in temperate regions, trees add a layer of new wood under the bark. Characteristics of each tree ring, such as thickness and density, reflect the environmental conditions (especially climate) that prevailed during the year when the ring formed. Favorable growth conditions produce a wide ring; unfavorable ones produce a narrow ring. Trees growing at the same time in the same region show similar tree-ring patterns. Because a single growth ring is usually added each year, the age of the tree when it was cut can be determined by counting the rings. If the year of cutting is known, the age of the tree and the year in which each ring formed can be determined by counting back from the outside ring. Scientists are not limited to working with trees that have been cut down. Small, nondestructive core samples can be taken from living trees To make the most effective use of tree rings, extended patterns known as ring chronologies are established. They are produced by comparing the patterns of rings among trees in an area. If the same pattern can be identified in two samples, one of which has been dated, the second sample can be dated from the first by matching the ring patterns common to both. Tree-ring chronologies extending back thousands of years have been established for some regions. To date a timber sample of unknown age, its ring pattern is matched against the reference chronology. Tree-ring chronologies are unique archives of environmental history and have important applications in such disciplines as climate, geology, ecology, and archaeology. For example, tree rings are used to reconstruct climate variations within a region for spans of thousands of years prior to human historical records. Knowing such long-term variations is of great value when interpreting the recent record of climate change.

In addition to the sources already discussed, other sources of proxy data that are used to gain insight into past climates include fossil pollen, corals, and historical documents.

Fossil Pollen Climate is a major factor influencing the distribution of vegetation, so the nature of the plant community occupying an area is a reflection of the climate. Pollen and spores are parts of the life cycles of many plants, and because they have very resistant walls, they are often the most abundant, easily identifiable, and best-preserved plant remains in sediments . By analyzing pollen from accurately dated sediments, scientists can obtain high-resolution records of vegetation changes in an area. Past climates can be reconstructed from such information.

Corals record sea-surface temperatures Coral colonies thrive in warm, shallow tropical waters. The tiny invertebrates extract calcium carbonate from seawater to build hard parts. They live atop the solid foundation left by past coral. Chemical analysis of the changing composition of coral reefs with depth can provide useful data on past near-surface temperatures. This graph shows a 350-year record of sea-surface temperatures obtained through oxygen isotope analysis of coral from the Galapagos Islands.

Historical Documents Historical documents sometimes contain helpful information. Although it may seem that such records should readily lend themselves to climate analysis, that is not the case. Most manuscripts were written for purposes other than climate description. Furthermore, writers understandably neglected periods of relatively stable atmospheric conditions and mention only droughts, severe storms, memorable blizzards, and other extremes. Nevertheless, records of crops, floods, and human migration have furnished useful evidence of the possible influences of changing climate.

Harvest dates as climate clues Historical records can sometimes be helpful in the analysis of past climates. The date for the beginning of the grape harvest in the fall is an integrated measure of temperature and precipitation during the growing season. These dates have been recorded for centuries in Europe and provide a useful record of year-to-year climate 1. What are proxy data, and why are they necessary in the study of climate change? 2. Why are seafloor sediments useful in the study of past climates? Aside from seafloor sediments, list four sources of proxy climate data. 3. Explain how past temperatures are determined using oxygen isotope analysis.

Atmospheric Basics Describe the composition of the atmosphere and the atmosphere’s vertical changes in pressure and temperature.

Air is not a unique element or compound. Rather, air is a mixture of many discrete gases, each with its own physical properties, in which varying quantities of tiny solid and liquid particles are suspended.

air is composed almost entirely of two gases—78 percent nitrogen and 21 percent oxygen. Although these gases are the most plentiful components of air and are of great significance to life on Earth, they are of little or no importance in affecting weather phenomena. The remaining 1 percent of dry air is mostly the inert gas argon (0.93 percent) plus tiny quantities of a number of other gases. Carbon dioxide, although present in only minute amounts (0.0400 percent, or 400 parts per million), is nevertheless an important constituent of air because it has the ability to absorb heat energy radiated by Earth and thus influences the heating of the atmosphere.

Air includes many gases and particles that vary significantly from time to time and from place to place. Important examples of these variable gases include water vapor, ozone, and tiny solid and liquid particles.

Argon (Ar) 0.934% 0.0400% or 400 ppm Water Vapor The amount of water vapor in the air varies considerably, from practically none at all up to about 4 percent by volume. Why is such a small fraction of the atmosphere so significant? Certainly the fact that water vapor is the source of all clouds and precipitation is enough to explain its importance. However, water vapor has other roles. Like carbon dioxide, it has the ability to absorb heat energy given off by Earth as well as some solar energy. It is, therefore, important when we examine the heating of the atmosphere.

Ozone Another important component of the atmosphere is ozone. It is a form of oxygen that combines not the same as the oxygen we breathe, which has two atmosphere, and its distribution is not uniform. It is concentrated well above Earth’s surface in a layer called the stratosphere, at an altitude of between 10 and 50 kilometers (6 and 31 miles). The presence of the ozone layer in The reason is that ozone absorbs the potentially harmful filter a great deal of the ultraviolet radiation, and if the as we know it. Aerosols The movements of the atmosphere are sufficient to keep a large quantity of solid and liquid particles suspended within it. Although visible dust sometimes clouds the sky, these relatively large particles are too heavy to stay in the air for very long. Still, many particles are microscopic and remain suspended for considerable periods of time. They may originate from many sources, both natural and human made, and include sea salts from breaking waves, fine soil blown into the air, smoke and soot from fires, pollen and microorganisms lifted by the wind, ash and dust from volcanic eruptions, and more. Collectively, these tiny solid and liquid particles are called aerosols. From a meteorological standpoint, these tiny, often invisible particles can be significant. First, many act as surfaces on which water vapor can condense, an important function in the formation of clouds and fog. Second, aerosols can absorb or reflect incoming solar radiation. Thus, when an air pollution episode is occurring, or when ash fills the sky following a volcanic eruption, the amount of sunlight reaching Earth’s surface can be measurably reduced.

Composition of the atmosphere Proportional volume of gases composing dry air. Nitrogen and oxygen obviously dominate.

Extent and Structure of the To say that the atmosphere begins at Earth’s surface and extends upward is obvious. But where does the atmosphere end, and where does outer space begin? There is no sharp boundary; the atmosphere rapidly thins as you travel away from Earth, until there are too few gas molecules to detect. Aerosols This satellite image shows two examples of aerosols. First, a dust storm is blowing across northeastern China toward Second, a dense haze toward the south (bottom center) is humangenerated air pollution.

Vertical changes in air pressure Pressure decreases rapidly near Earth’s surface and more gradually at greater heights.

Pressure Changes with Height To understand the vertical extent of the atmosphere, let us examine changes in atmospheric pressure with height. Atmospheric pressure is simply the weight of the air above. At sea level, the average pressure is slightly more than 1000 millibars.

–100 –90 –80 –70 –60 –50 –40 –30 –20 –10 –140 –120 –100 –80 –60 –40 –20 This corresponds to a weight of slightly more than 1 kilogram per square centimeter (14.7 pounds per square inch). Obviously, the pressure at higher altitudes is less . One-half of the atmosphere lies below an altitude of 5.6 kilometers (3.5 miles). At about 16 kilometers (10 miles), 90 percent of the atmosphere has been traversed, and above 100 kilometers (62 miles), only 0.00003 percent of all the gases making up the atmosphere remains. Even so, traces of our atmosphere extend far beyond this altitude, gradually merging with the emptiness of space.

Temperature Changes In addition to vertical changes in air pressure, there are also changes in air temperature as we ascend through the atmosphere. Earth’s atmosphere is divided vertically into four layers, on the basis of temperature: r Troposphere. We live in the bottom layer, which is characterized by a decrease in temperature with increasing altitude and is called the troposphere. The term literally means the region where air “turns over,” a reference to the appreciable vertical mixing of air in this lowermost zone. The troposphere is the chief focus of meteorologists because it is in this layer that essentially all important weather phenomena occur. The temperature decrease in the troposphere is called the environmental lapse rate. 1000 feet), a figure known as the normal lapse rate. It should be emphasized, however, that the environmental lapse rate is not a constant but rather can be highly variable and must be regularly measured. To determine the actual environmental lapse rate as well as to gather information about vertical changes in pressure, wind, and humidity, radiosondes are is attached to a weather balloon and transmits data by radio as it ascends through the atmosphere (Figure 21.14). The thickness of the troposphere is not the same everywhere; it varies with latitude and season. On the average, the temperature drop continues to a height of about 12 kilometers (7.4 miles). The outer boundary of the troposphere is the tropopause. r Stratosphere. Beyond the tropopause is the stratosphere. In the stratosphere, the temperature remains constant to a height of about 20 kilometers (12 miles) and then begins a gradual increase that continues until the stratopause, at a height of nearly 50 kilometers (30 miles) above Earth’s surface. Below the tropopause, atmospheric properties such as temperature and humidity are readily transferred by large-scale turbulence and mixing. Above the tropopause, in the stratosphere, they are not. Temperatures increase in the stratosphere because it is in this layer that the atmosphere’s ozone is concentrated. Recall that ozone absorbs ultraviolet radiation from the Sun. As a consequence, the stratosphere is heated.

Radar unit for tracking Mesosphere. In the third layer, the mesosphere, temperatures again decrease with height until at the mesopause, more than 80 kilometers (50 miles) above Earth’s surface, the temperature approaches in the atmosphere occur at the mesopause. Thermosphere. The fourth layer extends outward from the mesopause and has no well-defined upper limit. This is the thermosphere, a layer that contains only a tiny fraction of the atmosphere’s mass. In the extremely rarefied air of this outermost layer, temperatures again increase, due to the absorption of very short-wave, high-energy solar radiation by atoms of oxygen and nitrogen. Temperatures rise to in the thermosphere. But such temperatures are not comparable to those experienced near Earth’s surface. Temperature is defined in terms of the average speed at which molecules move. Because the gases of the thermosphere are moving at very high speeds, the temperature is very high. But the gases are so sparse that, collectively, they process only an insignificant amount of heat.

1. What are the major components of clean, dry air? List two significant variable components. transmits data on vertical changes in temperature, pressure, and humidity in the troposphere. The troposphere is where practically all weather phenomena occur; therefore, it is very hen this weather balloon was launched, the Science Source) package being carried aloft by the balloon? temperature at this altitude? How did you figure this out? at all, as it rises through the atmosphere? Explain.

2. Describe how air pressure changes with an increase in altitude. Does it change at a constant 3. The atmosphere is divided vertically into four layers, on the basis of temperature. Name the layers from bottom to top and indicate how temperatures change in each.

The electromagnetic spectrum This diagram illustrates the wavelengths and names of various types of radiation. Visible light consists of an array of colors we commonly call the “colors of the rainbow.” r All objects, at whatever temperature, emit radiant energy. Not only hot objects like the Sun but also Earth, including its polar ice caps, continually emit energy.

From our everyday experience, we know that the Sun emits light and heat as well as the ultraviolet rays that cause suntan. Although these forms of energy comprise a major portion of the total energy that radiates from the Sun, they are only part of a large array of energy called radiation, or electromagnetic radiation. This array, or 21.15. All radiation—whether x-rays, microwaves, or radio waves—transmits energy through the vacuum of space at 300,000 kilometers (186,000 miles) per second and only slightly slower through our atmosphere. When an object absorbs any form of radiant energy, the result is an increase in molecular motion, which causes a corresponding increase in temperature. To better understand how the atmosphere is heated, it is useful to have a general understanding of the basic laws governing radiation: r Hotter objects radiate more total energy per unit area than do colder objects. r The hotter the radiating body, the shorter the wavelength of maximum radiation. The Sun, in the visible range. The maximum radiation for Earth occurs at a wavelength of 10 micrometers, well within the infrared (heat) range. Because the wavelength for maximum Earth radiation is roughly 20 times longer than the maximum solar radiation, Earth radiation is often called longwave radiation, and solar radiation is called shortwave radiation. r Objects that are good absorbers of radiation are good emitters as well. Earth’s surface and the Sun approach being perfect radiators because they absorb and radiate with nearly 100 percent efficiency for their respective temperatures. On the other hand, gases are selective absorbers and emitters of radiation. For some wavelengths, the atmosphere is nearly transparent (that is, little radiation is absorbed). For other wavelengths, however, the atmosphere is nearly opaque (that is, it is a good absorber). Experience tells us that the atmosphere is transparent to visible light; hence, these wavelengths readily reach Earth’s surface. This is not the case for the longer-wavelength radiation emitted by Earth.

radiation averaged for the entire globe. Notice that the atmosphere is quite transparent to incoming solar radiation. On average, about 50 percent of the solar energy reaching the top of the atmosphere passes through the atmosphere and is absorbed at Earth’s surface. Another 20 percent is absorbed directly by clouds and certain atmospheric gases (including oxygen and ozone) before reaching the surface. The remaining 30 percent is reflected back to space by the atmosphere, clouds, and reflective surfaces such as snow and ice. The fraction of the total radiation that is reflected by a surface is called its albedo. Thus, the albedo for Earth as a whole (the planetary albedo) is 30 percent. What determines whether solar radiation will be transmitted to the surface, scattered, or reflected outward? It depends greatly on the wavelength of the energy being transmitted, as well as on the nature of the intervening material. averages. The actual percentages can vary greatly, primarily due to changes in the percentage of light reflected and scattered back to space. For example, if the sky is overcast, a higher percentage of light is reflected back to space than when the sky is clear.

Albedo (reflectivity) of various surfaces In general, light-colored surfaces tend to be more reflective than dark-colored surfaces and thus have higher albedos.

Airless bodies like the Moon All incoming solar radiation reaches the surface. Some is reflected back to space. The rest is absorbed by the surface and radiated directly back to space. As a result the lunar surface has a much lower average surface temperature than Earth.

Bodies with modest amounts of greenhouse gases like Earth The atmosphere absorbs some of the of this energy is radiated back to the surface and is warmer than it would otherwise be.

Incoming shortwave solar radiation The greenhouse effect The greenhouse effect of Earth compared with two of our close solar system neighbors.

and back toward Earth’s surface. Without this complicated game of “pass the hot potato,” Earth’s average . These absorptive gases in our atmosphere make Earth habitable for humans and other life-forms. As you will see in the sections that follow, changes in the air’s composition, both natural and human caused, impact the greenhouse effect in ways that can cause the atmosphere to either become warmer or cooler. This natural phenomenon was named the greenhouse effect because it was once thought that greenhouses were heated in a similar manner. The glass in a greenhouse allows short-wave solar radiation to enter and be absorbed by the objects inside. These objects, in turn, radiate energy but at longer wavelengths, to which glass is nearly opaque. The heat, therefore, is “trapped” in the greenhouse. It has been shown, however, that air inside greenhouses becomes warmer than outside air mainly because greenhouses restrict the exchange of air between the inside and outside. Nevertheless, the term greenhouse effect 1. What are the three paths taken by incoming solar radiation? What might cause the percentage taking each path to vary? 2. Explain why the atmosphere is heated chiefly by radiation from Earth’s surface. 3. Prepare a sketch with labels that explains the greenhouse effect.

Causes of Climate Change Discuss hypotheses that relate to natural causes of climate change. wide support, only to lose it and then sometimes to regain it. Some explanations are controversial. This is to be expected because planetary atmospheric processes are so large-scale and complex that they cannot be reproduced physically in laboratory experiments. Rather, climate and its changes must be simulated mathematically (modeled), using powerful computers. In this section we examine several current hypotheses that have earned serious consideration from the scientific changes, including the effect of rising carbon dioxide levels caused primarily by our burning of fossil fuels. As you read this section, you will find that more than one hypothesis may explain the same change in climate. In fact, several mechanisms may interact to shift climate. Also, no single hypothesis can explain climate change on all time years generally cannot explain fluctuations over hundreds of years. If our atmosphere and its changes ever become fully understood, we will probably see that climate change is caused by many of the mechanisms discussed here, plus new ones yet to be proposed.

In Chapter 18, the section “Causes of Ice Ages” describes two natural mechanisms of climate change. Recall that the movement of lithospheric plates gradually moves Earth’s This satellite image shows the sulfur dioxide Climate may be affected when large quantities these shifts in plates are very slow, they can have a dramatic impact on climate over spans of millions of years. Moving landmasses can also lead to significant shifts in ocean circulation, which influences heat transport around the globe.* related to the causes of ice ages involves variations in Earth’s orbit. Changes in the shape of the orbit (eccentricity), variations in the angle that Earth’s axis makes with the plane of its orbit (obliquity), and the wobbling of the axis page 563). These variations, in turn, contributed to the alternating glacial–interglacial episodes of the Ice Age.

The idea that explosive volcanic eruptions might alter Earth’s climate was first proposed many years ago. It is still regarded as a plausible explanation for some aspects of climatic variability. Explosive eruptions emit huge quantities of gases and fine-grained debris into the atmosphere. The greatest eruptions are sufficiently *For more on this, see the section “Supercontinents, Mountain Building, and Climate” in Chapter 22.

This image was taken from the International Space Station and shows a plume of volcanic ash streaming southeastward from the Mount Etna erupting in October 2002 This volcano on the island of Sicily is Europe’s largest and most powerful to inject material high into the atmosphere; strong upper-level winds then spread it around the globe, where it remains for many months or even years.

Anatahan Volcano blankets a portion of the Philippine Sea in April 2005. The haze consisted of tiny droplets of sulfuric acid formed when sulfur dioxide from the volcano combined with water in the atmosphere. The plume is bright and reflects sunlight back to space.

Volcanic Ash and Dust When Mount St. Helens erupted, there was immediate speculation about the possible effects on climate. Could such an eruption cause our climate to change? There is no doubt that the large quantity of volcanic ash emitted by the explosive eruption had significant local and regional effects for a short period. Still, studies indicated that any longer-term lowering of hemispheric temperatures was negligible. The cooling could not be distinguished from other natural temperature fluctuations.

although apparently less dramatic, effects have been associated with other great explosive volcanoes, including Indonesia’s Krakatoa in 1883. Three more recent volcanic events have provided considerable data and insight regarding the impact of volcanoes on global temperatures. The eruptions of Washington State’s Mount St. Helens in 1980, the Mexican volcano El Chichón in 1982, and Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines in 1991 have given scientists opportunities to study the atmospheric effects of volcanic eruptions with the aid of more sophisticated technology than was previously available. Satellite images and remote-sensing instruments allowed scientists to closely monitor the effects of the clouds of gases and ash that these volcanoes studies following the 1982 El Chichón eruption indicated that it had a greater cooling effect Net solar radiation at Hawaii's Mauna Loa on global mean temperature than Observatory relative to 1970 (zero on the graph). The eruptions of El Chichón and Mt. Mount St. Helens—on the order solar radiation reaching the surface. Chichón’s eruption was less St. Helens blast, so why did it have a greater impact on global temperatures? The reason is that the material emitted by Mount St. Helens was largely fine ash that settled out in a relatively short time. El Chichón, on the other hand, emitted far greater quantities of sulfur dioxide gas (an estimated St. Helens. This gas comEl Chichón bines with water vapor in the stratosphere to produce a dense cloud of tiny sulfuric acid particles (Figure 1973 1978 1983 1988 1993 1998 take several years to settle out completely. They lower the troposphere’s mean temperature because they reflect solar radiation back to We now understand that volcanic clouds that remain in the stratosphere for a year or more are composed largely of sulfuric-acid droplets and not of dust, as was once thought. Thus, the volume of fine debris emitted during an explosive event is not an accurate criterion for predicting the global atmospheric effects of an eruption. Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines erupted explosively in June 1991, injecting 25 to 30 million tons of sulfur dioxide into the stratosphere. The event provided scientists with an opportunity to study the climatic impact of a major explosive volcanic eruption using NASA’s The impact on global temperature of eruptions like El Chichón and Mount Pinatubo is relatively minor, but many scientists agree that the cooling produced could alter the general pattern of atmospheric circulation for a limited period. Such a change, in turn, could influence the weather in some regions. Predicting, or even identifying, specific regional effects still presents a considerable challenge to atmospheric scientists. Therefore, many great eruptions, closely spaced in time, need to occur if volcanic processes are to have a pronounced impact on climate for an extended period. Because no extensive episode of explosive volcanism is known to have occurred in historic times, such an occurrence is most often mentioned as a possible contributor to prehistoric climatic shifts.

Volcanism and Global Warming The Cretaceous period is the last period of the Mesozoic era, the era of middle life that is often called the “age of dinosaurs.” It began about 145.5 million years ago and ended about 65.5 million years ago, with the extinction of the dinosaurs (and many other life-forms as well).* The Cretaceous climate was among the warmest Circle. Tropical forests existed in Greenland and Antarctica, and coral reefs grew as much as 15 degrees latitude closer to the poles than at present. Deposits of peat that would eventually form widespread coal beds accumulated at high latitudes. Sea level was as much as 200 meters (650 feet) higher than it is today, consistent with a lack of polar ice sheets. What caused the unusually warm climates of the Cretaceous period? Among the significant factors that may have contributed was an enhanced greenhouse effect due to an increase in the amount of carbon dioxide come from? Many geologists suggest that the probable source was volcanic activity. Carbon dioxide is one of the gases emitted during volcanism, and there is now considerable geologic evidence that the Middle Cretaceous was a time when there was an unusually high rate of volcanic activity. Several huge oceanic lava plateaus were produced on the floor of the western Pacific during this span. These vast features were associated with hot spots that may have been produced by large mantle plumes. Massive outpourings of lava over millions of years would *For more about the end of the Cretaceous, see Chapter 22.

his satellite image shows an extensive plume of ash from an explosive volcanic eruption of Indonesia’s Sinabung influence air temperatures? Ash plume for years? Explain. greater effect than the volcanic ash?

This view shows an approximation of the Sun’s surface. The black spots surrounded by deep orange is a sunspot region where magnetic activity is extremely intense.

The instrument that produced this image used ultraviolet, radio, and other parts of the electromagnetic spectrum. Looping lines show solar plasma following magnetic field atmospheric greenhouse effect. Thus, the warmth that characterized the Cretaceous may have had its origins deep in Earth’s mantle. This example illustrates the interrelationships among parts of the Earth system. Seemingly unrelated materials and processes turn out to be linked. Here you have seen how processes originating deep in Earth’s interior are connected directly or indirectly to the atmosphere, the oceans, and the biosphere.

Among the most persistent hypotheses of climate change have been those based on the idea that the Sun is a variable star and that its output of energy varies through time. The effect of such changes would seem direct and easily understood: Increases in solar output would cause the atmosphere to warm, and reductions would result in cooling. This notion is appealing because it can be used to explain climate change of any length or intensity.

Annual number of sunspots Mean annual sunspot numbers The number of sunspots reaches a maximum about every 11 years.

sunspots were largely absent. This period of missing sunspots closely corresponds with a period in climate history known as the Little Ice Age, an especially cold period in Europe. For some scientists, this correlation suggests that a reduction in the Sun’s output was likely responsible at least in part for this cold episode. Other scientists seriously question this notion. Their hesitation stems in part from subsequent investigations using different climate records from around the world that failed to find a significant correlation between sunspot activity and climate.

Chichón and Mount Pinatubo eruptions on global 2. How might volcanism lead to global warming? 3. What are sunspots? How does solar output change as sunspot numbers change? Is there a solid connection between sunspot numbers and climate change on Earth?

Impact on Global Climate Summarize the nature and cause of the atmosphere’s changing composition since about 1750. Describe the climate’s response.

So far we have examined potential causes of climate change that are natural. In this section, we examine how humans contribute to global climate change. One impact largely results from the from the addition of human-generated aerosols to the atmosphere. Human influence on regional and global climate did not just begin with the onset of the modern industrial period. There is good evidence that people have been modifying the environment over extensive areas for thousands of years. The use of fire and the overgrazing of marginal lands by domesticated animals have both reduced the abundance and distribution of vegetation. By altering ground cover, humans have modified such important climate factors as surface albedo, evaporation rates, and surface winds.

only about 0.0400 percent (400 parts per million) of the gases that make up clean, dry air. Nevertheless, it is a very significant component meteorologically. Carbon dioxide is influential because it is transparent to incoming short-wavelength solar radiation, but it is not transparent to some of the longer-wavelength, outgoing Earth surface, thereby keeping the air near the ground along with water vapor, carbon dioxide is largely responsible for the atmosphere’s greenhouse The tremendous industrialization of the past two centuries has been fueled—and still is fueled—by burning fossil fuels: coal, natural gas, and petroleum. Combustion of these fuels has added great quantities of carbon 1958. The graph shows an annual seasonal cycle and a steady upward trend over the years. The up-and-down of the seasonal cycle is due to the vast land area of the Northern Hemisphere, which contains the majority of land-based vegetation. During spring and summer during the cold months occurs as vegetation dies and The use of coal and other fuels is the most prominent but it is not the only way. The clearing of forests also particularly pronounced in the tropics, where vast tracts graph shows energy consumption in 2014. The total was 98.3 10 raised to the 12th power, or a million million. The burning of fossil fuels represents about 81 percent Energy Information Administration) has been measured at Hawaii, since 1958. There has been a consistent increase since monitoring began. This graphic portrayal is known as the Keeling Curve, in honor of the scientist who originated the measurements.

have varied from about 180 to 300 ppm. As a result of human activities, the present higher than its highest level over at least the past 600,000 years. The rapid increase in the onset of industrialization is obvious. The annual rate concentration is growing has been increasing over the past several decades.

Given the increase in the have global temperatures actually increased? The answer is yes. According to a is unequivocal, as is now evident from observations of increases in global average air and ocean temperatures, widespread melting of snow and ice, and rising global sea level.”* Most of the observed increase in global average temperatures since the mid-twentieth century is Science Basis. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change is an authoritative group of scientists that provides advice to the world community through periodic reports that assess the state of knowledge of the causes and effects of climate change.

Carbon dioxide is not the only gas contributing to a possible global increase in temperature. In recent years atmospheric scientists have come to realize that human industrial and agricultural activities are causing a buildup of several trace gases that also play significant roles. The substances are called trace gases because their concentrations are much lower than the concentration of carbon dioxide. The most important trace gases are methane extremely likely due to the observed increase in human440 generated greenhouse gas concentrations. As used by indicates a probability of 95–100 percent. Global warming since the mid-1970s total warming in the past cen260 The upward trend in surface temperatures is shown in Fig200 ure 21.27. With the exception of 1998, the 10 warmest years 400,000 350,000 300,000 250,000 200,000 150,000 100,000 50,000 in the 135-year record have all occurred since 2000, with 2014 ranking as the warmest year on record. Weather patterns and other natural cycles cause These gases absorb wavelengths of outgoing fluctuations in average temperatures from year to year. from Earth that would otherwise escape into This is especially true on regional and local levels. For individually their impact is modest, example, while the globe experienced notably warm temtaken trace gases play a significant role in peratures in 2014, parts of the continental United States were cooler than normal. By contrast, 2014 was the warmest year on record for much of Europe and parts of Methane Although methane is present in much smaller Russia, and ocean temperatures were at a record high. small concentration would indicate. in greenhouse gas levels are causing a long-term rise in because methane is about 20 times more effecglobal temperatures. Each calendar year will not nective essarily be warmer than the one before, but scientists expect each decade to be warmer than the previous one. Methane is produced by anaerobic bacteria in wet An examination of the decade-by-decade temperature specifically oxygen.) Such places include swamps, What about the future? Projections for the years and the guts of termites and grazing ahead depend in part on the quantities of greenhouse fields (“artificial swamps”) used for mates of global warming for several different scenarios. because methane is a product of the pre-industrial level of carbon dioxide (280 ppm) to 560 ppm, the likely temperature increase will be in the over the past 400,000 years Most of these data come from the analysis of air bubbles trapped in ice cores. The record since 1958 comes from direct Loa Observatory, Hawaii. concentrations since the Revolution is obvious.

The increase in the concentration of methane in the atmosphere has been in step with the growth in human population. This relationship reflects the close link between methane formation and agriculture. As population increases, so do the numbers of cattle and rice paddies.

Temperature projections to 2100 The right half of the graph shows projected global warming based on different emissions scenarios. The shaded zone adjacent to each colored line shows the uncertainty range for each scenario. The basis for comparison (0.0 on the vertical axis) is the global average for the period 1980 to 1999. The orange line represents the scenario values for the year 2000.

Nitrous Oxide Sometimes called “laughing gas,” nitrous oxide is also building in the atmosphere, Global temperature changes during the 20th century ted sin oje u Pr ures The increase results primarily from agricultural activity. When farmers use nitrogen fertilizers to boost crop yield, some of the nitrogen enters the air as nitrous oxide. This gas is also produced by high-temperature combustion of fossil fuels. Although the annual release into the atmosphere is small, the lifetime of a nitrous oxide molecule is about 150 years! If nitrogen fertilizer and fossil fuel use grow at projected rates, nitrous oxide’s contribution to greenhouse warming may approach half that of methane.

fluorocarbons (CFCs) are not naturally present in the atmosphere. CFCs are manufactured chemicals with many uses that have gained notoriety because they are responsible for ozone depletion in the stratosphere. The role of CFCs in global warming is less well known. CFCs are very effective greenhouse gases. They were not developed until the 1920s and were not used in great quantities until the 1950s. Although corrective action has been were to stop immediately, the atmosphere would not be free of them for many years.

When the effects of all human-generated greenhouse into the future, their collective impact significantly Sophisticated computer models show that the trace gases will not be the same everywhere. Rather, the temperature response in polar regions could be two to three times greater than the global average. Because the polar troposphere is very stable, vertical mixing is suppressed, which limits the amount of surface heat that is transferred upward. In addition, an expected reduction in sea ice would contribute to the greater temperature increase. This topic will be explored more fully in the next section.

The source of these pollutants was coal-burning power plants, agricultural burning, and industrial processes.

This satellite image shows the extremely high levels of aerosols associated with this air 200 km pollution episode. At an index value of 4, aerosols are so dense that you would have difficulty seeing the midday sun.

Human-generated aerosols These satellite images show a serious air pollution episode in China on trigger an increase in the number of cloud droplets droplets increases the cloud’s brightness, causing more sunlight to be reflected back to space. One category of aerosols, called black carbon, is soot generated by combustion processes and fires. Unlike most other aerosols, black carbon warms the atmosphere because it is an effective absorber of incoming solar radiation. In addition, when deposited on snow and ice, black carbon reduces surface albedo, thus increasing the amount of radiation absorbed. Nevertheless, despite the warming effect of black carbon, the overall effect of atmospheric aerosols is to Studies indicate that the cooling effect of humangenerated aerosols offsets a portion of the global warming caused by the growing quantities of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. The magnitude and extent of the cooling effect of aerosols is uncertain. This uncertainty is a significant hurdle in advancing our understanding of how humans alter Earth’s climate. It is important to point out some significant differences between global warming by greenhouse gases and aerosol cooling. After being emitted, carbon dioxide and trace gases remain in the atmosphere for many decades. By contrast, aerosols released into the troposphere remain there for only a few days or, at most, a few weeks before they are “washed out” by precipitation, limiting their effects. Because of their short lifetime in the troposphere, aerosols are distributed unevenly over the globe. As expected, human-generated aerosols are concentrated near the areas that produce them—namely industrialized regions that burn fossil fuels and places where vegetation is burned. The lifetime of aerosols in the atmosphere is short. Therefore, the effect of aerosols on today’s climate is determined by the amount emitted during the preceding couple weeks. By contrast, the carbon dioxide and trace gases released into the atmosphere remain for much longer spans and thus influence climate for many decades.

increasing over the past 200 years? 2. How has the atmosphere responded to the continue to increase? contributing to global temperature change? 4. List the main sources of human-generated aerosols and describe their net effect on atmospheric temperatures.

South Pole, and which represents Barrow, Alaska? which line is which. Contrast positive- and negative-feedback mechanisms and provide examples of each.

Climate is a very complex interactive physical system. Thus, when any component of the climate system is altered, scientists must consider many possible outcomes. These possible outcomes are called climate-feedback mechanisms. They complicate climate-modeling efforts and add greater uncertainty to climate predictions.

Sea ice as a feedback mechanism The image shows the springtime breakup of sea ice near Antarctica. The diagram shows a likely feedback acts as a positive-feedback mechanism because surface albedo decreases, and the amount of energy absorbed at the surface Alamy) (https://goo.gl/FrSgZK) toward the idea that clouds do not dampen global warming but rather produce a small positive feedback overall.* The problem of global warming caused by humaninduced changes in atmospheric composition continues to be one of the most studied aspects of climate change. Although no models yet incorporate the full range of potential factors and feedbacks, the scientific consensus is that the increasing levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide and trace gases will lead to a warmer planet with a different distribution of climate regimes.

Earth’s climate system is amazingly complex. Comprehensive state-of-the-science climate simulation models are among the basic tools used to develop possible climate-change scenarios. Called general circulation models (GCMs), they are based on fundamental laws of physics and chemistry and incorporate human and biological interactions. GCMs are used to simulate many variables, including temperature, rainfall, snow cover, soil moisture, winds, clouds, sea ice, and ocean circulation over the Past Decade,” Science 330 (December 10, 2010), 1523–1526.

Natural Factors Only over the entire globe through the seasons and over spans of decades. In many other fields of study, hypotheses can be tested by direct experimentation in a laboratory or by field observations and measurements. However, this is often not possible in the study of climate. Rather, scientists must construct computer models of how our planet’s climate system works. If we understand the climate system correctly and construct the model appropriately, then the behavior of the model climate system should mimic the behavior of Earth’s climate system .

his satellite image from August 2007 shows the effects of tropical deforestation in a portion of the Amazon basin in western Brazil. Intact forest is dark green, whereas cleared areas are tan (bare ground) or light green (crops and pasture). Notice the relatively forests change the composition of the atmosphere? deforestation has on global warming.

What factors influence the accuracy of climate models? Clearly, mathematical models are simplified versions of the real Earth and cannot capture its full complexity, especially at smaller geographic scales. Moreover, computer models used to simulate future climate change must make many assumptions that significantly influence predictions. They must consider a wide range of possible changes in population, economic growth, fossil fuel consumption, technological development, improvements in energy efficiency, and more. Despite many obstacles, our ability to use supercomputers to simulate climate is very good and continues to improve. Although today’s models are far from infallible, they are powerful tools for understanding what Earth’s future climate might be like.

1. Distinguish between positive- and negativefeedback mechanisms. 2. Provide at least one example of each type of feedback mechanism. 3. What factors influence the accuracy of computer models of climate?

Slope of the shoreline The slope of the shoreline is critical to determining the degree to which sea-level changes will affect it. As sea level gradually rises, the shoreline retreats, and structures that were once thought to be safe from wave attack become vulnerable.

Arctic Sea Ice Climate models are in general agreement that one of the strongest signals of global warming should be a loss of sea ice in the Arctic. This is indeed occurring. The map extent for September 2014 to the long-term average for the period 1981–2010. On that date the extent was about 5 million square kilometers (1.94 square miles)—the sixth lowest extent of the satellite era which began in 1979. (September represents the end of the melt period, when the area covered by sea ice is changes, clearly depicts the trend. Not only is the area covered by sea ice declining, but the remaining sea ice has become thinner, making it more vulnerable to further melting. Models that best match historical trends project that Arctic waters may be virtually ice-free in the late summer by the 2030s. As was noted earlier in this chapter, a reduction in sea ice is a positive-feedback mechanism that reinforces global warming.

Siberian lakes This falsecolor image pair shows lakes dotting the tundra in 1973 and 2002. The tundra vegetation is colored a faded red, whereas lakes appear blue or blue-green. Many lakes disappeared or shrunk considerably between 1973 and 2002. After studying satellite imagery of about 10,000 large lakes in a (195,000- square-mile) area in northern Siberia, scientists documented an 11 percent decline in the number of lakes. (Based on number of lakes have shrunk or disappeared altogether. As the permafrost thaws, lake water drains deeper into the ground. Studies in Alaska show that thawing is occurring in interior and southern parts of the state where permafrost temperatures are near the thaw point. As Arctic temperatures continue to rise, some models project that nearsurface permafrost may be lost entirely from large parts of Alaska by the end of the century. Thawing permafrost represents a potentially significant positive-feedback mechanism that may reinforce global warming. When vegetation dies in the Arctic, cold temperatures inhibit its decomposition. As a consequence, over thousands of years, a great deal of organic matter has become stored in the permafrost. When the permafrost thaws, organic matter that may have been frozen for millennia comes out of “cold storage” and decomposes. The result is the release of carbon dioxide and methane—greenhouse gases that contribute to global warming. Thus, like decreasing sea ice, thawing permafrost is a positive-feedback mechanism.

The human-induced increase in the amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere has some serious implications currently ends up in the oceans. The additional carbon The pH scale This is the common measure of the degree of acidity or alkalinity of a solution. The scale ranges from 0 to 14, with a value of 7 indicating a solution that is neutral. Values below 7 indicate greater acidity, whereas numbers above 7 indicate greater alkalinity. It is important to note that the pH scale is logarithmic; that is, each whole number increment indicates a tenfold difference. Thus, pH 4 is 10 times more acidic than pH 5 and 100 times (10 × 10) more acidic than pH 6.

dioxide lowers the ocean’s pH, making seawater more acidic. The pH scale is shown and briefly described in pH and changes the balance of certain chemicals found naturally in seawater. In fact, the oceans have already absorbed enough carbon dioxide for surface waters to have experienced a decrease of 0.1 pH units since preindustrial times, with an additional pH decrease likely in the future. Moreover, if the current trend in carbon dioxide emissions continues, the ocean will experience a pH decrease of at least 0.2 pH units by 2100, which represents a change in ocean chemistry that has not occurred for millions of years. This shift toward acidity and the resulting changes in ocean chemistry make it more difficult for certain marine creatures to build hard parts out of calcium carbonate. The decline in pH thus threatens a variety of calcite-secreting organisms as diverse as microbes and corals, which concerns marine scientists because of the potential consequences for other sea life that depend on the health and availability of these organisms.

Oceans becoming more acidic The graphs show the correlation the atmosphere as measured at ocean, the water becomes more acidic (pH declines).

amount and rate of future climate shifts depends primarily on current and future human-caused emissions of heat-trapping gases and airborne particles. Many of the changes will probably be gradual, nearly imperceptible from year to year. Nevertheless the effects, accumulated over decades, will have powerful economic, social, and political consequences. Despite our best efforts to understand future climate shifts, there is also the potential for “surprises.” This simply means that due to the complexity of Earth’s climate system, we might experience relatively sudden, unexpected changes or see some aspects of climate shift in unanticipated ways. Many future climate scenarios predict steadily changing conditions, giving the impression that humanity will have time to adapt. However, the scientific community has indicated that at least some changes will be abrupt, perhaps crossing a threshold, or “tipping point,” so quickly that there will be little time to react. This is a reasonable concern because abrupt changes occurring over periods as short as decades or even years have been a natural part of the climate system throughout Earth history. The paleoclimate record described earlier in the chapter contains ample evidence of such abrupt changes. One such abrupt change occurred at the end of a time span known as the Younger Dryas, a time of abnormal cold and drought in the Northern Hemisphere that occurred about 12,000 years ago. Following this 1000-year-long cold period, the Younger Dryas abruptly ended in a few decades or less There are many examples of potential surprises, each of which would have large consequences. We simply do not know how far the climate system or other systems it affects can be pushed before they respond in unexpected ways. Even if the chance of any particular surprise happening is small, the chance that at least one such surprise will occur is much greater. In other words, although we may not know which of these events will occur, it is likely that one or more will eventually occur. The impact on climate of an increase in atmospheric Yet climate scientists continue to improve our understanding of the climate system and the potential impacts and effects of global climate change. Policymakers are confronted with responding to the risks posed by greenhouse gas emissions, knowing that our understanding is imperfect. They must also face the fact that climateinduced environmental changes cannot be reversed quickly, if at all, due to the lengthy time scales associated with the climate system.

1. Describe the factors that are causing sea level to rise. 2. Is global warming greater near the equator or near the poles? Explain. 3. Based on Table 21.1, what projected changes relate to something other than temperature?

Time and again, the splitting and colliding of continents has led to the formation of new ocean basins and the creation of great mountain ranges. Furthermore, the nature of life on our planet has undergone dramatic changes through time.

Earth Unique? List the principle characteristics that make Earth unique among the planets. There is only one place in the universe, as far as we know, that can support life—a modest-sized planet called Earth that orbits an average-sized star, the Sun. Life on Earth is ubiquitous; it is found in boiling mudpots and hot springs, in the deep abyss of the ocean, and even under the Antarctic ice sheet. Living space on our planet, however, is significantly limited when we consider the needs of individual organisms, particularly humans. The global ocean covers 71 percent of Earth’s surface, but only a few hundred meters below the water’s surface, pressures are so intense that humans cannot survive without an atmospheric diving suit. In addition, many continental areas are too steep, too high, or too cold for us to inhabit. Nevertheless, based on what we know about other bodies in the solar system—and the hundreds of planets recently discovered orbiting around other stars—Earth is still by far the most accommodating.

What fortuitous events produced a planet so hospitable to life? Earth was not always as we find it today. During its formative years, our planet became hot enough to support a magma ocean. It also survived a several-hundredmillion-year period of extreme bombardment by asteroids, to which the heavily cratered surfaces of Mars and the Moon testify. The oxygen-rich atmosphere that makes higher life-forms possible developed relatively recently. Serendipitously, Earth seems to be the right planet, in the right location, at the right time.

What are some of the characteristics that make Earth unique among the planets? Consider the following: r If Earth were considerably larger (more massive), its force of gravity would be proportionately greater. Like the giant planets, Earth would have retained a thick, hostile atmosphere consisting of ammonia and methane, and possibly hydrogen and helium. r If Earth were much smaller, oxygen, water vapor, and other volatiles would escape into space and be lost forever. Thus, like the Moon and Mercury, both of which lack atmospheres, Earth would be devoid of life. r If Earth did not have a rigid lithosphere overlaying a weak asthenosphere, plate tectonics would not operate. The continental crust (Earth’s “highlands”) would not have formed without the recycling of plates. Consequently, the entire planet would likely be covered by an ocean a few kilometers deep. As author Bill Bryson so aptly stated, “There might be life in that lonesome ocean, but there certainly wouldn’t be baseball.”* r Most surprisingly, perhaps, is the fact that if our planet did not have a molten metallic outer core, most of the life-forms on Earth would not exist. Fundamentally, without the flow of iron in the core, Earth could not support a magnetic field. It is the magnetic field that prevents lethal cosmic rays from showering Earth’s surface and from stripping away our atmosphere.

One of the primary factors that determine whether a planet is suitable for higher life-forms is its location in the solar system. The following scenarios substantiate Earth’s advantageous position: r If Earth were about 10 percent closer to the Sun, our atmosphere would be more like that of Venus and consist mainly of the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide. Earth’s surface temperature would then be too hot to support higher life-forms. r If Earth were about 10 percent farther from the Sun, the problem would be reversed—it would be too cold. The oceans would freeze over, and Earth’s active water cycle would not exist. Without liquid water, all life would perish. r Earth is near a star of modest size. Stars like the Sun have a life span of roughly 10 billion years and emit radiant energy at a fairly constant level during most of this time. Giant stars, on the other hand, consume their nuclear fuel at very high rates and “burn out” in a few hundred million years. Therefore, Earth’s proximity to a modestsized star allowed enough time for the evolution of humans, who first appeared on this planet only a few million years ago.

The last, but certainly not the least, fortuitous factor for Earth is timing. The first organisms to inhabit Earth were extremely primitive and came into existence roughly 3.8 billion years ago. From (Broadway Books, 2003).

The geologic time scale Numbers represent time in millions of years before the present. The Precambrian accounts for about 88 percent of geologic time. The remainder of this chapter focuses on the origin and evolution of planet Earth—the one place in the universe we know fosters life. As you learned in Chapter 9, researchers utilize many tools to interpret clues about Earth’s past. Using these tools, as well as clues contained in the rock record, scientists continue to unravel many complex events of the geologic past. The goal of this chapter is to provide a brief overview of the history of our planet and its life-forms—a journey that takes us back about 4.6 billion years, to the formation of Earth. Later, we will consider how our physical world assumed its present state and how Earth’s inhabitants changed through time. We suggest that you reacquaint yourself with the throughout the chapter.

1. In what way is Earth unique among the planets of our solar system? 2. Explain why Earth is just the right size. 3. Why is Earth’s molten, metallic core important to humans living today? 4. Why is Earth’s location in the solar system ideal for the development of higher life-forms?

Outline the major stages in Earth’s evolution, from the Big Bang to the formation of our planet’s layered internal structure. The universe had been evolving for several billion years before our solar system and Earth began to form. The universe began about 13.7 billion years ago with the Big Bang, when all matter and space came into existence. Shortly thereafter the two simplest elements, hydrogen and helium, formed. These basic elements were the ingredients for the first star systems. Several billion years later, our home galaxy, the Milky Way, came into existence. It was within a band of stars and nebular debris in an arm of this spiral galaxy that the Sun and planets took form nearly 4.6 billion years ago.

According to the Big Bang theory, the formation of our planet began about 13.7 billion years ago with a cataclysmic explosion that created all matter and space (Figure 22.4). Initially, subatomic particles (protons, neutrons, and electrons) formed. Later, as this debris cooled, atoms of hydrogen and helium, the two lightest elements, began to form. Within a few hundred million years, clouds of these gases condensed and coalesced into stars that compose the galactic systems we now observe. As these gases contracted to become the first stars, heating triggered the process of nuclear fusion. Within the interiors of stars, hydrogen nuclei convert to helium nuclei, releasing enormous amounts of radiant energy (heat, light, cosmic rays). Astronomers have determined that in stars more massive than our Sun, other thermonuclear reactions occur that generate all the elements on the periodic table up to number 26, iron. The heaviest elements (beyond number 26) are created only at extreme temperatures during the explosive death of a star eight or more times as massive as the Sun. During these cataclysmic supernova events, exploding stars produce all the elements heavier than iron and spew them into interstellar space. It is from such debris that our Sun and solar system formed. Based on the Big Bang scenario, atoms in your body were produced billions of years ago, in the hot interior of now-defunct stars, and the gold in your jewelry was produced during a supernova explosion that occurred in some distant place.

Recall that the solar system, including Earth, formed about the solar nebula contracted, most of the matter collected in the center to create the hot protosun. The remaining materials formed a thick, flattened, rotating disk, within which matter gradually cooled and condensed into grains and clumps of icy, rocky, and metallic material. Repeated collisions resulted in most of the material eventually collecting into asteroid-sized objects called planetesimals. The composition of planetesimals was largely determined by their proximity to the protosun. As you might expect, temperatures were highest in the inner solar system and decreased toward the outer edge of the disk. Therefore, between the present orbits of Mercury and Mars, the planetesimals were composed mainly of materials with high melting temperatures—metals and rocky substances. The planetesimals that formed beyond the orbit of Mars, where temperatures are low, contained high percentages of ices—water, carbon dioxide, ammonia, and methane—as well as smaller amounts of rocky and metallic debris. Through repeated collisions and accretion (sticking this process, the same amount of matter was concentrated into fewer and fewer bodies, each having greater and greater masses.

Artistic depiction of Earth Hadean is an unofficial eon of geologic time that occurred before the Archean. Its name refers to the “hellish” conditions on Earth. During part of the Hadean, Earth had a magma ocean and experienced intense bombardment by nebular debris.

This period of chemical differentiation established the three major divisions of Earth’s interior—the iron-rich core; the thin primitive crust; and Earth’s thickest layer, the mantle, located between the core and the crust. In addition, the lightest materials—including water vapor, carbon dioxide, and other gases—escaped to form a primitive atmosphere and, shortly thereafter, the oceans.

Describe how Earth’s atmosphere and oceans formed and evolved through time. We can be thankful for our atmosphere; without it, there would be no greenhouse effect, and Earth cycle nonexistent. The air we breathe is a stable mixture of 78 percent nitrogen, 21 percent oxygen, about 1 percent argon (an inert gas), and small amounts of gases such as carbon dioxide and water vapor. However, our planet’s original atmosphere was substantially different.

Outgassing produced Earth’s first enduring atmosphere Outgassing continues today from Frost/Robert Harding) vapor. The lightest of these—hydrogen and helium—most likely escaped into space because Earth’s gravity was too weak to hold them. The remaining gases—methane, ammonia, carbon dioxide, and water vapor—contain the basic ingredients of life: carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen. This early atmosphere was enhanced by a process called outgassing, through which gases trapped in the planet’s interior are released. Outgassing from hundreds of active volcanoes still remains an important planetary function worldwide. However, early in Earth’s history, when massive heating and fluidlike motion occurred in the mantle, the gas output would likely have been immense. These early eruptions probably released mainly water vapor, carbon dioxide, and sulfur dioxide, with minor amounts of other gases. Most importantly, free oxygen was not present in Earth’s primitive atmosphere.

Similar deposits are also found in northern France. (Photo by Imagesources/Glow genetic blueprints for living organisms. Marine organisms had always been shielded from harmful ultraviolet radiation by seawater, but the development of the atmosphere’s protective ozone layer allowed the continents to become more hospitable to plants and animals as well.

When Earth cooled sufficiently to allow water vapor to condense, rainwater fell and collected in low-lying areas. By 4 billion years ago, scientists estimate that as much as 90 percent of the current volume of seawater was contained in the developing ocean basins. Because volcanic eruptions released into the atmosphere large quantities of sulfur dioxide, which readily combines with water to form hydrochloric acid, the earliest rainwater was highly acidic. The level of acidity was even greater than in the acid rain that Earth’s rocky surface weathered at an accelerated rate. The products released by chemical weathering included atoms and molecules of various substances—including sodium, calcium, potassium, and silica—that were carried into the newly formed oceans. Some of these dissolved substances precipitated to become chemical sediment that mantled the ocean floor. Other substances formed soluble salts, which increased the salinity of seawater. Research suggests that the salinity of the oceans initially increased rapidly but has remained relatively constant over the past 2 billion years. Earth’s oceans also serve as a repository for tremendous volumes of carbon dioxide, a major constituent of the primitive atmosphere. This is significant because carbon dioxide is a greenhouse gas that strongly influences the heating of the atmosphere. Venus, once thought to be very similar to Earth, has an atmosphere composed of 97 percent carbon dioxide that produced an extreme greenhouse effect. As a result, its Carbon dioxide is readily soluble in seawater, where it often joins other atoms or molecules to produce various chemical precipitates. The most common compound generated by precipitation is calcium carbonate (CaCO3), which makes up limestone, the most abundant chemical sedimentary rock. About 542 million years ago, marine organisms began to extract calcium carbonate from seawater to make their shells and other hard parts. Included were trillions of tiny marine organisms, such as foraminifera, whose shells were deposited on the seafloor at the end of their life cycle. Some of these deposits can be greenhouse gas so it cannot easily reenter the atmosphere.

1. What is meant by outgassing, and what modern phenomenon serves that role today? 2. Identify the most abundant gases that were added to Earth’s early atmosphere through the process of outgassing. 3. Why was the evolution of photosynthesizing bacteria important to most modern organisms? 4. Why was rainwater highly acidic early in Earth’s 5. How does the ocean remove carbon dioxide from Earth’s atmosphere? What role do tiny marine organisms, such as foraminifera, have in the removal of carbon dioxide?

Explain the formation of continental crust, how continental crust becomes assembled into continents, and the role that the supercontinent cycle has played in this process.

Earth’s first 4 billion years are encompassed in the time span called the Precambrian. Representing nearly 90 percent of Earth’s history, the Precambrian is divided into the Archean eon (“ancient age”) and the Proterozoic eon (“early life age”). Our knowledge of this ancient time is limited because much of the early rock record has been obscured by the very Earth processes you have been studying, especially plate tectonics, erosion, and deposition. Most Precambrian rocks lack fossils, which hinders correlation of rock units. In addition, rocks this old are often metamorphosed and deformed, extensively eroded, and frequently concealed by younger strata. Indeed, Precambrian history is written in scattered, speculative episodes, like a long book with many missing chapters.

Geologists have discovered tiny crystals of the mineral zircon in continental rocks that formed 4.4 billion years ago—evidence that the continents began to form early in Earth’s history. By contrast, the oldest rocks found in the ocean basins are generally less than 200 million years old. What differentiates continental crust from oceanic crust? Recall that oceanic crust is a relatively dense (3.0 g/cm3) homogeneous layer of basaltic rocks derived from partial melting of the rocky upper mantle. In addition, oceanic crust is thin, averaging only 7 kilometers (4.3 miles) thick. Continental crust, on the other hand, is composed of a variety of rock types, has an average thickness of nearly 40 kilometers (25 miles), and contains a large percentage of low-density (2.7 g/cm3), silica-rich rocks such as granite. The significance of the differences between continental crust and oceanic crust cannot be overstated in a review of Earth’s geologic evolution. Oceanic crust, Earth’s early crust was continually recycled because it is relatively thin and dense, is found several kilometers below sea level—unless of course it has been pushed onto a landmass by tectonic forces. Continental crust, because of its great thickness and lower density, may extend well above sea level. Also, recall that oceanic crust of normal thickness readily subducts, whereas thick, buoyant blocks of continental crust resist being recycled into the mantle.

Making Continental Crust The formation of continental crust is a continuation of the gravitational segregation of Earth materials that began during the final stage of our planet’s formation. Dense metallic material, mainly iron and nickel, sank to form Earth’s core, leaving behind the less dense rocky material that forms the mantle. It is from Earth’s rocky mantle that low-density, silica-rich minerals were gradually distilled to form continental crust. This process is analogous to making sour mash whiskeys. In the production of whiskeys, various grains such as corn The crust covering this lava lake is continually being replaced with fresh lava are fermented to generate from below, much like the way Earth’s crust was recycled early in its history. alcohol, with sour mash being the by-product. This mixture is then heated or distilled, which drives off the lighter material (alcohol) and leaves behind the sour mash. In a similar manner, partial melting of mantle rocks generates low-density, silicarich materials that buoyantly rise to the surface to form Earth’s crust, leaving behind the dense mantle rocks (see Chapter 4). However, little is known about the details of the mechanisms that generated these silica-rich melts during the Archean.

The formation of continents The growth of large continental masses occurs through the collision and accretion of smaller crustal fragments.

Rocks older than Archean cratons Proterozoic cratons Phanerozoic orogens (541 Ma to present) deformed and metamorphosed sediments caught between converging crustal fragments, thereby shortening and thickening the developing crust. In the deepest regions of these collision zones, partial melting of the thickened crust generated silica-rich magmas that ascended and intruded the rocks above. The result was the formation of large crustal provinces that, in turn, accreted with others to form even larger crustal blocks called cratons. The portion of a modern craton that is exposed at the surface is called a shield. The assembly of a large Age of each province is in billions of years (Ga).

North America was assembled from crustal blocks that were joined by processes very similar to modern plate tectonics. Ancient collisions produced mountain belts that include remnant volcanic island arcs, trapped by colliding continental fragments.

North America provides an excellent example of the development of continental crust and its piecemeal very little continental crust older than 3.5 billion years remains. In the late Archean, between 3 and 2.5 billion years ago, there was a period of major continental growth. During this span, the accretion of numerous island arcs and other fragments generated several large crustal provinces. North America contains some of where these ancient continental blocks formed.

About 1.9 billion years ago, these crustal provinces collided to produce the Trans-Hudson mountain belt (see not restricted to North America; ancient deformed strata of similar age are also found on other continents.) This event built the North American craton, around which several large and numerous small crustal fragments were later added. One of these late arrivals is the Piedmont province of the Appalachians. In addition, several America during the Mesozoic and Cenozoic eras to generate the mountainous North American Cordillera.

Possible configuration of the supercontinent Rodinia For clarity, the continents are drawn with somewhat modern shapes, not their actual shapes from 1 billion years ago.

At different times, parts of what is now North America have combined with other continental landmasses to form a supercontinent. Supercontinents are large landmasses that contain all, or nearly all, the existing continents. Pangaea was the most recent, but certainly not the only, supercontinent to exist in the geologic past. The earliest well-documented supercontinent, Rodinia, formed during the Proterozoic eon, about 1.1 billion years ago . Although geologists are still studying its construction, it is clear that Rodinia’s configuration was quite different from Pangaea’s. One obvious distinction is that North America was located near the center of this ancient landmass. Between 800 and 600 million years ago, Rodinia gradually split apart. By the end of the Precambrian, many of the fragments reassembled, producing a large landmass in the Southern Hemisphere called Gondwana, India, Australia, and Antarctica. Other Siberia, and Northern Europe. We consider the fate of these Precambrian landmasses in the next section.

Supercontinent Cycle The idea that rifting and dispersal of one supercontinent is followed by a long period during which the fragments are gradually reassembled into a new supercontinent with a different configuration is called the supercontinent cycle. The assembly and dispersal of supertor continents had a profound impact on the evolution of Earth’s continents. In addition, this phenomenon greatly influenced global cliAmerica mates and contributed to South pole periodic episodes of rising and falling sea level.

Reconstruction of Earth as it may have appeared in late Precambrian time The southern continents were joined into a single landmass called Gondwana. Other landmasses that were not part America, northwestern Europe, and northern Asia.

continents. Evidence for periods when the seas advanced onto the continents include thick sequences of ancient sedimentary rocks that large areas of modern landmasses—including much of the eastern two-thirds of the The supercontinent cycle and sea-level changes are directly related to rates of spreading. When the rate of spreading is rapid, as it is along the East Pacific Rise today, the production of warm oceanic crust is also high. Because oceanic crust is less dense (takes up more space) than cold crust, fast-spreading ridges occupy more volume in the ocean basins than do Antarctic coast from the warm, poleward-directed curslow-spreading centers. (Think of getting into a tub filled rents in the southern oceans. As a result, most of the Antwith water.) As a result, when rates of seafloor spreadarctic landmass became covered with glacial ice. Local and regional climates have also been impacted ing increase, more seawater is displaced, which results in the sea level rising. This, in turn, causes shallow seas to by large mountain systems created by the collision of advance onto the low-lying portions of the continents. large cratons. Because of their high elevations, mountains exhibit markedly lower average temperatures than surrounding lowlands. In addition, air rising over these lofty structures promotes condensation and precipitation, 1. Briefly explain how low-density continental crust was produced from Earth’s rocky mantle. analogy is the wet, heavily forested western slopes of the 2. Describe how cratons came into being. Basin Desert that lies directly to the east. 3. What is the supercontinent cycle? What r en e nt 50 million years ago warm ocean currents kept Antarctica nearly ice free.

As South America separated from Antarctica, the West Wind Drift developed. This newly formed ocean current effectively cut Antarctica off from warm currents and contributed to the formation of its vast ice sheets.

Significant and numerous sea-level changes have been documented in geologic history, and many of them appear to be related to the assembly and dispersal of supercontinents. If sea level rises, shallow seas advance onto the he oldest-known sample of Earth is a 4.4-billionyear-old zircon crystal found in a metaconglomerate in the Jack Hills area of western Australia. Zircon is a silicate mineral that commonly occurs in trace amounts part of a granite intrusion, briefly describe its journey from the time of its formation until it was discovered at Jack Hill. the metaconglomerate in which it was found? Explain.

4. Give an example of how the movement of a continent can trigger climate change. 5. Explain how seafloor spreading rates are related to sea-level changes.

List and discuss the major geologic events in the Paleozoic, Mesozoic, and Cenozoic eras. The time span since the close of the Precambrian, called the Phanerozoic eon, encompasses 541 million years and is divided into three eras: Paleozoic, Mesozoic, and Cenozoic. The beginning of the Phanerozoic is marked by the appearance of the first life-forms with hard parts such as shells, scales, bones, or teeth—all of which greatly enhance the chances for an organism to be preserved in the fossil record. Thus, the study of Phanerozoic crustal history was aided by the availability of fossils, which improved our ability to date and correlate geologic events. Moreover, because every organism is associated with its own particular niche, the greatly improved fossil record provided invaluable information for deciphering ancient environments.

Formation of Pangaea During the late Paleozoic, Earth’s major landmasses joined to produce the supercontinent of Pangaea. Formation of Pangaea One of the major events of the Paleozoic era was the formaA tion of the supercontinent Pangaea. This event began with a series of collisions that over millions of years Europe, Siberia, and other smaller crustal fragments to form a large continent called Laurasia. Located south of Laurasia was the vast southC. 350 Ma ern continent called Gondwana, which encompassed five modern landmasses— South America, Africa, Australia, Antarctica, and India—and perhaps portions of China. Evidence of extensive continental glaciation places this landmass near the South Pole. By the late Paleozoic, Gondwana had migrated northward and collided with Laurasia to begin the final stage in Pangaea’s assembly.

Major provinces of the Appalachian Mountains The accretion of all of Earth’s major landmasses to form Pangaea spans more than 300 million years and resulted in the formation of several mountain belts. The collision of northern Europe (mainly Norway) with Greenland produced the Caledonian Mountains, whereas the joining of northern Asia (Siberia) and Europe created the Ural Mountains. Northern China is also thought to have accreted to Asia by the end of the Paleozoic, whereas southern China may not have become part of Asia until after Pangaea had begun to rift. (Recall that India did not begin to accrete to Asia until about 50 million years ago.) Pangaea reached its maximum size between 300 and 250 million years ago, as Africa collided with North final and most intense period of mountain building in the long history of the Appalachian Mountains. This mountain-building event produced the Central Appalachians of the Atlantic states, as well as New England’s northern Appalachians and mountainous structures that extend into Canada.

o u id n t a ge Spanning about 186 million years, the MesoNorthern zoic era is divided into Major geologic events of the Mesozoic include the breakup of Pangaea and the evolution of our modern ocean basins.

Navajo Sandstone, a cross-bedded, quartz-rich layer that in some places approaches 300 meters (1000 feet) thick. These remnants of massive dunes indicate that an enormous desert occupied much of the American Southwest during early Jurassic times. Another wellknown Jurassic deposit is the Morrison Formation—the world’s richest storehouse of dinosaur fossils. Included are the fossilized bones of massive dinosaurs such as Apatosaurus (formerly Brontosaurus), Brachiosaurus, and Stegosaurus.

Coal Formation in Western North America As the Jurassic period gave way to the Cretaceous, shallow seas again encroached upon much of western North America, as well as the Atlantic and Gulf coastal regions. This led to the formation of “coal swamps” (see Chapter 7) similar to those of the Paleozoic era. Today, the Cretaceous coal deposits in the western United States and Canada Native American reservation in Montana, there are nearly 20 billion tons of high-quality, Cretaceous-age coal. The Breakup of Pangaea Another major event of the Mesozoic era was the breakup of Pangaea. About 185 million years ago, a rift developed between what is now North America and western Africa, marking the birth of the Atlantic Ocean. As Pangaea gradually broke apart, the westward-moving North American plate began to override the Pacific basin. This tectonic event triggered a continuous wave of deformation that moved inland along Jurassic times, subduction of the Pacific basin under the North American plate began to produce the chaotic mixture of rocks that exist today in the Coast Ranges of igneous activity was widespread, and for more than 100 million years volcanism was rampant as huge masses of magma rose within a few miles of Earth’s surface. The remnants of this activity include the granitic plutons of the Sierra Nevada, as well as the Idaho batholith and British Columbia’s Coast Range batholith. The subduction of the Pacific basin under the western margin of North America also resulted in the piecemeal addition of crustal Baja Peninsula to northern Alaska collision displaced earlier accreted terranes further inland, adding to Coastal Plain the zone of deformation as well as (Area of low relief to the thickness and lateral extent underlain by of the continental margin. gradualy sloping Compressional forces moved sedimentary strata huge rock units in a shingle-like and unlithified fashion toward the east. Across much of North America’s western margin, older rocks were thrust eastward over younger strata, for distances exceeding 150 kilometers (90 miles). Toward the end of the Mesozoic, the southern portions of the Rocky Mountains developed. This mountain-building event, called the Laramide Orogeny, occurred when large blocks of deeply buried Precambrian rocks were lifted nearly vertically along steeply dipping faults, upwarping the overlying younger sedimentary strata. The mountain ranges produced by the Range, the Sangre de Cristo of New Mexico and Colorado, and the Bighorns of Wyoming (see GEOgraphics 14.1, page 436).

The Cenozoic era, or “era of recent life,” encompasses the past 66 million years of Earth history. It was during this span that the physical landscapes and life-forms of our modern world came into existence. The Cenozoic era represents a considerably smaller fraction of geologic time than either the Paleozoic or the Mesozoic, but we know much more about this time span because the rock formations are more widespread and less disturbed than those of any preceding era. Most of North America was above sea level during the Cenozoic era. However, the eastern and western margins of the continent experienced markedly contrasting events because of their different plate boundary relationships. The Atlantic and Gulf coastal regions, far removed from an active plate boundary, were tectonically stable. By contrast, western North America was the leading edge of the North American plate, and the plate interactions during the Cenozoic account for many events of mountain building, volcanism, and earthquakes.

California This volcano is one of several large composite cones that Range. (Photo by Michael fissures in portions of present-day Washington, Oregon, Immediately west of the vast Columbia Plateau, volcanic activity was different in character. Here, more viscous magmas with higher silica content erupted explosively, creating the Cascades, a chain of stratovolcanoes extending from northern California into Canada, some of which are still active. As the Cenozoic was drawing to a close, the effects of mountain building, volcanic activity, isostatic adjustments, and extensive erosion and sedimentation created the physical landscape we know today. All that remained of Cenozoic time was the final 2.6-millionyear episode called the Quaternary period. During this most recent, and ongoing, phase of Earth’s history, humans evolved and the action of glacial ice, wind, and running water added to our planet’s long, complex geologic history.

1. During which period of geologic history did the supercontinent Pangaea come into existence? During which period did it begin to break apart? Southwest during early Jurassic time. 3. Where is most Cretaceous age coal found today in the United States? America during the Cenozoic era.

Describe some of the hypotheses on the origin of life and the characteristics of early prokaryotes, eukaryotes, and multicelled organisms. The oldest fossils provide evidence that life on Earth was established at least 3.5 billion years ago . Microscopic fossils similar to modern cyanobacteria have been found in silica-rich chert deposits worldwide. Notable examples include southern Africa, where rocks date to more than 3.1 billion years, and the Lake Superior region of western Ontario and northern Minnesota, where the Gunflint Chert contains some fossils older than 2 billion years. Chemical traces of organic matter in even older rocks have led paleontologists to conclude that life may have existed as early as 3.8 billion years ago.

Stromatolites are among the most common Cross-section through fossil stromatolites deposited by cyanobacteria. (Photo by Sinclair Stammers/Science Source) Bachman/Science Source) and ammonia, both of which were plentiful in Earth’s primitive atmosphere. Some scientists suggest that these gases could have been easily reorganized into useful organic molecules by ultraviolet light. Others consider lightning to have been the impetus, as the well-known experiments conducted by biochemists Stanley Miller and Harold Urey attempted to demonstrate. Still other researchers suggest that amino acids arrived “ready-made,” delivered by asteroids or comets that collided with a young Earth. Evidence for this hypothesis comes from a group of meteorites, called carbonaceous chrondrites, which contain amino acid–like organic compounds. Yet another hypothesis proposes that the organic material needed for life came from the methane and hydrogen sulfide that spews from deep-sea hydrothermal also possible that life originated in hot springs similar to those found in Yellowstone National Park.

Regardless of where or how life originated, it is clear that the journey from “then” to “now” involved change (Figure 22.20). The first known organisms were simple single-cell bacteria called prokaryotes, which means their genetic by a nucleus. Because oxygen was largely absent from Earth’s early atmosphere and oceans, the first organisms employed anaerobic (without oxygen) metabolism to extract energy from “food.” Their food source was likely organic molecules in their surroundings, but that supply was very limited. Later, bacteria evolved that used solar energy to synthesize organic compounds (sugars). This event was an important turning point in biological evolution: For the first time, organisms had the ability to produce food for themselves as well as for other life-forms. Recall that photosynthesis by ancient cyanobacteria, a type of prokaryote, contributed to the gradual rise in the level of oxygen, first in the ocean and later in the atmosphere. It was these early organisms, which began to inhabit Earth 3.5 billion years ago, that dramatically transformed our planet. Fossil evidence for the existence of these microscopic bacteria includes distinctively layered mats, called stromatolites, composed of slimy material secreted by these What is known about these ancient fossils comes mainly from the study of modern stromatolites like those found in like stubby pillars built as microbes slowly move upward to he rocks shown here are Cambrian-age stromatolites of the Hoyt Limestone, exposed at Lester Park, near Saratoga Springs, New York.

approximately how many years ago these rocks were organisms that likely produced these limestone deposits? of New York when these rocks were deposited?

Ediacarans are a group of sea-dwelling animals that may have come into existence about 600 million years ago. These soft-bodied organisms were up to 1 meter (3 feet) in length and are the oldest animal fossils so Stammers/Science Source) avoid being buried by the sediment that is continually deposited on them.

Evolution of Eukaryotes The oldest fossils of more advanced organisms, called eukaryotes, are about 2.1 billion years old. The first eukaryotes were microscopic, single-cell organisms, but unlike prokaryotes, eukaryotes contain nuclei. This distinctive cellular structure is what all multicellular organisms that now inhabit our planet—trees, birds, fish, reptiles, and humans—have in common.

During much of the Precambrian, life consisted exclusively of single-celled organisms. It wasn’t until perhaps 1.2 billion years ago that multicelled eukaryotes evolved. Green algae, one of the first multicelled organisms, contained chloroplasts (used in photosynthesis) and were the likely ancestors of modern plants. The first primitive marine animals did not appear until somewhat later, perhaps 600 million years ago. Fossil evidence suggests that organic evolution progressed at an excruciatingly slow pace until the end of the Precambrian. At that time, Earth’s continents were largely barren and the oceans were populated mainly with tiny organisms, many too small to be seen with the naked eye. Nevertheless, the stage was set for the evolution of larger and more complex plants and animals.

1. What group of organic compounds is essential necessary for life as we know it? 2. What are stromatolites? What group of organisms is thought to have produced them? 3. Compare prokaryotes with eukaryotes. To which group do all multicelled organisms belong?

Era: Life Explodes List the major developments in the history of life during the Paleozoic era. The Cambrian period marks the beginning of the Paleozoic era, a time span that saw the emergence of a spectacular variety of new life-forms. All major invertebrate (animals lacking backbones) groups made their appearance, including jellyfish, sponges, worms, mollusks (clams and snails), and arthropods (insects and crabs). This huge expansion in biodiversity is often referred to as the Cambrian explosion.

Land plants of the Paleozoic The Silurian saw the first upright-growing (vascular) plants. Plant fossils became increasingly common from the Devonian onward.

During the Devonian, a group of fish called the lobe-finned Extensive forests fish began to adapt to tercover vast areas of restrial environments (Figure the continents internal sacks that could be filled with air to supplement their “breathing” through gills. One group of lobe-finned fish probably occupied freshwater tidal flats or small ponds. Some began to use their fins to move from one pond to another in search of food or to evacuate deteriorating ponds. This favored the evolution of a group of animals able to stay out of water longer and move on land more efficiently. By the late Devonian, lobe-finned fish had evolved into air-breathing amphibians with strong Modern amphibians, such as frogs, toads, and salamanders, are small and occupy limited biological niches. However, conditions during the late Paleozoic were ideal for these newcomers to land. Large tropical swamps teeming with large insects and millipedes extended across North America, Europe, and Siberia. With virtually no predatory risks, amphibians diversified rapidly. Some even took on lifestyles and forms similar to modern reptiles such as crocodiles. Despite their success, amphibians were not fully adapted to life out of water. In fact, amphibian means “double life” because these animals need both the water from where they came and the land to where they moved. Amphibians are born in water, as exemplified by tadpoles, complete with gills and tails. These features disappear during the maturation process, resulting in airbreathing adults with legs.

Vertebrates advanced from water-dwelling lobefin fish, to amphibians, to reptiles—the first true terrestrial vertebrates, with improved lungs for active lifestyles and “waterproof” skin that prevented the loss of body fluids. Most importantly, reptiles developed shellcovered eggs laid on land. Eliminating the water-dwelling stage (like the tadpole stage in frogs) was an important evolutionary step. Of interest is the fact that the watery fluid within the reptilian egg closely resembles seawater in chemical composition. Because the reptile embryo develops in this watery environment, the shelled egg has been characterized as a “private aquarium” in which the embryos of these land vertebrates spend their water-dwelling stage of life. With this “sturdy egg,” the remaining ties to the water were broken, and reptiles moved inland.

Comparison of the anatomical features of the lobe-finned fish and fins on the lobe-finned fish contained the same basic elements (h, humerus, or upper arm; r, radius; and u, ulna, or lower arm) as This amphibian is shown with the standard five toes, but early amphibians had as many as eight toes. Eventually the amphibians evolved to have a standard toe count of five.

Relationships of vertebrate of all land-dwelling vertebrate species and perhaps 90 groups and their divergence percent of all marine organisms were obliterated; it from lobefin fish was the most significant of five mass extinctions that occurred over the past 500 million years. Each extinction wreaked havoc with the existing biosphere, wiping out large numbers of species. In each case, however, survivors entered new biological communities that were ultimately more diverse. Therefore, mass extinctions actually invigorated life on Earth, as the few hardy survivors eventually filled more environmental niches than those left behind by the victims. Several mechanisms have been proposed to explain these ancient mass extinctions. Initially, paleontologists believed they were gradual events caused by a combination of climate change and biological forces, such as predation and competition. Other research groups have attempted to link certain mass extinctions to the explosive impact of a large asteroid striking Earth’s surface. The most widely held view is that the Permian mass extinction was driven mainly by volcanic activity because it coincided with a period of voluminous eruptions of flood basalts that blanketed about 1.6 million square kilometers (624,000 square miles), an area nearly the size of Alaska. This series of eruptions, which lasted roughly 1 million years, occurred in northern Russia, in an area called the Siberian Traps. It was the largest volcanic eruption in the past 500 million years. The release of huge amounts of carbon dioxide likely generated a period of accelerated greenhouse warming, while the emission of sulfur dioxide is credited with producing copious amounts of acid rain. These drastic environmental changes likely put excessive stress on many of Earth’s life-forms.

Briefly explain the major developments in the history of life during the Mesozoic era. As the Mesozoic era dawned, its life-forms were the survivors of the great Permian extinction. These organisms diversified in many ways to fill the biological voids created at the close of the Paleozoic. While life on land underwent a radical transformation with the rise of the dinosaurs, life in the sea also entered a dramatic phase of transformation that produced many of the animal groups that prevail in the oceans today, including modern groups of predatory fish, crustaceans, mollusks, and sand dollars.

On land, conditions favored organisms that could adapt to drier climates. One such group of plants, gymnosperms, produced “naked” seeds that are exposed on modified leaves that usually form cones. The seeds are not enclosed in fruits, as are apple seeds, for example. Unlike the first plants to invade the land, seed-bearing gymnosperms did not depend on free-standing water for fertilization. Consequently, these plants were not restricted to a life near the water’s edge. The gymnosperms quickly became the dominant trees of the Mesozoic. Examples of this group include cycads that resembled large pineapple plants (Figure 22.29); ginkgo plants having fan-shaped leaves, much like their modern relatives; and the largest plants, the conifers, whose modern descendants include the pines, firs, and junipers. The best-known fossil occurrence of these ancient trees is in northern Arizona’s Petrified Forest National Park. Here, huge petrified logs lie exposed at the surface, having been weathered from rocks of the Triassic Chinle Formation.

Toothed beak (reptilian feature) birds took to the air from the ground up or from the trees down is a question scientists continue to debate. Other reptiles returned to the sea, including fish-eating plesiosaurs and ichthyosaurs. These reptiles became proficient swimmers but retained their reptilian teeth and breathed by means of lungs rather than For nearly 160 million years, dinosaurs reigned supreme. However, by the close of the Mesozoic, like many other reptiles, dinosaurs became extinct. Select reptile groups have survived to recent times, including turtles, snakes, crocodiles, and lizards. The huge, land-dwelling dinosaurs, the Tail feathers marine plesiosaurs, and the flying pterosaurs (bird feature) are known only through the fossil record. What caused this great extinction?

The boundaries between divisions on the geologic time scale represent times of significant geological and/or biological change. Of special interest is the boundary between the Mesozoic era (“middle life”) and the Cenozoic era (“recent life”), about 66 million years ago. During this transition, roughly three-quarters of all plant and animal species died out in another mass extinction. This boundary marks the end of the era in which dinosaurs and other large reptiles dominated the landscape and the beginning of the era when mammals assumed that role.

This layer is presumably the scattered remains of the meteorite responsible for the environmental changes that provided the second and final blow that led to the demise of many reptile groups. Regardless of what caused this massive extinction, its outcome provides a valuable lesson in understanding the role that catastrophic events play in shaping our planet’s physical landscape and sustainability of lifeforms. The extinction of the dinosaurs opened habitats for the small mammals that survived. These new habitats, along with evolutionary forces, led to the development of the large mammals that occupy our modern world.

surface, which resulted in global cooling (“impact winter”) and inhibited photosynthesis, disrupting food production. Long after the dust settled, the sulfur oxides that were added to the atmosphere by the blast remained. Sulfate aerosols, because of their high reflectivity, perpetuated the unusually cold temperatures. One piece of evidence that points to a catastrophic collision 66 million years ago is a thin layer of sediment, less than 1 centimeter thick, discovered in several places around the globe. This sediment contains a high level of the element iridium, rare in Earth’s crust but found in high proportions in stony meteorites.

1. What group of plants became the dominant trees during the Mesozoic era? Name a modern descendant of this group. 2. What group of reptiles led to the evolution of modern birds? 3. What was the dominant reptile group on land during the Mesozoic? 4. Identify two reptiles that returned to life in the sea.

Era: Age of Mammals Discuss the major developments in the history of life during the Cenozoic era. During the Cenozoic, mammals replaced reptiles as the dominant land animals. At nearly the same time, angiosperms (flowering plants with covered seeds) replaced gymnosperms as the dominant plants. The Cenozoic is often called the “Age of Mammals” but can also be considered the “Age of Flowering Plants” because, in the plant world, angiosperms enjoy a status similar to that of mammals in the animal world. The development of flowering plants strongly influenced the evolution of both birds and mammals that feed on seeds and fruits, as well as many insect groups. During the middle of the Cenozoic, another type of angiosperm, grasses, developed and spread rapidly over the plains. This fostered the emergence of herbivorous (plant-eating) mammals, which, in turn, provided the evolutionary foundation for large predatory mammals.

The earliest mammals coexisted with dinosaurs for nearly 100 million years but were small rodent-like Angiosperms became the dominant plants during the Cenozoic Angiosperms, commonly known as flowering plants, consist of a group of seed-plants that have reproductive structures The most diverse and widespread of modern plants, many angiosperms display including grasses, have very tiny flowers. The expansion of the grasslands during the Cenozoic era greatly increased the diversity of grazing mammals and the predators that feed on them.

creatures that gathered food at night, when dinosaurs were probably less active. Then, about 66 million years ago, fate intervened when the large meteorite collided with Earth and dealt the final crashing blow to the reign of the dinosaurs. This transition from one dominant group to another is clearly visible in the fossil Mammals are distinct from reptiles in that they are warm blooded and give birth to live young that suckle on milk. Being warm blooded allowed mammals to lead more active lives and to occupy more diverse habitats than reptiles because they could survive in cold regions. (Modern reptiles are cold blooded and dormant during cold weather. However, recent studies suggest that dinosaurs may have been warm blooded.) Other mammalian adaptations included the development of insulating body hair and more efficient hearts, lungs, and other With the demise of the large Mesozoic reptiles, Cenozoic mammals diversified rapidly. The many forms that exist today evolved from small primitive mammals that were characterized by short legs; flat, five-toed feet; and small brains. Their development and specialization took four principal directions: increase in size, increase in brain capacity, specialization of teeth to better accommodate their diet, and specialization of limbs to be better equipped for a particular lifestyle or environment.

Mammoths These relatives of modern elephants were among the large mammals that became extinct at the close of the Ice Age. (Image courtesy of INTERFOTO/Alamy) rise to our species, Homo sapiens, as well as to some extinct related species, including the Neanderthals (Homo neanderthalis). Despite having the same-sized brain as present-day humans and being able to fashion hunting tools from wood and stone, Neanderthals became extinct about 28,000 years ago. At one time, Neanderthals were considered a stage in the evolution of Homo sapiens, but that view has largely been abandoned. Based on our current understanding, Homo sapiens originated in Africa about 200,000 years ago and began to spread around the globe. The oldest-known Homo East and date back to 115,000 years ago. Humans are known to have coexisted with Neanderthals and other China, and Indonesia. Further, there is mounting genetic evidence that our ancestors may have interbred with members of some of these groups. By 36,000 years ago, humans were producing spectacular cave paintings in Europe. About 11,500 years ago, all prehistoric human populations except for Homo sapiens died out.

During the rapid mammal diversification of the Cenozoic era, some species became very large. For example, by the Oligocene epoch, a hornless rhinoceros evolved that stood nearly 5 meters (16 feet) high. It is the largest land mammal known to have existed. As time passed, many other mammals evolved to larger forms—more, in fact, than now exist. Many of these large forms were common as recently as 11,000 years ago. However, a wave of late Pleistocene extinctions rapidly eliminated these animals from the landscape. North America experienced the extinction of mastodons and mammoths, both huge relatives of the modern elephant. In addition, saber-toothed cats, giant beavers, large ground sloths, horses, giant bison, and others died out. In Europe, late Pleistocene extinctions included woolly rhinos, large cave bears, and Irish elk. Scientists remain puzzled about the reasons for this recent wave of extinctions of large animals. Because these large animals survived several major glacial advances and interglacial periods, it is difficult to ascribe extinctions of these animals to climate change. Some scientists hypothesize that early humans hastened the decline of these mammals by selectively hunting large forms.

In 2014, renewable energy consumption represented about fast-growing part of this category. These wind turbines are in percentage of the products and substances we use every day were mined from Earth’s crust and/or manufactured using energy extracted from the crust. We humans consume huge quantities of energy and mineral resources, and demand continues to grow. In 1960, the world population was 3 billion. In 2015, Earth was home to nearly 7.4 billion people. By 2025, the planet’s population is expected to approach 8 billion. Improving living standards in many parts of the world add to resource demand as well. How long can our remaining resources sustain the rising standard of living in today’s industrialized countries and still provide for the growing needs of developing regions? How much environmental deterioration are we willing to accept in pursuit of resources? Can alternatives be found? If we are to satisfy an increasing per capita demand and a growing world population, we must understand our resources and their limits.

Resources are commonly divided into two broad categories: renewable and nonrenewable. Renewable resources can be replenished over relatively short time spans such as months, years, or decades. Common examples are plants and animals for food, natural fibers for clothing, and trees for lumber and paper. Energy from flowing water, wind, and the Sun are also considered renewable. By contrast, nonrenewable resources continue to be formed in Earth, but the processes that create them are so slow that significant deposits take millions of years to accumulate. For human purposes, Earth contains fixed How much do each of us use? The annual per capita consumption of nonmetallic and metallic resources for the United States is about 11,000 kilograms (12 tons). About 97 percent of the materials used are nonmetallic. The per capita use of oil, coal, and natural gas exceeds 11,000 kilograms.

Metallic Resources 35 kg (77 lbs) 9 kg (20 lbs) Other metals 360 kg (790 lbs) 5713 kg (12695 lbs) 4025 kg (8945 lbs) Sand and gravel 137 kg (304 lbs) 178 kg (395 lbs) 162 kg (361 lbs) 302 kg (672 lbs) Phosphate rock Other nonmetals quantities of these substances. When the present supplies are mined or pumped from the ground, there will be no more. Examples are fossil fuels (for example, coal, oil, natural gas) and many important metals (for example, iron, copper, uranium, gold). Some of these nonrenewable resources, such as aluminum, can be used over and over again; others, such as oil, cannot be recycled. Occasionally some resources can be placed in either category, depending on how they are used. Groundwater is one such example. Where it is pumped from the ground at a rate that can be replenished, groundwater can be classified as a renewable resource. However, in places where groundwater is withdrawn faster than it is replenished, the water table drops steadily. In this case, the groundwater is being “mined” just like other nonrenewable resources. The problem of declining water-table levels is discussed in Chapter 17. Most of the energy and mineral resources we use are nonrenewable. How much of these does the average Energy Resources 3700 kg (8140 lbs) 3850 kg (8470 lbs) Natural gas shows the estimated annual per capita consumption of several important mineral and energy resources. This is each person’s prorated share of the materials required by industry to provide the vast array of homes, cars, electronics, cosmetics, packaging, and so on that modern society requires. Figures for other highly industrialized countries, such as Canada, Australia, and several nations in Western Europe are comparable.

1. Distinguish between renewable and nonrenewable resources. 2. Are resources such as aluminum, that can be recycled, considered renewable? 3. Do we use a greater quantity of metallic or nonmetallic resources?

Energy Resources: Fossil Fuels energy consumption. Earth’s tremendous industrialization over the past two centuries has been fueled—and is still fueled—by burning coal, petroleum, and natural gas. About 81 percent of the energy consumed in from and what it is used for. Our reliance on fossil fuels is obvious.

This is the percentage of the total for this category.

Reading this double graph: The left side indicates what energy sources we use. The right side shows where we use the energy. The lines with numbers that connect the graphs provide more details. Use the top line as an example. It shows that 71% of the petroleum is used by the transportation sector. It also indicates that 92% of the energy used by the transportation sector is petroleum.

In 2014 the United States produced nearly 1 billion tons of coal. It will likely remain a major energy source for many years to come. Where is coal mined in the United States?

The top 10 coal-producing states in 2014 (thousands of tons/percentage of total) Wyoming is far and away the largest producer of coal in the United States. With more than Wyoming is home to the eight largest mines in the country.

Production by region in millions of tons (percentage of total) Anthracite coal has the highest carbon content—86 to 97%. It is relatively rare in the United States and is more difficult to mine. All of the mines are in northeastern Pennsylvania.

Subbituminous coal is 35 to 45% carbon. Large quantities occur in thick beds near the surface, resulting in low mining costs. Wyoming is the major source of this type.

Subbituminous coal 9000 Btu/lb Bituminous coal 12,000 Btu/lb 1. In what state is the most coal mined? 2. What is the primary type of coal mined in that state?

Modern offshore oil production platform in the North Sea. they can be buried by other sediments. Therefore, accumulations of oil and gas are not as widespread as are the marine environments that support abundant biological activity. This limiting factor notwithstanding, large quantities of organic matter are buried and protected from oxidation in many offshore sedimentary basins. With ever-deeper burial over millions of years, chemical reactions gradually transform some of the original organic matter into the liquid and gaseous hydrocarbons we call petroleum and natural gas. Unlike the organic matter from which they formed, the newly created petroleum and natural gas are mobile. These fluids are gradually squeezed from the compacting, mud-rich layers where they originate into adjacent permeable beds such as sandstone, where openings between sediment grains are larger. Because this occurs underwater, the rock layers containing the oil and gas are saturated with water. Because oil and gas are less dense than water, they migrate upward through the water-filled pore spaces of the enclosing rocks. Unless something halts this upward migration, the fluids will eventually reach the surface, at which point the volatile components will evaporate.

oil and gas to accumulate underground is termed an oil trap. Several geologic structures may act as oil traps, but all have two basic conditions in common: a porous, permeable reservoir rock that will yield petroleum and natural gas in sufficient quantities to make drilling worthwhile, and a cap rock, such as shale, that is virtually impermeable to oil and gas. The cap rock halts the upwardly The first successful oil well was completed by Edwin Drake (right) on August 27, 1859, near was encountered at a Depth of 21 meters (69 feet).

Seismic search for oil and natural gas Reflected seismic waves are used to search for underground reservoirs of oil and natural gas. The seismic waves from explosions reflect off the boundaries between layers of different composition. Using computer programs, the data show the geometry of the strata, including folds and faults. Using this information, geologists map potential petroleum reservoirs in Earth’s crust.

older Paleozoic strata. There is virtually no oil produced from the most ancient rocks, those of Precambrian age.

Oil Sands Oil sands are a somewhat unconventional yet significant source of oil that is likely to become increasingly important in the decades to come. Unlike the oil that accumulates in traps, this oil is obtained in a different manner. Oil sands are usually mixtures of clay and sand combined with water and varying amounts of a black, highly viscous tar-like material known as bitumen. The use of the term sand can be misleading because not all deposits are associated with sands and sandstones. Some occur in other materials, including shales and limestones. The oil in these deposits is very similar to heavy crude oils pumped from wells. The major difference between conventional oil reservoirs and oil sand deposits is in the viscosity (resistance to flow) of the oil they contain. In oil sands, the oil is much more viscous and cannot simply be pumped out. Substantial oil sand deposits occur in several locations around the world. By far the largest are in the Canadian province of Alberta. Some oil sands are mined at the surface in a manner similar to the strip mining of coal. The excavated material is then heated with pressurized steam until the bitumen softens and rises. Once collected, the oily material is treated to remove impurities, and then hydrogen is added. This last step upgrades the material to a synthetic crude, which can then be refined. Extracting and refining oil sands requires a great deal of energy—nearly half as much as the end product yields! Nevertheless, oil sands from Alberta’s vast deposits are the source of about 50 percent of Canada’s oil production. In 2013, nearly 2 million barrels of crude bitumen were produced per day. It is estimated that this amount will reach 3.7 million barrels per day by 2020 and 5.2 million barrels per day by 2030.

Water table Hydraulic fracturing involves the injection of water, sand, and chemicals at high pressure into a well.

Natural gas and waste water flows from fractures into well The pressurized mixture creates new cracks in the rock layer. The cracks are held open by the sand When pressure is released, hydraulic fracturing fluid (waste water) and natural gas flow to the surface.

Obtaining oil from oil sand has environmental drawbacks. Substantial land disturbance is associated with mining huge quantities of rock and sediment. Moreover, large quantities of water are required for processing, and when processing is completed, contaminated water and sediments accumulate in toxic disposal ponds. About 80 percent of the oil sands in Alberta are buried too deep for surface mining. Oil from these deep deposits must be recovered by using in situ (Latin for “in place”) techniques. Using drilling technology, steam is injected into the deposit to heat the oil sand, which reduces the viscosity of the bitumen. The hot, mobile bitumen migrates toward producing wells, which pump it to the surface, while the sand is left in place. Production using in situ techniques already rivals open-pit mining and in the future will replace mining as the main source of bitumen production from the oil sands. Challenges facing in situ processes include increasing the efficiency of oil recovery, managing the water used to make steam, and reducing the costs of energy required for the process.

Hydraulic Fracturing In some shale deposits, there are significant reserves of natural gas that cannot naturally leave because of the rock’s low permeability. The practice of hydraulic fracturing (often called fracking) shatters the shale, opening up cracks through which the natural gas is initiated by pumping fluids into the rock at very high pressures. The fluid is mostly water but also includes other chemicals that aid in the fracturing process. Some of these chemicals may be toxic, and there are concerns about fracking fluids leaking into freshwater aquifers that supply people with drinking water. The injection fluid also includes sand, so once fractures open up in the shale, the sand grains can keep them propped open and permit the gas to continue to flow. Once the fracturing has been accomplished, the fracking fluid is brought back to the surface. This wastewater is then injected into deep disposal wells. In some locations, these injections appear to trigger numerous minor earthquakes. Due to concerns about potential groundwater contamination and induced seismicity, hydraulic fracturing remains a controversial practice. Its environmental effects remain a focus of continuing research.

1. Why are coal, oil, and natural gas called fossil fuels? Do all three form under the same of the fossil fuels represent? Where is most coal used? How about petroleum? 3. What is an oil trap? Sketch two examples. What do all oil traps have in common? 4. What are oil sands, and where are they most 5. Describe the circumstances in which hydraulic fracturing is used.

Hydraulic fracturing (“fracking”) This wellstimulation process is commonly used in lowpermeability rocks such as shale to increase oil and/or natural gas flow.

Describe the importance of nuclear energy and discuss its pros and cons. 23.2 also shows that 100 percent of that energy was used to produce electricity. The right side of The fuel for these nuclear power plants comes from radioactive materials that release energy through the process of nuclear fission. Fission is accomplished by bombarding the nuclei of heavy atoms, commonly uranium-235, with neutrons. This causes the uranium nuclei to split into smaller nuclei and to emit neutrons and heat energy. The ejected neutrons, in turn, bombard the nuclei of adjacent uranium atoms, producing a chain reaction. If the supply of fissionable material is sufficient and if the reaction is allowed to proceed in an uncontrolled manner, an enormous amount of energy is released, in the form of an atomic explosion. In a nuclear power plant, the fission reaction is controlled by moving neutron-absorbing rods into or out of the nuclear reactor. The result is a controlled nuclear chain reaction that releases great amounts of heat. The heat energy produced is transported from the reactor and used to drive steam turbines that turn electrical generators, which is similar to what occurs in most conventional power plants.

Uranium-235 is the only naturally occurring isotope that is readily fissionable, and it is therefore the primary fuel used in nuclear power plants.* Although large quantities of uranium ore have been discovered, most contain *Thorium, although not capable by itself of sustaining a chain reaction, can be used with uranium-235 as a nuclear fuel.

Tsunami destroys nuclear power plant In March 2011, an earthquake and massive tsunami destroyed Japan’s Fukushima nuclear power plant. The event triggered a reevaluation of nuclear power in many AFP/Getty Images) less than 0.05 percent uranium. Of this small amount, 99.3 percent is the nonfissionable isotope uranium-238, and just 0.7 percent consists of the fissionable isotope uranium-235. Because most nuclear reactors operate with fuels that are at least 3 percent uranium-235, the two isotopes must be separated in order to concentrate the fissionable uranium-235. The process of separating the uranium isotopes is difficult and substantially increases the cost of nuclear power generation. Although uranium is a rare element in Earth’s crust, it does occur in enriched deposits. Some of the most important occurrences are associated with what are believed to be ancient placer deposits in streambeds.** For example, in Witwatersrand, South Africa, grains of uranium ore (as well as rich gold deposits) were concentrated by virtue of their high density in rocks made largely of quartz pebbles. In the United States, the richest uranium deposits are Plateau and in younger rocks in Wyoming. Most of these deposits have formed through the precipitation of uranium compounds from groundwater. Here, precipitation of uranium occurs as a result of a chemical reaction with organic matter, as evidenced by the concentration of uranium in fossil logs and organic-rich black shales.

At one time, nuclear power was heralded as the clean, cheap source of energy that would replace fossil fuels. However, several obstacles have emerged to hinder the development of nuclear power as a major energy source. One is the skyrocketing costs of building nuclear facilities that must contain numerous safety features. There is also concern about the possibility of a serious accidents. The March 2011 emergency at Japan’s Fukushima nuclear power plant is a recent example (Figure nuclear meltdowns, and releases of radioactive materials followed. **Placer deposits are discussed later in the chapter.

It should be emphasized that the concentrations of fissionable uranium-235 and the design of reactors are such that nuclear power plants cannot explode like atomic bombs. The dangers arise from the possible escape of radioactive debris during a meltdown of the core or other malfunction. In addition, hazards such as the disposal of nuclear waste and the relationship that exists between nuclear energy programs and the proliferation of nuclear weapons must be considered when evaluating the pros and cons of nuclear power. Worldwide, 11 percent of electricity is generated by nuclear power plants, and the amount is increasing. Although nuclear power capacity has remained relatively unchanged in the United States for many years, it continues to grow worldwide. In 2015 more than 430 nuclear plants were operating worldwide, and another 60 reactors were under construction, the majority in Asian countries.

Among the benefits, or “pros,” for nuclear energy is the fact that nuclear power plants do not emit carbon dioxide—the greenhouse gas that contributes significantly to global warming (see Chapter 21). By contrast, the generation of electricity from fossil fuels produces large quantities of carbon dioxide. Thus, substituting nuclear power for power generated by fossil fuels represents one option for reducing carbon emissions.

provided by nuclear power? 2. What is the primary fuel used in nuclear power 3. List some pros and cons of nuclear energy.

List and discuss the major sources of renewable energy. Describe the contribution Unlike fossils fuels, which are exhaustible, renewable energy sources regenerate and can be sustained indefinitely. The use of renewable energy is not new. More than 150 years ago, wood supplied a high percentage of our energy needs. Today coal, oil, and natural gas dominate, but the use of renewable ing the past 40 years and is expected to continue growing in the Solar 4% projects that we will still rely on nonrenewable fuels to meet a significant portion of our needs.

Renewable energy In 2014 renewable energy represented about 10 percent receiver end of a Stirling engine. The internal side of a receiver then heats hydrogen gas, causing it to expand. The pressure created by the expanding gas drives a piston, which turns a small electric generator.

Air has mass, and when it moves (that is, when the wind blows), it contains the energy of that motion—kinetic be converted into other forms— mechanical force or electricity—that we can use to perform work. Mechanical energy from wind is commonly used for pumping water in rural or remote places. The “farm windmill,” still a familiar sight in many rural areas, is an example. Mechanical energy converted from wind can also be used for other purposes, such as sawing logs, grinding grain, and propelling sailboats. In addition, wind-powered electric turbines generate electricity for homes and businesses and for sale to utilities (see chapter-opening photo). Today, modern wind turbines are being installed at breakneck speed. In fact, worldwide, the installed wind power capacity was nearly 370,000 megawatts (million over 2010.* China has the greatest installed capacity (more than 114,000 megawatts in 2014), followed by the United States (about 66,000 megawatts in 2014). According to the World Wind Energy Association, wind turbines were supplying about 3 percent of worldwide electricity demand at the beginning of 2015. Wind speed is crucial in determining whether a place is a suitable site for installing a wind-energy facility. Generally a minimum average wind speed of 21 kilometers (13 miles) per hour (or 6 meters per second) is necessary for a large-scale wind-power plant to be large difference in energy production and, therefore, a large difference in the cost of the electricity generated. For example, a turbine operating on a site with an average wind speed of 19.3 kilometers (12 miles) per hour would generate about 33 percent more electricity than one operating at 17.7 kilometers (11 miles) per hour. Also, there is little energy to be harvested at low wind speeds; air moving *One megawatt is enough electricity to supply 250–300 average American at 9.6 kilometers (6 miles) per hour contains less than one-eighth the energy of air moving at twice that speed. Although the modern in California, many states have greater wind potential. mated average wind speeds at a height of 80 meters 39,431 47,620 (260 feet) above the sur31,100 17,400 23,900 face—the level where most 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 commercial wind turbines rotate. Areas with averby waterwheels has been used to power mills and other age wind speeds greater than about 6 meters per second machinery. Today, the power generated by falling water (13 miles per hour) are considered to have potential for the term hydroelectric power. In the United States, the most installed wind capacity, followed by California hydroelectric power plants satisfied about 7 percent of the country’s demand in 2014. Most of this energy is produced at large dams, which allow for a controlled flow of water Compared to burning fossil fuels to generate electricity, wind power produces little impact in terms of pol-. The water impounded in a reservoir is a form lution. However, there are other problems related to wind of stored energy that can be released at any time to produce electricity. energy, most of which are local. One of the most critical Although water power is considered a renewable is bird kills, because birds occasionally collide with wind resource, the dams built to provide hydroelectricity have turbines. Land erosion caused by improper installation, finite lifetimes. Recall from Chapter 16 that all rivers noise, and visual impact are also cited as potential envicarry suspended sediment, which is deposited behind ronmental issues. the dam as soon as it is built. Eventually sediment may completely fill the reservoir. This takes 50 to 300 years, funds to develop offshore wind technologies. Offshore depending on the quantity of suspended material transwinds are stronger and blow more consistently than ported by the river. An example is Egypt’s huge Aswan winds over land. Data suggest that more than 4 million High Dam, which was completed in the 1960s. It is estimegawatts of capacity is available on public land along mated that half of the reservoir will be filled with sedithe coasts of the United States. This is four times more ment from the Nile River by 2025. than the country’s total electrical-generating capacity. rently generated comes from wind energy, the Department of Energy’s goal is to obtain from wind by 2030, with 4 perAnnual Average Wind Speed at 80 meters cent of that amount anticipated from offshore wind farms. This target seems consistent with the current growth rate of wind energy nationwide. Thus, windWind generated electricity appears to be shifting from being an alter>10.5 native to being a mainstream energy source.

Because the entire country consists of geologically young volcanic rocks, warm water can be encountered in holes drilled almost anywhere. 100 km 50 mi future expansion of hydroelectric power. The total power produced by hydroelectric sources might still increase, but the relative share provided by this source will likely decline because other alternate energy sources will increase at a faster rate. In recent years, a different type of hydroelectric power production has come into use. Called a pumped water-storage system, it is actually a type of energy management. During times when demand for electricity is low, unneeded power produced by nonhydroelectric sources is used to pump water from a lower reservoir to a storage area at a higher elevation. Then, when demand for electricity is great, the water stored in the higher reservoir is available to drive turbines and produce electricity to supplement the power supply.

Geothermal energy is harnessed by tapping natural underground reservoirs of steam and hot water. These occur where subsurface temperatures are high, due to relatively recent volcanic activity or nearby magma chambers. Geothermal energy is put to use in two ways: The steam and hot water are used for heating and to generate Iceland is a large volcanic island with current volcanic activity. In Iceland’s capital, Reykjavik, underground steam and hot water are pumped into buildings throughout the city for space heating. They also warm greenhouses, where fruits and vegetables are grown all year. In the United States, localities in several western states use hot water from geothermal sources for space heating.

Iceland straddles the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. This divergent plate boundary is the site of numerous active volcanoes and geothermal systems.

The steam at this power station in southwestern water from the plant is sent via an insulated pipeline to Reykjavik for space heating.

The Italians began generating electricity geothermally in 1904, so the idea is not new. In 2014, 24 countries produced more than 12,800 megawatts of power this way. The United States was the leading producer, responsible for more than 25 percent of the total. Nevertheless, geothermal power represents just 0.4 percent The first commercial geothermal power plant in the United States was built in 1960 at The Geysers, north of San Francisco. The Geysers remains the world’s largest geothermal power plant, generating nearly 1000 megawatts annually. In addition to The Geysers, geothermal development is occurring elsewhere in the western United States, including Nevada, Utah, and the is enough to supply more than 3 million homes. This is comparable to burning about 70 million barrels of oil each year. The following geologic factors favor a geothermal reservoir of commercial value: chamber deep enough to ensure adequate pressure and slow cooling but not so deep that the natural water circulation is inhibited. Such magma chambers are most likely in regions of recent volcanic activity. r Large and porous reservoirs with channels connected to the heat source, near which water can circulate and then be stored in the reservoir. As with other alternative methods of power production, geothermal sources are not expected to provide a high percentage of the world’s growing energy needs.

ake Powell is the reservoir that was created when River. As water in the lake is released, it drives turbines and produces electricity. (Photo by Michael Collier) generated at Glen Canyon Dam? not last indefinitely.

Biomass: Renewable Energy from Biomass is organic material made from plants and animals. It is a renewable energy source because we can always grow more trees and crops, and waste will always exist. Some examples of biomass fuels are wood, crops, example is burning a log in a wood stove or fireplace. Wood and garbage can be burned to produce steam for generating electricity or to provide heat to industries and homes.

Burning biomass is not the only way to release its energy. Biomass can be converted to other usable forms of energy, such as methane gas, or transportation fuels, States. Primary sources of biomass energy are as follows: r Wood biomass includes wood chips from forestry operations, residues from lumber, pulp/paper, and furniture mills, and fuel wood for space heating. The largest single source of wood energy is “black liquor,” a residue of pulp, paper, and paperboard production. r Biofuels include alcohol fuels such as ethanol, and “biodiesel,” a fuel from grain oils and animal fats. Most biofuel used in the United States is ethanol produced from corn. r Municipal waste contains biomass such as paper, cardboard, food scraps, grass clippings, and leaves. Waste can be recycled, composted, sent to landfills, or used in waste-to-energy plants. There are hundreds of landfills in the United States that recover biogas, which is methane that forms when waste matter decomposes in low-oxygen (anaerobic) conditions. The methane is burned to produce electricity and heat.

Several methods of generating electrical energy from the oceans have been proposed, but the ocean’s energy potential remains largely untapped. The development of tidal power is the principal example of energy production from the ocean. Tides have been used as a source of power for centuries. Beginning in the twelfth century, waterwheels driven by the tides were used to power gristmills and sawmills. During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, much of Boston’s flour was produced at a tidal mill. Today far greater energy demands must be satisfied, and more sophisticated ways of using the force created by the perpetual rise and fall of the ocean must be employed.

Tidal power is harnessed by constructing a dam across the mouth of a bay or an estuary in a coastal area having between the bay and the open ocean magnifies the variations in water level that occur as the tides rise and fall. The strong in-and-out flow that results at such a site is then used to drive turbines and electrical generators. Tidal energy utilization is exemplified by the tidal power plant at the mouth of the Rance River in France. By far the largest yet constructed, this plant went into operation in 1966 and produces enough power to satisfy the needs of Brittany and also meet the demands of other regions. Much smaller experimental facilities have been built near Murmansk in Russia, near Taliang in China, and on the Annapolis River estuary, an arm of the Bay of Fundy in the Along most of the world’s coasts, it is not possible to harness tidal energy. If the tidal range is less than 8 meters (25 feet), or if narrow, enclosed bays are absent, tidal power development is not economically feasible. For this reason, the tides will never provide a very high portion of our ever-increasing electrical energy requirements. Nevertheless, the development of tidal power may be worth pursuing at feasible sites because electricity produced by the tides consumes no exhaustible fuels and creates no noxious wastes.

1. How important is renewable energy to the overall 2. What is the greatest use of renewable energy? 3. Describe two ways in which solar energy is used to produce electricity. 4. Which has had the more rapid rate of growth rate in the United States in recent years: wind power or hydroelectric power? 5. What is biomass? List four examples. 6. Where in the United States is hydroelectric power development most concentrated? How about geothermal power development?

his image shows an active landfill where tons of trash and garbage are dumped every day. Eventually this site will be reclaimed to resemble the area shown on the right and will SuperStock; Right Photo by Jim West/Alamy Images) and waste could become a source of energy. What form of energy will it be? How might it be used? renewable or nonrenewable? Explain.

Distinguish among resource, reserve, and ore. Earth’s crust is the source of a wide variety of useful and essential substances. In fact, practically every manufactured product contains substances derived from minerals. Table 23.1 lists some important examples.

Except for oxygen and silicon, all other elements make up a relatively small fraction of common crustal rocks . Indeed, the natural concentrations of many average percentage of a valuable element is worthless if the cost of extracting it exceeds the value of the material recovered. To be considered valuable, an element must be concentrated above the level of its average crustal abundance. Generally, the lower the crustal abundance, the greater the concentration. For example, copper makes up about 0.0135 percent of the crust. However, for a material to be considered a copper ore, it must contain a concentration that is about 50 times this amount. Aluminum, in contrast, represents 8.13 percent of the crust and must be concentrated to only about four times its average crustal percentage before it can be extracted profitably. It is important to realize that a deposit may become profitable to extract or lose its profitability because of economic changes. If demand for a metal increases and prices rise, the status of a previously unprofitable deposit changes, and it becomes an ore. The status of unprofitable deposits may also change if a technological advance allows the useful element to be extracted at a lower cost than before. This occurred at the copper-mining operation located at Bingham Canyon, Utah, one of the largest open-pit mines on Earth . Mining was halted here in 1985 because outmoded equipment had driven up the cost of extracting the copper beyond the selling price. The owners responded by replacing an antiquated 1000-car railroad with conveyor belts and pipelines for transporting the ore and waste. These devices achieved a cost reduction of nearly 30 percent and returned this mining operation to profitability. Over the years, geologists have been keenly interested in learning how natural processes produce localized concentrations of essential metallic minerals. One well-established fact is that occurrences of valuable mineral resources are closely related to the rock cycle. That is, the mechanisms that generate igneous, sedimentary, and metamorphic rocks, including the processes of weathering and erosion, play a major role in producing concentrated accumulations of useful elements. Moreover, with the development of plate tectonics theory, geologists added yet another tool for understanding the processes by which one rock is transformed into another.

1. Contrast resource and reserve. 2. What is an ore? Explain how different igneous and metamorphic processes produce economically significant mineral deposits.

Some of the most important accumulations of metals, such as gold, silver, copper, mercury, lead, platinum, and nickel, are produced by igneous and metamorphic processes (see Table 23.1). These mineral resources, like most others, result from processes that concentrate desirable materials to the extent that extraction is economically feasible.

The igneous processes that generate some metal deposits are quite straightforward. For example, as a large magma body cools, the heavy minerals that crystallize early tend to settle to the lower portion of the magma chamber (crystal settling). This type of magmatic differentiation basaltic magmas where chromite (ore of chromium), magnetite, and platinum are occasionally generated. Layers of chromite, interbedded with other heavy minerals, are mined from such deposits in the Stillwater Complex of Montana. Another example is the Bushveld Complex in South Africa, which contains over 70 percent of the world’s known reserves of platinum.

Pegmatite Deposits Magmatic differentiation is important in the late stages of the magmatic process. This is particularly true of granitic magmas, in which the residual melt can become enriched in rare elements and heavy metals. Further, because water and other volatile substances do not crystallize along with the bulk of the magma body, these fluids make up a high percentage of the melt during the final phase of solidification. Crystallization in a fluid-rich environment, where ion migration is enhanced, results in the formation of crystals several centimeters, or even a few meters, in length. The resulting rocks, called pegmatites, are composed of these unusually large crystals. Most pegmatites are granitic in composition and consist of unusually large crystals of quartz, feldspar, and muscovite. Feldspar is used in the production of ceramics, and muscovite is used for electrical insulation and glitter. Further, pegmatites often contain some of the least abundant elements. Thus, in addition to the common silicates, some pegmatites include semiprecious gems such as beryl, topaz, and tourmaline. Moreover, minerals containing the elements lithium, cesium, uranium, and the rare earths* are occasionally found . Most pegmatites are located within large igneous masses or as dikes or veins that cut into the host rock surrounding the magma chamber. *The rare earths are a group of 15 elements (atomic numbers 57 through 71) that possess similar properties. They are useful catalysts in petroleum refining and are used to manufacture strong magnets for turbines and rechargeable batteries for cell phones and computers.

Pegmatites and hydrothermal deposits Illustration of the relationship between an igneous body and associated pegmatites and hydrothermal mineral deposits. Not all late-stage magmas produce pegmatites, nor do all have a granitic composition. Rather, some magmas become enriched in iron or occasionally copper. For example, at Kiruna, Sweden, magma composed of more than 60 percent magnetite solidified to produce one of the largest iron deposits in the world.

Among the best-known and most important ore deposits are those generated from hot, ion-rich fluids called hydrothermal (hot-water) solutions. Included in this group are the gold deposits of the Homestake Mine in South Dakota; the lead, zinc, and silver ores near Coeur d’Alene, Idaho; the silver deposits of the Comstock Lode in Nevada; and the copper ores of the Keweenaw Peninsula in Michigan.

High-grade gold ore deposit in a quartz vein Hydrothermal Vein Deposits The majority of hydrothermal deposits originate from hot, metal-rich fluids that are remnants of late-stage magmatic processes. During solidification, liquids plus various metallic ions accumulate near the top of the magma chamber. Because of their mobility, these ion-rich solutions can migrate great distances through the surrounding rock before they are eventually deposited, usually as sulfides of various metals. Some of this fluid moves along openings such as fractures or bedding planes, where it cools and precipitates the metallic ions to produce vein productive deposits of gold, silver, and mercury occur as hydrothermal vein deposits.

Black smoker spewing hot, Sulfide deposits along a mid-ocean ridge Massive sulfide deposits can result from the circulation of seawater through the oceanic crust along active spreading centers. As seawater infiltrates the hot basaltic crust, it leaches sulfur, iron, copper, and other metals. The hot, enriched fluid returns to the seafloor near the ridge axis along faults and fractures. Some metal sulfides may be precipitated in these channels as the rising fluid begins to cool. When the hot liquid emerges from the seafloor and mixes with cold seawater, the sulfides precipitate to form massive deposits. Photo shows a close-up view of a black smoker spewing hot, mineral-rich seawater along the East Pacific Rise. (Photo by Fisheries and Oceans Canada/Uvic-Verena such a situation. When groundwater invades a zone of recent igneous activity, its temperature rises, greatly enhancing its ability to dissolve minerals. These migrating hot waters remove metallic ions from intrusive igneous rocks and carry them upward, where they may be deposited as an ore body. Depending on the conditions, the resulting accumulations may occur as vein deposits, as disseminated deposits, or, where hydrothermal solutions reach the surface in the form of hot springs or geysers, as surface deposits.

Hydrothermal Activity at Oceanic Ridges With the development of plate tectonics theory, it became clear that some hydrothermal deposits originated along ancient island of Cyprus, where copper has been mined for more than 4000 years. Apparently, these deposits represent ores that formed on the seafloor at an ancient oceanic spreading center. Since the mid-1970s, active hot springs and metalrich sulfide deposits have been detected at several sites, including study areas along the East Pacific Rise and the Juan de Fuca Ridge. The deposits form where heated seawater, rich in dissolved metals and sulfur, gushes from the seafloor as particle-filled clouds called black the hot oceanic crust along the flanks of the ridge. As the water moves through the newly formed material, it is heated and chemically interacts with the basalt, extracting and transporting sulfur, iron, copper, and other metals. Near the ridge axis, the hot, metal-rich fluid rises along faults. Upon reaching the seafloor, the spewing liquid mixes with the cold seawater, and the sulfides precipitate to form massive sulfide deposits.

The role of metamorphism in producing mineral deposits is frequently tied to igneous processes. For example, many of the most important metamorphic ore deposits are produced by contact metamorphism. Here the host rock is recrystallized and chemically altered by heat, pressure, and hydrothermal solutions emanating from an intruding igneous body. The extent to which the host rock is altered depends on the nature of the intruding igneous mass as well as the nature of the host Some resistant materials, such as quartz sandstone, may show very little alteration, whereas others, including limestone, might exhibit the effects of metamorphism for several kilometers from the igneous pluton. As hot, ionrich fluids move through limestone, chemical reactions take place, producing useful minerals such as garnet and corundum. Further, these reactions release carbon dioxide, which greatly facilitates the outward migration of metallic ions. Thus, extensive aureoles of metal-rich deposits commonly surround igneous plutons that have invaded limestone strata. The most common metallic minerals associated with contact metamorphism are sphalerite (zinc), galena (lead), chalcopyrite (copper), magnetite (iron), and bornite (copper). The hydrothermal ore deposits may be disseminated throughout the altered zone or exist as concentrated masses that are located either next to the intrusive body or along the margins of the metamorphic Regional metamorphism can also generate useful mineral deposits. Recall that at convergent plate boundaries, the oceanic crust and sediments that have accumulated at the continental margins are carried to great depths. In these high-temperature, high-pressure environments, the mineralogy and texture of the subducted materials are altered, producing deposits of nonmetallic minerals such as talc and graphite.

1. Describe two examples of mineral resources associated with magmatic differentiation. 2. What are hydrothermal deposits? List two general 3. Describe the process at oceanic ridges that produces sulfide ore deposits. 4. Relate ore deposits to contact metamorphism.

Discuss ways in which surface processes produce ore deposits. The preceding discussion focused on mineral resources that are closely linked to igneous activity and metamorphism. In this section, we look at examples of metallic mineral resources that accumulate as a result of surface processes.

Weathering creates many important mineral deposits by concentrating minor amounts of metals that are scattered through unweathered rock into economically valuable concentrations. Such a transformation is often termed secondary enrichment, and it takes place in one of two ways. In one situation, chemical weathering coupled with downward-percolating water removes undesirable materials from decomposing rock, leaving the desirable Bauxite This ore of aluminum forms as a result of weathering processes under tropical conditions. Its color varies from red or brown to nearly white.

Bauxite Bauxite, the principal ore of aluminum, is one important example of an ore created as a result of enrichment by weathering processes. Although aluminum is the third-most-abundant element in Earth’s crust, economically valuable concentrations of this important metal are not common because most aluminum is tied up in silicate minerals, from which it is extremely difficult to extract. Bauxite forms in rainy tropical climates, in association with the deeply weathered soils known as laterites. (In fact, bauxite is sometimes called aluminum laterite.) When aluminum-rich source rocks are subjected to the intense and prolonged chemical weathering of the tropics, most of the common elements, including calcium, sodium, and silicon, are removed by leaching. Because aluminum is extremely insoluble, it becomes concentrated in the soil as bauxite, a hydrated aluminum oxide. Thus, the formation of bauxite depends both on climatic conditions in which chemical weathering and leaching are pronounced and on the presence of an aluminumrich source rock. Important deposits of nickel and cobalt are also found in laterite soils that develop from igneous rocks rich in ferromagnesian silicate minerals.

Other Deposits Many copper and silver deposits result when weathering processes concentrate metals that are deposited through a low-grade primary ore. Usually such enrichment occurs in deposits containing pyrite (FeS2), the most common and widespread sulfide mineral. Pyrite is important because when it chemically weathers, sulfuric acid forms, which enables percolating waters to dissolve the ore metals. Once dissolved, the metals gradually migrate downward through the primary ore body until they are precipitated. Deposition takes place because of changes that occur in the chemistry of the solution when it reaches the saturated zone (the zone beneath the surface where all pore spaces are filled with groundwater). In this manner, the small percentage of dispersed metal can be removed from a large volume of rock and redeposited as a higher-grade ore in a smaller volume of rock. This enrichment process is responsible for the economic success of many copper deposits, including one located in Miami, Arizona. Here the ore was upgraded from less than 1 percent copper in the primary deposit to as much as 5 percent copper in some localized zones of enrichment. When pyrite weathers (oxidizes) near the surface, residues of iron oxide remain. The presence of these rusty-colored caps at the surface indicates the possibility of an enriched copper ore below and is a visible sign for prospectors.

The sorting of sediments by wind or water usually results in like-sized grains being deposited together. However, sorting according to the specific gravity of particles also occurs. This latter type of sorting is responsible for the creation of placers, which are deposits formed when heavy minerals are mechanically concentrated by currents. Placers associated with streams are among the most common and best known, but the sorting action of waves can also create placers along the shore. Placer deposits usually involve minerals that are not only heavy but also durable (to withstand physical destruction during transportation) and chemically resistant (to endure weathering processes). Placers form because heavy minerals settle quickly from a current, whereas less-dense particles remain suspended and are carried onward. Common sites of accumulation include point bars on the insides of meanders as well as cracks, depressions, and other irregularities on streambeds. Many economically important placer deposits exist, with accumulations of gold the best known. Indeed, it was the placer deposits discovered in 1848 that led to the famous California Gold Rush. Years later, similar deposits created a gold rush to Alaska as well. Panning for gold by washing sand and gravel from a flat pan to concentrate the fine “dust” at the bottom was a common method early prospectors used to recover the precious metal, and it is a process similar to that which created the placer in the first place. In addition to gold, other heavy and durable minerals form placers. These include platinum, diamonds, and tin. The Ural Mountains contain placers rich in platinum, and placers are important sources of diamonds in southern Africa. Significant portions of the world’s supply of cassiterite, the principal ore of tin, have come from placer deposits in Malaysia and Indonesia. Cassiterite is often widely disseminated through granitic igneous rocks. In this state, the mineral is not sufficiently concentrated to be extracted profitably. However, as the enclosing rock dissolves and disintegrates, the heavy and durable cassiterite grains are set free. Eventually the freed particles are washed to a stream, where they are deposited in placers that are significantly more Placers These deposits form when heavy minerals are mechanically concentrated by currents. (Photo on Images; photo on right from the Library of Congress) concentrated than the original deposit. Similar circumstances and events are common to many minerals mined from placers. In some cases, if the source rock for a placer deposit can be located, it too may become an important ore body. By following placer deposits upstream, one can sometimes locate the original ore body. This is how the gold-bearing veins of the mother lode in California’s Sierra Nevada batholith were found, as well as the famous Kimberley diamond mine of South Africa. The placers were discovered first, and their source was found at a later time.

1. What is secondary enrichment? 2. Name the primary ore of aluminum and describe its formation. 3. How might the mineral pyrite play a role in creating an ore deposit? 4. Describe the way in which minerals accumulate in placers. List four minerals that are mined from such deposits.

Distinguish between two broad categories of nonmetallic mineral resources and list examples of each. Earth materials that are not used as fuels or processed for the metals they contain are referred to as nonmetallic mineral resources. Realize that use of the word mineral is very broad in this economic context and is quite different from the geologist’s strict definition of mineral found in Chapter 3. Nonmetallic mineral resources are extracted and processed either for the nonmetallic elements they contain or for the physical and chemical properties they possess. People often do not realize the importance of nonmetallic minerals because they see only the products that result from their use and not the minerals themselves. That is, many nonmetallics are used up in the process of creating other products. Examples include the fluorite and limestone that are part of the steelmaking process, the abrasives required to make a piece of machinery, and the fertilizers needed to grow a food crop (Table 23.2).

The quantities of nonmetallic minerals used each reminds us that the per capita consumption of nonfuel resources in the United States totals more than 11 metric tons, of which about 94 percent are nonmetallics. Nonmetallic mineral resources are commonly divided into two broad groups: building materials and industrial minerals. Because some substances have many different uses, they are found in both categories.

Limestone, perhaps the most versatile and widely used rock of all, is the best example. As a building material, it is used not only as crushed rock and building stone but also in the making of cement. Moreover, as an industrial mineral, limestone is an ingredient in the manufacture of steel and is used in agriculture to reduce the acidity of soils (see GEOgraphics 7.1, page 220).

Natural aggregate consists of crushed stone, sand, and gravel. From the standpoint of quantity and value, aggregate is a very United States produces nearly 2 billion tons of aggregate per year, which represents about one-half of the country’s entire nonenergy mining volume. Aggregate is produced commercially in every state and is used in nearly all building construction and in most public works projects. Besides aggregate, other important building materials include gypsum for plaster and wallboard, clay for tile and bricks, and limestone and shale, which combine to form cement. Cement and aggregate go into the making of concrete, a material that is essential to practically all construction. Aggregate gives concrete its strength and volume, and cement binds the mixture into a rock-hard substance. Building just 2 kilometers of fourlane highway requires more than 85 thousand tons of aggregate. Building an average six-room house requires 90 tons of aggregate. Because most building materials are widely distributed and present in almost unlimited quantities, they have little intrinsic value. Their economic worth comes only after the materials are removed from the ground and processed. Since their per-ton value compared with the values of metals and industrial minerals is low, mining and quarrying operations are usually undertaken to satisfy local needs. Except for special types of cut stone used for building and monuments, transportation costs greatly limit the distance most building materials can be profitably moved.

Many nonmetallic resources are classified as industrial minerals. In some instances, these materials are important because they are sources of specific chemical elements or compounds. Such minerals are used to manufacture chemicals and produce fertilizers. In other cases, their importance is related to the physical properties they exhibit. Examples include minerals such as corundum and garnet, which are used as abrasives. Although supplies of industrial minerals are generally plentiful, most of these minerals are not nearly as abundant as building materials. Moreover, deposits are far more restricted in distribution and extent. As a result, many of these nonmetallic resources must be transported considerable distances, which of course adds to their cost. Unlike most building materials, which need a minimum of processing before they are ready to use, many industrial minerals require considerable processing to extract the desired substance at the proper degree of purity for its ultimate use.

Fertilizers The growth in world population beyond 7 billion requires that the production of basic food crops continue to expand. Therefore, fertilizers—primarily nitrate, phosphate, and potassium compounds— are extremely important to agriculture. The synthetic nitrate industry, which derives nitrogen from the atmosphere, is the source of practically all the world’s nitrogen fertilizers. The primary source of phosphorus and potassium, however, remains Earth’s crust. The mineral apatite is the primary source of phosphate. In the United States, most production comes from marine Although potassium is an abundant element in many minerals, the primary commercial sources are evaporite States, deposits near Carlsbad, New Mexico, have been called potash).

Sulfur Because it has many uses, sulfur is an important nonmetallic resource. In fact, the quantity of sulfur used is considered one indicator of a country’s level of industrialization. More than 80 percent is used to produce sulfuric acid. Although its principal use is in the manufacture of phosphate fertilizer, sulfuric acid has many other applications as well. Sources include deposits of native sulfur associated with salt domes and volcanic areas, as well as common iron sulfides such as pyrite. In recent years an increasingly important source has been the sulfur removed from coal, oil, and natural gas in order to make these fuels less polluting. Salt Common salt, known by the mineral name halite, is another important and versatile resource. It is among the most prominent nonmetallic minerals used as a raw material in the chemical industry. In addition, large quantities are used to “soften” water and to keep streets and highways free of ice. Of course, most people are aware that it is also a basic nutrient and a part of many food products. Salt is a common evaporite, and thick deposits are exploited using conventional underground mining techniques. Subsurface deposits are also tapped, using brine wells in which a pipe is introduced into a salt deposit and water is pumped down the pipe. The salt dissolved by the water is brought to the surface through a second pipe. This is also the process used to obtain the potassium chloride to serve as a source of salt, as it has for centuries. The salt is harvested after the Sun evaporates the water.

1. Which is greater, the per capita consumption of metallic resources or of nonmetallic mineral 2. Distinguish between building materials and industrial minerals. 3. List two examples of building materials. What are three examples of industrial minerals? 4. What is an example of a substance that may be either a building material or an industrial mineral?

Sharp on Mars. This is a composite of several images captured by a camera located at the end of the rover’s robotic arm. (Photo courtesy of NASA/JPL-Caltech/MSSS) 1This chapter was revised with the assistance of Professors Teresa Tarbuck and Mark Watry.

lanetary geology is the study of the formation and evolution of the bodies in our solar system—including the eight planets and myriad smaller objects: moons, dwarf planets, asteroids, comets, and meteoroids. Studying these objects provides valuable insights into the dynamic processes that operate on Earth. Understanding how other atmospheres evolve helps scientists build better models for predicting climate change. Studying tectonic processes on other planets helps us appreciate how these complex interactions alter Earth. In addition, seeing how erosional forces work on other bodies allows us to observe the many ways landscapes are created. Finally, the uniqueness of Earth, a body that harbors life, is revealed through the exploration of other planetary bodies.

Describe the formation of the solar system according to the nebular theory. Compare and contrast the terrestrial and Jovian planets. The Sun is at the center of a revolving system, trillions of miles wide, consisting of eight planets, their satellites, and numerous smaller asteroids, comets, and meteoroids. An estimated 99.85 percent of the mass of our solar system is contained within the Sun. Collectively, the planets account Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune. Pluto was reclassified in 2003 as a member of a new class of solar system bodies called dwarf planets. Tethered to the Sun by gravity, all the planets travel in the same direction, on slightly elliptical orbits (Table 24.1). Gravity causes objects nearest the Sun to travel fastest. Therefore, Mercury has the highest orbital velocity, 48 kilometers (30 miles) per second, and the shortest period of revolution around the Sun, 88 Earth days. By contrast, the distant dwarf planet Pluto has an orbital speed of just 5 kilometers (3 miles) per second and requires 248 Earth-years to complete one revolution. Most large bodies orbit the Sun approximately in the same plane. The planets’ inclination with respect to the Earth–Sun orbital plane, known as the ecliptic, is shown in Table 24.1.

Nebular Theory: Formation of the The nebular theory, which explains the formation of the solar system, proposes that the Sun and planets formed from a rotating cloud of interstellar gases (mainly hydrogen and helium) and dust called the solar nebula. As the solar nebula contracted due to gravity, most of the material collected in the center to form the hot protosun.

Orbits of the planets system, in which planets are not drawn to scale. the Sun—150 million kilometers (93 million miles).

of ices accounts, in part, for the large sizes and low densities of these outer planets. The two most massive planets, Jupiter and Saturn, had surface gravities sufficient to attract and retain large quantities of hydrogen and helium, the lightest elements. It took roughly 1 billion years after the protoplanets formed for the planets to gravitationally accumulate most of the interplanetary debris. This was a period of intense bombardment as the planets cleared their orbits by collecting much of the leftover material. The “scars” of this period are still evident on the Moon’s surface. Because of the gravitational effect of the planets, particularly Jupiter, small bodies were flung into planet-crossing orbits or into interstellar space. The small fraction of interplanetary matter that escaped this violent period became either asteroids or comets. By comparison, the present-day solar system is a much quieter place, although many of these processes continue today at a reduced pace.

Mean Distance from Sun Period of Revolution Relative Mass (Earth = 1) †Eccentricity is a measure of the amount an orbit deviates from a circular shape. The larger the number, the less circular the orbit. ‡Includes all satellites discovered as of July 2015. Satellites are celestial bodies that orbit a planet rather than orbiting a star like the Sun.

and numbers of satellites (see Table 24.1). Variations in the chemical composition of planets are largely responsible for their density differences. Specifically, the average density of the terrestrial planets is about 5 times the density of water, whereas the average density of the Jovian planets is only 1.5 times that of water. In fact, Saturn has a density only 0.7 times that of water, which means that it would float in a sufficiently large tank of water. The outer planets are also characterized by long orbital periods and numerous satellites.

Internal Structures Recall from Chapter 12 that shortly after Earth formed, segregation of material resulted in the formation of three major layers, defined by their chemical composition: the crust, mantle, and core. This type of chemical separation occurred in the other planets as well. However, because the terrestrial planets are compositionally different from the Jovian planets, the nature of these layers is different as well. The terrestrial planets are dense, having relatively large cores of iron and nickel. The outer cores of Earth and Mercury are liquid, whereas the cores of Venus and Mars are thought to be only partially molten. This difference is attributable to Venus and Mars having lower internal temperatures than Earth and Mercury. Silicate minerals and other lighter compounds make up the mantles of the terrestrial planets. Finally, the silicate crusts of terrestrial planets are relatively thin compared to their mantles. The two largest Jovian planets, Jupiter and Saturn, likely have small, solid cores consisting of iron compounds, like the cores of the terrestrial planets, and rocky material similar to Earth’s mantle. Progressing outward, the layer above the core consists of liquid hydrogen that is under extremely high temperatures and pressures. There is substantial evidence that under these conditions, hydrogen behaves like a metal in that its electrons move freely about and are efficient conductors of both heat and electricity. Jupiter’s intense magnetic field is thought to be the result of electric currents flowing within a spinning layer of liquid metallic hydrogen. Saturn’s magnetic field is much weaker than Jupiter’s, due to its smaller shell of liquid metallic hydrogen. Above this metallic layer, both Jupiter and Saturn are thought to be composed of molecular liquid hydrogen that is intermixed with helium. The outermost layers are gases of hydrogen and helium, as well as ices of water, ammonia, and methane—which mainly account for the low densities of these giants. Uranus and Neptune also have small iron-rich, rocky cores, but their mantles are likely hot, dense water and ammonia. Above their mantles, the amount of hydrogen and helium increases, but these gases exist in much lower concentrations than in Jupiter All planets except Venus and Mars have significant magnetic fields generated by flow of metallic materials in their liquid cores, or mantles. Magnetic fields play an important role in protecting a planet’s surface from bombardment by the solar wind, a stream of charged particles ejected from the Sun. This protection is necessary for the survival of any life-forms. Venus has a weak field due to the interaction between the solar wind and its uppermost atmosphere (ionosphere), while the weak Martian magnetic field is thought to be a remnant from when its interior was hotter.

Bodies with atmospheres versus airless bodies Two factors largely explain why some solar system bodies have thick atmospheres, whereas others are airless. Airless worlds have relatively warm surface temperatures and/or weak gravities. Bodies with significant atmospheres have low surface temperatures and strong gravities.

Formation of an impact as our Moon, are unable to hold even heavy gases such as carbon dioxide and nitrogen. Mercury is massive enough to hold trace amounts of hydrogen, helium, and oxygen gases. Venus, and Mars, retain some heavy gases, including water vapor, nitrogen, and carbon dioxide. However, their atmospheres are miniscule compared to their total mass. Early in their development, the terrestrial planets probably had much thicker atmospheres. Over time, however, these primitive atmospheres gradually changed as light gases trickled away into space. For example, Earth’s atmosphere continues to leak hydrogen and helium (the two lightest gases) into space. This phenomenon occurs near the top of Earth’s atmosphere, where air is so tenuous that nothing stops the fastest-moving particles from flying off into space. The speed required to escape a planet’s gravity is called escape velocity. Because hydrogen is the lightest gas, it most easily reaches the speed needed to overcome Earth’s gravity. Billions of years in the future, the loss of hydrogen (one of the components of water) will eventually “dry out” Earth’s oceans, ending its hydrologic cycle. Life, however, may remain sustainable in Earth’s polar The massive Jovian planets have strong gravitational fields and thick atmospheres. Furthermore, because of their great distance from the Sun, solar heating is minimal. This explains why Saturn’s moon Titan, which is small compared to Earth but much farther from the Sun, retains an atmosphere. Because the molecular motion of a gas is temperature dependent, even hydrogen and helium move too slowly to escape the gravitational pull of the Jovian planets.

This 20-kilometer-wide (12-mile-wide) crater is Clearly visible are the bright rays, central peak, secondary craters, and large accumulation of ejecta near the water). The Moon’s relatively small iron core is thought to account for much of this difference. The Moon’s low mass relative to Earth results in a lunar gravitational attraction that is one-sixth that of only 25 pounds on the Moon, although the person’s mass remains the same. This difference allows an astronaut to carry a heavy life-support system with relative ease. If not burdened with such a load, an astronaut could jump six times higher on the Moon than on Earth. The Moon’s small mass (and low gravity) is the primary reason it was not able to retain an atmosphere.

Telescopic view of the lunar surface The major features are the dark maria and the light, highly cratered highlands. (Lick Observatory Publications Office) come from the rocky mantle of the impactor, while its core was assimilated into the growing Earth. This impact model is consistent with the Moon having a proportionately smaller core than Earth’s and, hence, a lower density.

History of the Lunar Surface The evidence used to unravel the history of the lunar surface comes primarily from radiometric dating of rocks returned from Apollo missions and studies of crater densities—counting the number of craters per unit area. The greater the crater density, the older the feature is inferred to be. Such evidence suggests that, after the Moon coalesced, it passed through the following four phases: (1) formation of the original crust, (2) excavation of the large impact basins, (3) filling of maria basins, and (4) formation of rayed During the late stages of its accretion, the Moon’s outer shell was most likely completely melted—literally a magma ocean. Then, about 4.4 billion years ago, the magma ocean began to cool and underwent magmatic differentiation (see Chapter 4). Most of the dense minerals, olivine and pyroxene, sank, while less-dense silicate minerals floated to form the Moon’s crust. The highlands are made of these igneous rocks, which rose buoyantly like “scum” from the crystallizing magma. The most common highland rock type is anorthosite, which is composed mainly of calcium-rich plagioclase feldspar. Once formed, the lunar crust was continually impacted as the Moon swept up debris from the solar nebula. During this time, several large impact basins were created. Then, about 3.8 billion years ago, the Moon, as well as the rest of the solar system, experienced a sudden drop in the rate of meteoritic bombardment. The Moon’s next major event was the filling of the large impact basins, which had been created at least 300 million years earlier. Radiometric dating of the maria basalts puts their age between 3.0 billion and 3.5 billion years, considerably younger than the initial lunar crust. The maria basalts are thought to have originated at depths between 200 and 400 kilometers (125 and 250 miles). They were likely generated by a slow rise in temperature attributed to the decay of radioactive elements. Partial melting probably occurred in several isolated pockets, as indicated by the diverse chemical makeup of the rocks retrieved during the Apollo missions. Recent evidence suggests that some mareforming eruptions may have occurred as recently as 1 billion years ago. Other lunar surface features related to this period of volcanism include small shield volcanoes (8–12 kilometers [5–7.5 miles] in diameter), evidence of pyroclastic eruptions, rilles (narrow winding valleys thought to be lava channels), and grabens (down-faulted valleys). ejected from these craters blankets the maria surfaces and many older, rayless craters. The relatively young Copernicus crater is thought to be about 1 billion years old. Had it formed on Earth, weathering and erosion would have long since obliterated it.

Impact of an asteroid-size body produced a huge crater hundreds of kilometers in diameter and disturbed the lunar crust far beyond the crater.

Formation and filling of large impact basins Filling of the impact crater with fluid basalts, perhaps derived from partial melting deep within the lunar mantle.

Today these basins make up the lunar maria and a few similar large structures on Mercury. that continually modify Earth’s surface are absent. In addition, tectonic forces are no longer active on the Moon, so quakes and volcanic eruptions have ceased. Because the Moon is unprotected by an atmosphere, erosion is dominated by the impact of tiny particles from space (micrometeorites) that continually bombard its surface and gradually smooth the landscape. This activity has crushed and repeatedly mixed the upper portions of the lunar crust.

Both the maria and terrae are mantled with a layer of gray, unconsolidated debris derived from a few billion years of meteoric bombardment. This soil-like layer, properly called lunar regolith (rhegos = blanket, lithos = stone), is composed of igneous rocks, breccia, glass beads, and fine lunar dust. The lunar regolith is anywhere from 2 to 20 meters (6.6 to 66 feet) thick, depending on the age of the lunar surface in that particular region.

1. Briefly describe the origin of the Moon. 2. Compare and contrast the Moon’s maria and 3. How are maria on the Moon similar to the Columbia Plateau in the Pacific Northwest? 4. How is crater density used in the relative dating of the Moon’s surface features? 5. Summarize the major stages in the development of the modern lunar surface.

Outline the principal characteristics of Mercury, Venus, and Mars. Describe their similarities to and differences from Earth. The terrestrial planets, in order from the Sun, are Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars. Here we consider the three other Earth-like planets and compare their features to those of Earth.

Mercury, the innermost and smallest planet, revolves around the Sun quickly (88 days) but rotates slowly on its axis. Mercury’s day–night cycle, which lasts 176 Earth days, is very long compared to Earth’s 24-hour cycle. One “night” on Mercury is roughly equivalent to 3 months on Earth and is followed by the same duration of daylight.

Mercury has the greatest temperature extremes, from as and lead. These extreme temperatures make life as we Mercury absorbs most of the sunlight that strikes it, reflecting only 6 percent into space, a characteristic of terrestrial bodies with little or no atmosphere. The minuscule amount of gas that is present on Mercury may have originated from several sources, including ionized gas from the Sun, ices that vaporized during a relatively recent comet impact, and/ or outgassing of the planet’s interior. Although Mercury is small and scientists expected the planet’s interior to have already cooled, NASA’s Messenger spacecraft measured Mercury’s magnetic field in 2012 and found it to be about 100 times less than Earth’s. This suggests that Mercury has a large core that remains hot and fluid—a requirement for generating a magnetic field. Mercury resembles Earth’s Moon in that it has very low reflectivity, no sustained atmosphere, numerous volcanic features, and a heavily cratered terrain. The largest-known impact crater (1300 kilometers [800 miles] in diameter) on Mercury is Caloris Basin. Images and other data gathered by Mariner 10 show evidence of volcanism in and around Caloris Basin and a few other smaller basins. Also like our Moon, Mercury has smooth plains that cover nearly 40 percent of the area imaged by Mariner 10. Most of these smooth areas are associated with large impact basins, including Caloris Basin, where lava partially filled the basins and surrounding lowlands. Consequently, these smooth plains appear to be similar in origin to lunar maria. Recently, Messenger found evidence of volcanism by revealing thick volcanic deposits similar to those in the Columbia Basin on Earth. Researchers were also surprised by the recent detection of probable ice caps on Mercury.

Two views of Mercury On the left is a monochromatic image, while the image on the right is color enhanced. These are high-resolution mosaics constructed from thousands of images obtained by the Messenger The composition of the Venusian interior is probably similar to Earth’s. However, Venus’s weak magnetic field means its internal dynamics must be very different from Earth’s. Scientists think that mantle convection operates on Venus, but the processes of plate tectonics do not appear to have contributed to the present Venusian topography. The surface of Venus is completely hidden from view by a thick cloud layer composed mainly of tiny sulfuric acid droplets. In the 1970s, despite extreme temperatures and pressures, four Russian spacecraft landed successfully and obtained surface images. As expected, however, all the probes were crushed by the planet’s immense atmospheric pressure, approximately 90 times that on Earth, within an hour of landing. Using radar imaging, the unstaffed spacecraft Magellan mapped Venus’s surface in stunning detail. on Venus—far fewer than on Mercury and Mars but more than on Earth. Researchers expected that Venus would show evidence of extensive cratering from the heavy bombardment period but found instead that a period of extensive volcanism was responsible for resurfacing Venus. The planet’s thick atmosphere also limits the number of impacts by breaking up large incoming meteoroids and incinerating most of the small debris. About 80 percent of the Venusian surface consists of low-lying plains covered by lava flows, some of which traveled along lava channels that extend hundreds of kilometers. Venus’s Baltis Vallis, the longestknown lava channel in the solar system, meanders 6800 kilometers (4225 miles) across the planet. More than 1000 volcanoes with diameters greater than 20 kilometers (12 miles) have been identified on Venus. However, high surface pressures keep the gaseous components in lava on Earth or Mars. Maat Mons, the largest volcano on Venus, is about 8.5 kilometers (5 miles) high and 400 kilometers (250 miles) wide. By comparison, Mauna Loa, the largest volcano on Earth, is about 9 kilometers high (5.5 miles) and only 120 kilometers (75 miles) wide. Venus also has major highlands consisting of plateaus, ridges, and topographic rises that stand above the plains. The rises are thought to have formed where hot mantle plumes encountered the base of the planet’s crust, causing uplift. Much like with mantle plumes on Earth, abundant volcanism is associated with mantle upwelling on Venus. Recent data collected by the European Space Agency’s Venus Express suggest that Venus’s highlands contain silica-rich granitic rock. As such, these elevated landmasses resemble Earth’s continents, albeit on a much smaller scale.

Global view of the surface of Venus This computergenerated image of Venus was constructed from years of investigations, culminating with the Magellan mission. The twisting bright features that cross the globe are highly fractured ridges and canyons of the eastern Aphrodite highland.

Mars, approximately one-half the diameter of Earth, revolves around the Sun in 687 Earth days. Mean surface the summer. Although seasonal temperature variations are similar to Earth’s, daily temperature variations are greater due to the very thin atmosphere of Mars (only 1 percent as dense as Earth’s). The tenuous Martian atmosphere consists primarily of carbon dioxide (95 percent), with small amounts of nitrogen, oxygen, and water vapor.

Color represents height above (or below) the mean planetary radius: White is about 12 kilometers above average, and dark blue is 8 kilometers below average.

lava plains dust storms with winds up to 270 kilometers (170 miles) per hour can persist for weeks. Dust devils have also been photographed. Most of the Martian landscape resembles Earth’s rocky deserts, with abundant dunes and low areas partially filled with dust.

Volcanoes on Mars Volcanism has been prevalent on Mars throughout most of its history. The scarcity of impact craters on some volcanic surfaces suggests that the planet is still active. Mars has several of the solar system’s largest known volcanoes, including the largest, Olympus Mons, which is about the size of Arizona and stands nearly three times higher than Mount Everest. This gigantic volcano was last active about 100 million years ago and resembles Earth’s Hawaiian shield volcanoes. How did the volcanoes on Mars grow so much larger than similar structures on Earth? The largest volcanoes on the terrestrial planets tend to form where plumes of hot rock rise from deep within their interiors. On Earth, moving plates keep the crust in constant motion. Consequently, mantle plumes tend to produce a chain of volcanic structures, like the Hawaiian Islands. By contrast, plate tectonics on Mars is absent, so successive eruptions accumulate in the same location, creating enormous volcanoes rather than a string of smaller ones.

Wind Erosion on Mars The dominant force currently Similar rock outcrops on Mars and Earth This set of images compares a rock outcrop on Mars (left) with similar rocks on Earth. The rock outcrop on Earth formed in a streambed, which suggests that the Martian rocks formed in a similar environment. Based on this finding, the scientist John Grotzinger concluded that there was once “a vigorous flow on the to exist anywhere on the Martian surface. However, poleward of about 30 degrees latitude, ice can be found within 1 meter (3 feet) of the surface. In the polar regions, it forms small permanent ice caps. Current estimates place the maximum amount of water ice held by the Martian polar ice caps at about 1.5 times the amount Considerable evidence indicates that in the first 1 billion years of the planet’s history, liquid water flowed on the surface, creating stream valleys and related features. One location where running water stream-like banks that contain numerous teardrop-shaped islands. These valleys appear to have been cut by catastrophic floods with discharge rates that were more than Most of these large flood channels emerge from areas of chaotic topography that appear to have formed when the surface collapsed. The most likely source of water for these flood-created valleys was the melting of subsurface ice. If the meltwater was trapped beneath a thick layer of permafrost, pressure could mount until a catastrophic release occurred. As the water escaped, the overlying surface would collapse, creating the chaotic terrain. Not all Martian valleys appear to have resulted from water released in this manner. Some exhibit branching, tree-like patterns resembling dendritic drainage networks on Earth. In addition, the Opportunity rover investigated structures similar to features created by water on Earth— including layered sedimentary rocks, playas (salt flats), and lake beds. Minerals that form only in the presence of water, such as hydrated sulfates, were also detected. Small spherical concretions of hematite, dubbed “blueberries,” were found that probably precipitated from water to form lake sediments. Nevertheless, except in the polar regions, rounded gravel fragments within a rock outcrop consis- that contains rounded gravel fragments deposited in a tent with the sedimentary rock conglomerate. Weathered stream bed on Earth. rock fragments can be seen below.

water does not appear to have significantly altered the topography of Mars for more than 1 billion years. On August 6, 2012, the Mars rover Curiosity landed April 2015, Curiosity had traveled over 10 kilometers (6 miles), examining the lower slopes of this layered mountain in an effort to investigate how the region’s ancient environment evolved from having lakes and rivers to the much drier sandstone bedrock containing some rounded grains, indicating that the grains traveled long distances before becoming part of the sediment that later hardened into this sandstone (see GEOgraphics 24.1). The fact that these grains appeared to have been carried by running water is strong evidence that climatic conditions dramatically changed in the distant past. We can only imagine what Curiosity will uncover in its quest to study the climate and geology of Mars.

Earth-like stream channels are strong evidence that Mars ariner 9 obtained this image of Phobos, one of two tiny moons of Mars. Phobos has a diameter of only 24 kilometers (15 miles). The two moons of Mars were not discovered until the late 1800s because their size made them nearly impossible different from Earth’s moon. and its companion moon, Deimos, got their names.

4. Why are the largest volcanoes on Earth so much smaller than the largest ones on Mars? 5. What evidence suggests that Mars had an active hydrologic cycle in the past?

Summarize and compare the features of Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune, including their ring systems. The four Jovian planets, in order from the Sun, are Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune. Because of their location within the solar system and their size and composition, they are also commonly called the outer planets and the gas giants.

Earth’s auroras, which occur only in conjunction with heightened solar activity, Jupiter’s auroras are continuous. Jupiter’s Moons Jupiter’s satellite system, consisting of 67 moons discovered thus far, resembles a miniature solar system. Galileo discovered the 4 largest satellites, referred to as Galilean satellites, in 1610. The two largest, Ganymede and Callisto, are roughly the size of Mercury, whereas the two smaller ones, Europa and Io, are about the size of Earth’s Moon. The eight largest moons appear to have formed around Jupiter as the solar system condensed. Jupiter also has many very small satellites (about solar system lie beneath the icy surfaces of some of Jupi20 kilometers [12 miles] in diameter) that revolve in ter’s moons. For example, detailed images from Galileo the opposite direction (retrograde motion) of the larghave revealed that Europa’s icy surface is quite young est moons and have eccentric (elongated) orbits steeply and exhibits cracks apparently filled with dark fluid from inclined to the Jovian equator. These satellites appear below. This suggests that under its icy shell, Europa to be asteroids or comets that passed near enough to be must have a warm, mobile interior—perhaps an ocean. either gravitationally captured by Jupiter or remnants of Because liquid water is a necessity for life as we know the collisions of larger bodies. it, there is considerable interest in sending an orbiter to The Galilean moons can be observed with binocuEuropa—and, eventually, a lander capable of launching a lars or a small telescope and are interesting in their own robotic submarine—to determine whether it harbors life. right. Images from Voyagers 1 and 2 revealed, to the surprise of most geoscientists, that each of the four GaliJupiter’s Rings One of the surprising aspects of the Galileo mission also unexpectedly revealed that the com- Voyager 1 mission was the discovery of Jupiter’s ring position of each satellite is strikingly different, implying a different evolution for each. For example, Ganymede has a dynamic core that generates a strong magnetic field not observed in other satellites. The innermost of the Galilean moons, Io, is perhaps the most volcanically active body in our solar system. More than 80 active, sulfurous volcanic centers have been discovered. Umbrella-shaped plumes have been source for volcanic activity is tidal energy generated by a relentless “tug of war” between Jupiter and the other volcanically active bodies of the Galilean moons, Galilean satellites—with Io as the rope. The gravitational other than Earth known has an icy surface that to exist in the solar system. is crisscrossed by many field of Jupiter and the other nearby satellites pull and linear features. push on Io’s tidal bulge as its slightly eccentric orbit takes it alternately closer to and farther from Jupiter. This gravitational flexing of Io is transformed into heat (similar to the backand-forth bending of a piece of sheet metal) and results in Io’s spectacular sulfurous volcanic eruptions. Lava, thought to be mainly composed of silicate minerals, regularly erupts on its The planets closer to the Sun than Earth are considered too warm to contain liquid water, and those farther from the Sun are generally too cold (although recall that Mars probably had abundant liquid satellite, exhibits cratered areas, Galilean satellites, is densely water at some point in its history). The best smooth regions, and areas covered cratered, much like Earth’s Moon. prospects of finding liquid water within our by numerous parallel grooves.

Jupiter’s four largest moons These moons are often referred to as the Galilean moons because Galileo discovered them.

Laboratory/University of Arizona/ This plume of volcanic gases and debris is rising more than 100 kilometers (60 miles) above Io’s surface.

The bright red area on the left side of the image (see arrow) is newly erupted lava. system. More recently, the ring system was thoroughly investigated by the Galileo mission. By analyzing how these rings scatter light, researchers determined that the rings are composed of fine, dark particles similar in size to smoke particles. Furthermore, the faint nature of the rings indicates that these minute particles are widely dispersed. The main ring is composed of particles believed to be fragments blasted from the surfaces of Metis and Adrastea, two small moons of Jupiter. Impacts on Jupiter’s moons Amalthea and Thebe are believed to be the source of the debris from which the outer gossamer ring formed.

Requiring more than 29 Earth years to make one revolution, Saturn is almost twice as far from the Sun as Jupiter, yet their atmospheres, compositions, and internal structures are remarkably similar. The most striking feature of Saturn is its system of rings, first observed by Galileo in 1610. Through his primitive telescope, the rings appeared as two small bodies adjacent to the planet. Their ring nature was determined 50 years later Saturn’s atmosphere, like Jupiter’s, is dynamic. Although the bands of clouds are fainter and wider Great Red Spot occur in Saturn’s atmosphere, as does intense lightning. Although the atmosphere is about 93 percent hydrogen and 3 percent helium by volume, the clouds (or condensed gases) are composed of ammonia, ammonia hydrosulfide, and water, each segregated by temperature. As on Jupiter, the dynamics of Saturn’s atmosphere are driven by the heat released by gravitational compression.

Saturn’s Moons The Saturnian satellite system consists of 62 known moons, of which 53 have been named. The moons vary significantly in size, shape, surface age, and origin. Twenty-three of the moons are “original” satellites that formed in tandem with their parent planet.

Hyperion, Saturn’s impact-pummeled satellite Planetary geologists think Hyperion’s surface is so weak and porous that At least 3 (Rhea, Dione, and Tethys) show evidence of tectonic activity, where internal forces have ripped apart their icy surfaces. Others, like Hyperion, are so porous that impacts punch into their surfaces. Many of Saturn’s smallest moons have irregular shapes and are only a few tens of kilometers in diameter. Saturn’s largest moon, Titan, is larger than Mercury and is the second-largest satellite in the solar system. Titan and Neptune’s Triton are the only satellites in the solar system known to have substantial atmospheres. Titan was visited and photographed by the CassiniHuygens probe in 2005. The atmospheric pressure at Titan’s surface is about 1.5 times that at Earth’s surface, and the atmospheric composition is about 98 percent nitrogen and 2 percent methane, with trace organic compounds. Titan has Earth-like landforms and geologic processes, such as dune formation and streamlike erosion caused by methane “rain.” In addition, the northern latitudes appear to have lakes of liquid methane. Enceladus is another unique satellite of Saturn—one of the few where active eruptions have been observed . The outgassing, comprised mostly of water, is thought to be the source that replenishes the material areas called “tiger stripes” that consist of four large fractures with ridges on either side.

Two of Saturn’s ring from a flattened cloud of dust and gases that Encke gap encircled the parent planet. Or perhaps the rings formed later, when a moon or large asteroid was gravitationally pulled apart after straying too close to a planet. Yet another hypothesis suggests that a foreign body collided catastrophically with one of the planet’s moons, the fragments of which tend to jostle one diameter that orbits in the Encke gap, located as a ring shepherd. Its gravity helps confine the moonlets in Saturn’s thin Fring. another and form a flat, Encke gap open by sweeping up any stray thin ring. Researchers material that may enter. expect more light to be shed on the origin of planetary rings as the Cassini spacecraft continues its tour of Most of Saturn’s rings fall into one of two categories, based on density. Saturn’s main (bright) rings, designated Uranus and Neptune: Twins of meters (house-size), with most of the particles being Although Earth and Venus have many similar traits, these dense rings, particles collide frequently as they orbit Uranus and Neptune are perhaps more deserving of being called “twins.” They are nearly equal in diameter 40,000 kilometers (25,000 miles) wide, they are very thin, (both about four times the size of Earth), and they are only 10–30 meters (30–100 feet) from top to bottom. both bluish in appearance, as a result of methane in their At the other extreme are Saturn’s faint rings. Satatmospheres. Their days are nearly the same length, and their cores are made of rocky silicates and iron—similar 24.21, is composed of widely dispersed, tiny particles. to the other gas giants. Their mantles, made mainly of Recall that volcanic-like activity on Saturn’s satellite water, ammonia, and methane, are thought to be very Enceladus is thought to be the source of material for different from those of Jupiter and Saturn. One of the most pronounced differences between Uranus and NepStudies have shown that the gravitational tugs of tune is the time they take to complete one revolution nearby moons tend to “shepherd” the ring particles by around the Sun—84 and 165 Earth years, respectively. Uranus: The Sideways Planet Unique to Uranus is be the work of satellites located on either side that conthe orientation of its axis of rotation. Whereas the other fine the ring by pulling back particles that try to escape. On the other hand, the Cassini division, a clearly visible Uranus is like a top that has been knocked on its side but remains spinning. This unusual characterMimas, one of Saturn’s moons. istic of Uranus is likely due to one or more impacts that Some of the ring particles are believed to be debris essentially knocked the planet sideways from its original ejected from the moons embedded in them. It is also orientation early in its evolution. possible that material is continually recycled between Uranus shows evidence of huge storm systems the rings and the ring moons. The ring moons gradually equivalent in size to those in the United States. Recent sweep up particles, which are subsequently ejected by photographs from the Hubble Space Telescope also collisions with large chunks of ring material or perhaps reveal banded clouds composed mainly of ammonia and by energetic collisions with other moons. It seems, then, methane ice—similar to the cloud systems of the other that planetary rings are not timeless features as we once gas giants. thought; rather, they are continually recycled. The origin of planetary ring systems is still Uranus’s Moons Spectacular views from Voyager 2 being debated. Perhaps the rings formed simultaneshowed that Uranus’s five largest moons have varied terously and from the same material as the planets and rains. Some have long, deep canyons and linear scars, whereas others possess large, smooth areas on otherwise Propulsion Laboratory suggest that Miranda, the innermost of the five largest moons, was recently geologically active—most likely driven by gravitational heating, as occurs on Io.

Uranus has a ring system. The discovery was made as Uranus passed in front of a distant star and blocked its view, a process called occultation (occult = hidden). Observers saw the star “wink” briefly five times (meaning five rings) before the primary occultation and again five times afterward. More recent ground- and space-based observations indicate that Uranus has at least 10 sharp-edged, distinct rings orbiting its equatorial region. Interspersed among these distinct structures are broad sheets of dust.

Neptune: The Windy Planet Because of Neptune’s great distance from Earth, astronomers knew very little about this planet until 1989. Twelve years and nearly 3 billion miles of Voyager 2 travel provided investigators an amazing opportunity to view the outermost planet. Neptune has a dynamic atmosphere, much like that of the other Jovian planets. Record wind speeds exceeding 2400 kilometers (1500 miles) per hour encircle the planet, making Neptune one of the windiest places in the solar system. Neptune also exhibits large dark spots, thought to be rotating storms similar to Jupiter’s Great Red Spot. However, Neptune’s storms appear to have comparatively short life spans—usually only a few years. Another feature that Neptune has in common with the other Jovian planets is layers of white, cirrus-like clouds (probably frozen methane) about 50 kilometers (30 miles) above the main cloud deck.

Triton, Neptune’s largest moon The bottom of the image shows Triton’s wind- and sublimationeroded south polar cap. Sublimation is the process whereby a solid (ice) changes directly to a gas.

1. What is the nature of Jupiter’s Great Red Spot? 2. What is distinctive about Jupiter’s satellite Io? 3. How are Jupiter and Saturn similar to one 4. What two roles do ring moons play in the nature of planetary ring systems? 5. How are Saturn’s satellite Titan and Neptune’s satellite Triton similar to one another? 6. Name three bodies in the solar system that exhibit active volcanism.

List and describe the principal characteristics of the small bodies that inhabit the solar system. There are countless chunks of debris in the vast spaces separating the eight planets and in the outer reaches of the solar system. In 2006, the International Astronomical Union organized solar system objects not classified as planets or moons into two broad categories: (1) small solar system bodies, including asteroids, comets, and meteoroids, and (2) dwarf planets. The newest grouping, dwarf planets, includes Ceres, a body about 1000 kilometers (600 miles) in diameter and the largest known object in the asteroid belt, and Pluto, a former planet.

Asteroid belt The asteroid belt The orbits of most asteroids lie Also shown in red are the orbits of a few known nearEarth asteroids.

Dust tail to form Comets, like asteroids, are leftover material from the formation of the solar system. They are loose collections of rocky material, dust, water ice, and frozen gases (ammonia, methane, and carbon dioxide) and thus are nicknamed “dirty snowballs.” Recent space missions to comets have shown their surfaces to be dry and dusty, which indicates that their ices are hidden beneath a rocky layer. Most comets reside in the outer reaches of the solar system and take hundreds of thousands of years to complete a single orbit around the Sun. However, a smaller Holmes The nucleus of the comet is within the bright Holmes, which orbits the Sun every 6 years, was uncharacteristically active during its most recent entry into the inner solar system.

number of short-period comets (those having orbital periods of less than 200 years), such as the famous Halley’s Comet, make regular encounters with the inner solar system. The shortest-period comet (Encke’s Comet) orbits the Sun once every 3 years.

Structure and Composition of Comets All the phenom- ena associated with comets come from a small central body called the nucleus. Ion tail These structures are typically 1 to 10 kilometers in diameter, but nuclei 40 kilometers across have been observed. When comets reach the inner solar system, solar energy begins to vaporize their ices. The escaping gases carry dust from the comet’s surface, producing a highly reflective halo called a coma. Within the coma, the small glowing nucleus with a diameter of only a few kilometers can sometimes be detected. As comets approach the Sun, most develop tails that can extend for millions of kilometers. The tail of a comet points away from the Sun in a slightly curved manner that the Sun has a repulsive force that pushes away particles of the coma to form the tail. Scientists have identified two solar forces known to contribute to tail formation: radiation pressure caused by radiant energy (light) emitted by the Sun and the charged particles of the solar wind. Sometimes a single tail composed of both dust and ionized gases is produced, but two tails particles produce a slightly curved tail that follows the comet’s orbit, whereas the extremely light ionized gases are “pushed” directly away from the Sun, forming the second tail. As a comet’s orbit carries it away from the Sun, the gases forming the coma recondense, the tail disappears, and the comet returns to cold storage. Material that was blown from the coma to form the tail is lost forever. When all the gases are expelled, the inactive comet, which closely resembles an asteroid, continues its orbit without a coma or tail. It is believed that few comets remain active The very first samples from a comet’s coma (Comet Wild 2) were returned to Earth in January 2006 by NASA’s Stardust spacecraft. Images from Stardust show that the comet’s surface was riddled with flat-bottomed depressions and appeared dry, although at least 10 gas jets were active. Laboratory studies revealed that the coma contained a wide range of organic compounds and substantial amounts of silicate crystals.

Comet Wild 2 This image shows Comet Wild 2, as seen by NASA’s Stardust spacecraft. The inset shows an artist’s depiction of jets of gas and dust erupting from Comet Wild 2.

Belt and Oort Cloud Most comets originate in one of two regions: the Kuiper belt or the Oort cloud. Named in honor of astronomer Gerald Kuiper, who predicted its existence, the Kuiper belt hosts comets that orbit in to contain about a billion objects over 1 kilometer (0.62 mile) in size. However, most comets are too small and too distant to be observed from Earth, even using the Hubble Space Telescope. Like the asteroids in the inner solar system, most Kuiper belt comets move in slightly elliptical orbits that lie roughly in the same plane Kuiper belt comets or the gravitational influence of one of the Jovian planets occasionally alters their orbits sufficiently to send them into our view. Halley’s Comet originated in the Kuiper belt. Its orbital period averages 76 years, and every one of its 29 appearances since 240 b.c.e. has been recorded, thanks to ancient Chinese astronomers—testimony to their dedication as astronomical observers and the endurance of Chinese culture. In 1910, Halley’s Comet made a very close approach to Earth, making for a spectacular Named for Dutch astronomer Jan Oort, the Oort cloud consists of comets that are distributed in all directions from the Sun, forming a spherical shell around the solar system. Most Oort cloud comets orbit the Sun at distances greater than 10,000 times the Earth–Sun distance. The gravitational effect of a distant passing star may send an occasional Oort cloud comet into a highly eccentric orbit that carries it toward the Sun. However, only a tiny fraction of Oort cloud comets have orbits that bring them into the inner solar system.

Nearly everyone has seen meteors, commonly (but inaccurately) called “shooting stars.” These streaks of light can be observed in as little as the blink of an eye or can last as “long” as a few seconds. They occur when a small solid particle, a meteoroid, enters Earth’s atmosphere from interplanetary space. Heat, created by friction between the meteoroid and the air, produces the light we see trailing across the sky. Most meteoroids originate from one of three sources: (1) interplanetary debris missed by the gravitational sweep of the planets during formation of the solar system, (2) material that is continually being ejected from the asteroid belt, or (3) the rocky and/or metallic remains of comets that once ejected by a violent asteroid impact. Before Apollo astronauts brought Moon rocks back to Earth, meteorites were the only extraterrestrial materials that could be studied in the laboratory. Meteoroids less than about 1 meter (3 feet) in diameter generally vaporize before reaching Earth’s surface. Some, called micrometeorites, are so tiny and their rate of fall so slow that they drift to Earth continually as space dust. Researchers estimate that thousands of meteoroids enter Earth’s atmosphere every day. After sunset on a clear, dark night, many are bright enough to be seen with the naked eye.

At least 40 terrestrial craters exhibit features that could be produced only by an explosive impact of a large asteroid or perhaps even a comet nucleus. More than 250 others may be of impact origin. Notable among them is Arizona’s Meteor Crater, a huge cavity more than 1 kilometer (0.6 mile) wide and 170 meters (560 feet) deep, with an upturned rim that rises above the surrounding countryside. More than 30 tons of iron fragments have been found in the immediate area, but attempts to locate the main body have been unsuccessful. Based on the amount of erosion observed on the crater rim, the impact likely occurred within the past 50,000 years.

This enhanced color image is used to detect differences in the composition and texture of Pluto’s surface The bright area in the lower-central region, sometimes referred to as “the heart of the heart” is Planum and is thought to be the source of exotic ices that flowed to produce the two bluish lobes near the bottom of the image.
