1004

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

A. Damage cellular membranes/matrices
_-Toxin

B. Inhibit protein synthesis

C. Activate second messenger pathways

Shiga toxin

A1

Stable
toxin

Na+

B
A2
Cap and rim

Cl–

Receptor-mediated
endocytosis via Gb3

H2O

Gb3

Stem
A1
GTP

mRNA

cGMP

Ribosome
+
NH3
Amino terminus
of nascent peptide

FIGURE 25.15

■ Three classes of microbial exotoxins. These classes are defined by mode of action. A. Pore-forming toxins assemble
in target membranes and cause leakage of compounds into and out of cells. B. Shiga toxin attaches to ganglioside Gb3, enters the cell, and
cleaves 28S rRNA in eukaryotic ribosomes to stop translation. C. Enterotoxigenic E. coli heat-stable toxin affects cGMP production. The result
is altered electrolyte transport—inhibition of Na+ uptake and stimulation of Cl– transport. In response to the resulting electrolyte imbalance,
water leaves the cell.

such toxin, exfoliative toxin of Staphylococcus aureus,
breaks the connection between dermis and epidermis,
giving victims the gruesome appearance of scalded skin.

aureus, form pores in host cell membranes and cause leakage of cell constituents (Fig. 25.15A).
■

Cytoskeleton alterations. A second class of toxins can
stimulate either actin polymerization or actin depolymerization. For example, Vibrio cholerae RTX toxin
depolymerizes actin by cross-linking actin fibers. Modifying actin polymerization can alter cell shape or cause
cell membranes to wrap around the pathogen, inviting
the organism into the cytoplasm.

■

Protein synthesis disruption. A third class, exemplified by diphtheria and Shiga toxins, targets eukaryotic
ribosomes and destroys protein synthesis (Fig. 25.15B).

■

Cell cycle disruption. These toxins either stop (E. coli
cytolethal distending toxin, or CLDT) or stimulate
(Pasteurella multocida toxin) host cell division.

■

■

Signal transduction disruption. The fifth type of toxin
subverts host cell second messenger pathways. Cholera
toxin and E. coli ST (stable toxin), for instance, cause
runaway synthesis of cyclic adenosine monophosphate
(cAMP; described later) and cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) (Fig. 25.15C), respectively, in target
cells. Elevated cAMP or cGMP levels, in turn, trigger
critical changes in ion transport and fluid movement.
Cell-cell adherence. These exotoxins are proteases that
cleave proteins binding host cells to one another. One

■

Vesicle traffic. The major toxin in this class (VacA of
Helicobacter pylori) actually has several modes of action,
depending on the host cell. The most visually striking
effect is its ability to cause vacuolization, which is the
fusion of numerous intracellular vesicles.

■

Exocytosis. The eighth class of exotoxin includes two
protease toxins that alter the movement of nerve cell
cytoplasmic vesicles to membranes where they release
neurotransmitters. One example is tetanus toxin, which
cleaves host proteins required for exocytosis of the inhibitory neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA).

■

Superantigens. Members of the ninth and last class of
toxins activate the immune system without being processed by antigen-presenting cells (discussed in Section 24.3). The pyrogenic (fever-producing) toxins of
Staphylococcus aureus (such as toxic shock syndrome
toxin, TSST) and Streptococcus pyogenes are examples of
superantigen toxins.

Mechanisms of selected exotoxins are described in the
following sections. We focus on toxins that disrupt membranes and a set of exotoxins collectively called AB subunit exotoxins that target either protein synthesis or

CHAPTER 25

signal transduction. Superantigens were described in Section 24.3, and exotoxins that affect exocytosis (tetanus and
botulism toxins) will be discussed in Section 26.7.

Membrane Disruption

Toxins that disrupt membranes include pore-forming proteins that bind cholesterol and insert themselves into target
membranes, and phospholipases that hydrolyze membrane
phospholipids into fatty acids. General descriptive terms
for these toxins are hemolysins, which lyse red blood cells
(but other cells as well), and leukocidins, which more specifically lyse white blood cells. One example is streptolysin
O produced by Streptococcus pyogenes. This pathogen can
cause pharyngitis (sore throat) and necrotizing fasciitis,
also known as “flesh-eating” disease.
Pore-forming toxins. A classic example of a pore-forming exo-

toxin is the hemolytic alpha toxin produced by Staphylococcus
aureus, an organism that causes boils and blood infections.
Alpha toxin forms a transmembrane, oligomeric (sevenmember) beta barrel pore in target cell plasma membranes.
It is easy to see how the resulting leakage of cell constituents and influx of fluid cause the target cell to burst. To form
the pore, hydrophobic areas of each monomer face the lipids of the membrane, and hydrophilic residues face the channel interior. A completed pore and a cutaway view exposing
the channel are illustrated in Figure 25.16A and B. Diagnostic microbiology laboratories visualize hemolysins such as
alpha toxin by inoculating bacteria onto agar plates containing
sheep red blood cells (Fig. 25.16C). The clear, yellow zones
around the S. aureus colonies growing on blood agar indicate
that the microbe secretes a hemolysin. A particularly potent

MICROBIAL PATHOGENESIS

■

1005

pore-forming leukocidin is Panton-Valentine toxin, produced
by most strains of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus.
Phospholipase toxins. Phospholipase C of Clostridium

perfringens, a cause of gas gangrene, cleaves phosphatidylcholine in host plasma membranes. At high concentrations
the toxin causes membrane disruption, but at sublethal
concentrations the exotoxin will generate signaling molecules from membrane lipids that can activate cytokine
production. Some phospholipases, also called lecithinases,
can increase the permeability of capillaries to cause edema
(fluid accumulation in tissues).
Escaping vacuoles. Other membrane-disrupting exotox-

ins specifically target vacuolar membranes. Many bacterial
pathogens enter eukaryotic host cells by inducing phagocytosis and then end up in a phagosome vacuole. Some of these
intracellular pathogens need to break out of the phagosome
to grow in the cytoplasm. One example is Listeria monocytogenes, a gastrointestinal pathogen that can also cause
meningitis (described later). This Gram-positive rod uses listeriolysin (a pore-forming exotoxin) and two phospholipases
to escape the phagosome to grow in the cytoplasm.

Two-Subunit AB Exotoxins

As noted earlier, exotoxins target a variety of different host
mechanisms. But despite the diversity of their targets, many
exotoxins share a common structural theme; they have two
subunits, usually called A and B. These two-subunit complexes are called AB exotoxins. The actual toxic activity in
AB exotoxins resides within the A subunit. The role of the B
subunit is to bind host cell receptors. Thus, the B subunit for

B. Cross section of alpha hemolysin

C. Hemolysis by S. aureus

MICROBELIBRARY.COM

A. Alpha hemolysin

■

FIGURE 25.16 ■ Alpha hemolysin of Staphylococcus aureus. A. 3D image of the pore complex, comprising seven monomeric proteins.
(PDB code: 7AHL) B. Cross section showing the channel. Arrows indicate movement of fluids through the pore. C. A blood agar plate inoculated with S. aureus. The alpha toxin is secreted by the organism and diffuses away from the producing colony. It forms pores in the red blood
cells embedded in the agar, causing the cells to lyse—a process that is visible as a clear area surrounding each colony.

1008

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

Normally, intestinal transport mechCONH2
anisms absorb NaCl and other ions (elecTarget
trolytes), as well as water from food
protein
N
material moving through the intesRibose
Ribose
tine. These actions produce wellADP-ribosyltransferase
A subunit
B-subunit
formed feces with very little water
P
P
CONH2
pentamer
+ Target protein
+
and salt content. CT and LT, howFIGURE 25.17 ■ AB
P
P
(active)
N
ever, reverse this process by secrettoxins. A. A typical AB toxin
H Nicotinamide
Ribose
Ribose
ing water and electrolytes into the
consists of an A subunit and
N
N
intestinal lumen. After the baca pentameric B subunit joined
N
N
noncovalently. B. Many AB
teria attach to the cells lining the
N
N
N
N
toxins are ADPintestinal villi (Fig. 25.18C and
NH2
NH2
ribosyltransferase enzymes
D), they secrete their AB exotoxins
that modify protein structure
NAD
ADP-ribosyl protein
(Fig. 25.18B). Both exotoxins have five
and function.
(inactive)
B subunits arranged as a ring around a single A subunit. The B subunits bind to ganglioside GM1 on
eukaryotic cell membranes and deliver the A subunit to the
target cell (Fig. 25.19
, steps 1–4). The A subunit poseach toxin delivers the A subunit to the host cell. Many AB
sesses the toxic part of the molecule, an ADP-ribosyltranstoxins have five identical B subunits arranged as a ring, in the
ferase, which must be activated by the host.
center of which is nestled a single A subunit (Figs. 25.15B
The binding of CT or LT to GM1 triggers endocyand 25.17A).
tosis and the formation of a toxin-containing vacuole,
AB exotoxins of one major subclass have ADP-ribosylwhich is transported to the endoplasmic reticulum. Durtransferase enzymatic activity as part of their A subunits.
ing this time, the A subunit is cleaved by a host proteThese enzyme toxins transfer the ADP-ribose group from
ase into two fragments, called A1 and A2, which are still
an NAD molecule to a target protein (Fig. 25.17B). Cholheld together by a disulfide bond. The reducing environera toxin modifies an arginine residue in a GTPase. Pertussis
ment in the vacuole reduces that bond and frees the A1
toxin alters a cysteine in a different GTPase. The ADP-ribopeptide containing active ADP-ribosyltransferase into the
sylated protein has an altered function. Sometimes the funcendoplasmic reticulum, which exports the toxin into the
tion is destroyed (for example, protein synthesis is destroyed
cytoplasm.
by diphtheria toxin); other times the protein is locked into
The mission of the A1 peptide is to modify (that is,
an active form insensitive to regulatory feedback control
ADP-ribosylate) a membrane-associated GTPase (called a
(for example, cAMP synthesis continues unchecked in the
G protein or G factor) that binds to adenylate cyclase and
presence of cholera toxin).
controls its activity (Fig. 25.19, step 5). Human cells have
two types of G-factor complexes that stimulate (Gs) or
inhibit (Gi) adenylate cyclase, respectively, when bound to
AB Exotoxins That Target
GTP (see eTopic 25.6 for details). An intrinsic GTPase in
each G factor hydrolyzes GTP and prevents continual stimSignal Transduction
ulation of adenylate cyclase by Gs, or its inhibition by Gi.
Cholera and E. coli labile toxins. Vibrio cholerae
Cholera toxin (and E. coli labile toxin) ADP-ribosylate G s
(Fig. 25.18A) produces a severe diarrheal disease called
and thereby inhibit the intrinsic GTPase activity (step 5).
cholera that generally affl icts malnourished people popuAs a result, adenylate cyclase is constantly stimulated to
lating poor countries like Bangladesh, or countries where
produce cAMP.
access to clean water has been disrupted by war or natuThe high amount of cAMP stimulates a host protein
ral disasters, such as the aftermath of the 2010 earthquake
kinase that activates various ion transport channels, includin Haiti. V. cholerae produces a gastrointestinal AB enteroing the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regutoxin nearly identical to one produced by some strains of
lator (CFTR), so named because a defect in this protein
E. coli associated with what is known as “traveler’s diarmanifests as the lung disease cystic fibrosis. CFTR controls
rhea.” Enterotoxins specifically affect the intestine. The
chloride transport in several cell types, including intestiE. coli enterotoxin is called labile toxin (LT) because it is
nal epithelia (discussed in Section 23.4). As a result of
easily destroyed by heat. Cholera toxin (CT) and labile toxin
CFTR activation, chloride, sodium, and other ions leave
are both AB toxins with identical modes of action, which is
the cell, and in an attempt to equilibrate osmolarity, water
to increase the level of cAMP made inside the host cell.
leaves as well. Because the affected cells line the intestine,
A.

B.

CHAPTER 25
A. Vibrio cholerae

■

MICROBIAL PATHOGENESIS

■

1009

C. Brush border of intestine

B. Cholera toxin

DR. GOPAL MURTI/SCIENCE SOURCE

5 B subunits

1 µm

GM1

1 µm

D. V. cholerae attachment

Pathogenesis of cholera. A. Vibrio cholerae (SEM). Note the slight
curve of the cell and the presence of a single polar flagellum. B. 3D structure of cholera
toxin, binding ganglioside GM1 on the intestinal cell surface. (PDB code: 1S5F) C. Brush
border of intestine (TEM). V. cholerae binds to the fingerlike villi on the apical surface.
D. V. cholerae, binding to the surface of a host cell (SEM). Note that V. cholerae does not
invade the host cell.
■

V. cholerae

1µ
µm
m

A2 subunit

A1 subunit
B subunit

Adenylate
cyclase
1. The 5B:1A toxin complex
binds the ganglioside GM1
on host membrane lipid rafts.

GM1

ATP

GTPase

Cl–

ADP-ribose
NAD

2. The toxin is endocytosed.

cAMP

NAm

5. The A1 peptide attaches an
ADP-ribose to an amino acid
within the host G protein that
regulates adenylate cyclase.
3. The phagosome
containing CT is taken to
the endoplasmic reticulum.

■

6. Cyclic AMP levels
rise and activate ion
transport systems,
causing an electrolyte
imbalance. Water from
the cell follows the
ions, causing diarrhea.

Nucleus

4. The A1 subunit is removed
from the B subunits and
exported into the cytoplasm.

FIGURE 25.19

K+ H2O
Na+
HCO3–

Endoplasmic
reticulum

Cholera toxin mode of action. Delivery of cholera toxin into target cells and deregulation of adenylate cyclase activity.

NAm = nicotinamide.

COURTESY OF LUZ BLANCO

FIGURE 25.18

Intestinal cell surface

© 2006 DENNIS KUNKEL MICROSCOPY, INC.

A subunit

1010

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

the escaping water enters the intestinal lumen, leading to
watery stools, or diarrhea (Fig. 25.19, step 6).

Thought Question

25.2 Figure 25.19 illustrates how cholera toxin works to
cause diarrhea. To develop a vaccine that generates protective
antibodies, which subunit of cholera toxin should be used to
best protect a person from the toxin’s effects?

How is diarrhea a benefit to the microorganism? The
more diarrhea is produced and expelled, the more organisms
are made and disseminated throughout the environment.
In this way, diarrhea increases the chance that another host
will ingest the organism, ensuring survival of the species.
Diarrhea can also benefit a pathogen by decreasing competition with other organisms as they are swept away. In fact,
the vast majority of organisms found in the diarrheal fluids
of cholera patients are V. cholerae bacteria.
Different pathogens have discovered alternative ways to
alter host cAMP levels. The Gram-negative pathogen Bordetella pertussis causes a childhood respiratory infection called
whooping cough, so named for the whooping sound made
as a child tries to take a breath after a fit of coughing. This
microbe also secretes an ADP-ribosylating toxin, but this
toxin modifies Gi (the inhibitory factor that normally downregulates adenylate cyclase activity). ADP-ribosylation in
this instance prevents that inhibition, with the result (again)
of runaway cAMP synthesis. Pertussis toxin, however, is
structurally different from cholera toxin. In addition, the
organism makes a “stealth” adenylate cyclase that is secreted
from the bacterium but remains inactive until it enters host
cells, where it becomes active by binding the calcium-binding protein calmodulin. The resulting increase in cAMP
levels causes inappropriate triggering of certain host cell signaling pathways and damages lung cells.
Anthrax. A century ago, anthrax (caused by Bacillus

anthracis; Fig. 25.20A) was mainly a disease of cattle
and sheep. Humans acquired the disease only accidentally. Today we fear the deliberate shipment of B. anthracis
through the mail (as happened in 2001) or its dispersion
from the air ducts of heavily populated buildings. What
makes this Gram-positive, spore-forming microbe so dangerous? In large part, its lethality is due to the secretion
of a plasmid-encoded tripartite toxin (a variant of the AB
exotoxin theme). The core subunit of the toxin is called
protective antigen (PA) because immunity to this protein
protects hosts from disease. Protective antigen is made as a
single peptide but then binds to the host cell surface (there
are multiple receptors), where a human protease cleaves off
a fragment (Fig. 25.20B). The remaining part of PA can

self-assemble in the membrane to form heptameric (sevenmembered) and octomeric (eight-membered) pores. The
other two components of anthrax toxin—edema factor
(EF) and lethal factor (LF)—bind to the PA rings and are
carried into the cell (Fig. 25.20C). The complex is endocytosed, and the two proteins carried in are passed through
the pore into the host cytoplasm. Proton motive force
helps unfold the exotoxins and translocates them across
the endocytic membrane. PA is the B subunit for anthrax
toxin, while EF and LF represent different A subunits.
Edema factor and lethal factor are the toxic parts of
anthrax toxin. Both are enzymes that attack the signaling
functions of the cell. Edema factor is an adenylate cyclase
that remains inactive until entering the cytoplasm, where it
binds calmodulin. This binding activates adenylate cyclase,
resulting in a huge production of cAMP, and inactivates
calmodulin from its normal function in the cell.
Lethal factor is actually a protease that cleaves several
host protein kinase kinases, each of which is part of a critical
regulatory cascade affecting cell growth and proliferation.
A protein kinase kinase is an enzyme that phosphorylates,
and thereby activates, another protein kinase that can then
phosphorylate one or more subsequent target proteins. One
consequence of subverting these phosphorylation cascades
is a failure to produce signals that recruit immune cells to
fight the infection.
Thought Question

25.3 How might you experimentally determine whether a
pathogen secretes an exotoxin? (Hint: You can learn more
about how new toxins are found in eTopic 25.8.)

AB Exotoxins That Target
Protein Synthesis
Shiga toxin: Shigella and E. coli O157:H7. Shigella dysente-

riae and E. coli O157:H7 (also known as enterohemorrhagic
E. coli) cause food-borne diseases whose symptoms include
bloody diarrhea. These organisms produce an important
toxin known as Shiga toxin (or Shiga-like toxin). The gene
(stx) encoding Shiga toxin is part of a phage genome integrated into the bacterial chromosome. The toxin has five B
subunits for binding and one A subunit imbued with toxic
activity. The A subunit, upon entry, destroys protein synthesis by cleaving 28S rRNA in eukaryotic ribosomes. Strains
that produce high levels of this toxin are associated with
acute kidney failure, known as hemolytic uremic syndrome.

Note:

Shigella dysenteriae is the only Shigella species that
produces Shiga toxin.

CHAPTER 25
A.

■

MICROBIAL PATHOGENESIS

■

1011

C.

B. anthracis

1. Protective antigen
subunit (PA) is made
as a single peptide.

PA
Cytoplasm

2. PA binds to a host cell surface,
where a human protease cleaves off
the orange part shown in part (B).

Membrane
Anthrax
toxin
receptor

ARTHUR FRIEDLANDER (NIAID)

3. Seven PA fragments
autoassemble in the
membrane to form a pore.

LF
EF

4. The other two components of
anthrax toxin−EF and LF−bind
to the ring and are carried into
the cell by endocytosis.

B.
Single PA protein
Heptamer

5. EF and LF are
expelled through the PA
pore into the cytoplasm.

FIGURE 25.20

■ Bacillus anthracis and anthrax toxin. A. B. anthracis (approx. 2 μm
in length; SEM) in splenic tissue from a monkey. Spores are not visible. B. Single subunit and
heptamer of protective antigen. (PDB code: 1TZO) C. Mechanism of toxin entry.

E. coli O157:H7 is a recently emerged pathogen. The
organism can colonize cattle intestines without causing
bovine disease; as a result, undetected bacteria can easily contaminate meat products following slaughter, as well as irrigation water from farms (see Chapter 28). The first large U.S.
outbreak of O157:H7 disease was associated with fast-food
hamburgers at a Washington State Jack in the Box restaurant in 1993. Both E. coli and Shigella have remarkable acid
resistance mechanisms that rival that of the gastric pathogen
Helicobacter pylori. This acid resistance makes these pathogens infectious at a very low infectious dose.
What activates stx expression? Iron availability is a key
factor for inducing the expression of stx and many other
virulence genes in pathogens. The body holds its iron
tightly in proteins such as lactoferrin and transferrin. To an

invading organism, the body is a very iron-poor environment. In the presence of low iron, expression of Shiga toxin
increases, the toxin kills host cells, and dead cells release
their iron. Shiga toxin, then, offers a way to rob the host of
its iron stores.
An intriguing question often pondered by scientists is,
What roles do virulence factors play in the natural ecology
of these bacteria? Surely, factors such as Shiga toxin did
not evolve after Shigella started infecting humans. William
Lainhart, Gino Stolfa, and Gerald Koudelka from the State
University of New York at Buffalo discovered that Shiga
toxin is actually a natural defense against Tetrahymena
thermophila, a ciliated protist that grazes on bacteria. Lainhart and his colleagues found that Tetrahymena was killed
when cocultured with Shiga toxin–producing bacteria.

1012

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

They proposed that reactive oxygen species produced by
Tetrahymena induce the SOS response in Shigella, which
then activates phage replication and the expression of stx
(SOS induction is discussed in Section 9.4). This is another
example of altruistic behavior by members of a bacterial
species in which some individuals sacrifice themselves (as
a result of phage lysis) to save the population. For further
discussion of the beneficial roles of viruses, see Chapter 6.

used to try to tame the human host. A discussion of how
new microbial toxins are discovered is found in eTopic 25.8.
Thought Question

25.5 Use an Internet search engine to determine which

other toxins are related to the cholera toxin A subunit. (Hint:
Start by searching on “protein” at PubMed to find the protein
sequence; then use a BLAST program.)

Diphtheria toxin. The classic example of an exotoxin that

targets protein synthesis is diphtheria toxin, produced by
Corynebacterium diphtheriae, the cause of the respiratory
disease diphtheria. The two-component diphtheria exotoxin, discussed more fully in eTopic 25.7, kills cells by
ADP-ribosylating eukaryotic protein synthesis elongation
factor 2 (EF2). The vaccine used to prevent diphtheria (the
“D” in DTaP) is an inactivated form of this exotoxin (see
Section 24.7). C. diphtheriae is another example of a pathogen whose toxin gene (dtx) is regulated by iron availability
and is part of a prophage genome integrated into the bacterial chromosome. Recall that a prophage is phage genome
that has integrated into a bacterial chromosome.

Thought Question

25.4 Would patients with iron overload (excess free iron in
the blood) be more susceptible to infection?

We have examined only a few of the many protein exotoxins employed by pathogens. Some of the others, including tetanus and botulism toxins, will be described in the
next chapter. What should be apparent from our brief sampling is the evolutionary ingenuity that pathogens have
A. LPS membrane

Endotoxin (LPS) Is Made Only
by Gram-Negative Bacteria

Another important virulence factor common to all Gramnegative microorganisms is endotoxin present in the outer
membrane (discussed in Chapter 3). Not to be confused
with secreted exotoxins, endotoxin is an embedded part of
the bacterial cell surface and an important contributor to disease. Endotoxin, otherwise called lipopolysaccharide (LPS),
is composed of lipid A, core glycolipid, and a repeating
polysaccharide chain known as the O antigen (Fig. 25.21).
LPS molecules form the outer leaflet of the Gram-negative
outer membrane (discussed in Chapter 3). As bacteria die,
they release endotoxin. Endotoxin is a microbe-associated
molecular pattern (MAMP) molecule that can bind to certain Toll-like receptors on macrophages or B cells and trigger the release of TNF-alpha, interferon, IL-1, and other
cytokines (MAMPs, Toll-like receptors, and cytokines are
discussed in Chapters 23 and 24). The release of these active
agents causes a variety of symptoms, such as:
■

Fever

■

Activation of clotting factors, leading to disseminated
intravascular coagulation

B. Gram-negative bacterial endotoxin (lipopolysaccharide, LPS)

Water

Lipid A
O-specific
oligosaccharide
subunit

PACIFIC NORTHWEST NATIONAL LABORATORY

O-specific polysaccharide chain

n

(outer)

(inner)

Core oligosaccharide
Core glycolipid

LPS

Membrane

FIGURE 25.21
Water

■ Endotoxin. A. Model of a lipopolysaccharide (LPS) membrane
of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, consisting of 16 lipopolysaccharide molecules (red)
and 48 ethylamine phospholipid molecules (white). B. Basic structure of endotoxin,
showing the repeating O-antigen side chain that faces out from the microbe and the
membrane proximal core glycolipid and lipid A (contains endotoxic activity).

CHAPTER 25

■

MICROBIAL PATHOGENESIS

■

1013

TABLE 25.4-Major Distinctions between Bacterial Exotoxins and Endotoxins
Property

Exotoxin

Endotoxin

Producing organism

Gram-positive or -negative

Gram-negative only

Chemical

Protein (size 50–1,000 kDa)

Lipopolysaccharide (lipid A moiety; size 10 kDa)

Denatured by boiling

Yes, if boiled long enough

No

Mode of action

Some exotoxins target specific features of eukaryotic
cells (membrane, protein synthesis, signal transduction,
etc.); others are superantigens

Bind Toll-like receptor 4; activate cytokine
production

Enzyme activity

Often

No

Toxicity

High (1-μg quantities)

Low ( >100-μg quantities), but the primary cause of
Gram-negative sepsis (serious blood infections)

Immunogenicity

Highly antigenic

Poorly antigenic

Vaccine

Toxoids can be made for some

Toxoids cannot be made

Fever production
(pyrogenicity)

Occasionally

Yes

■

Activation of the alternative complement pathway

■

Vasodilation, leading to hypotension (low blood pressure)

■

Shock due to hypotension

■

Death, when other symptoms are severe

The major differences between exotoxins and endotoxins
are summarized in Table 25.4.

Note:

Lipopolysaccharide O antigens forming part of the outer
membrane are used to classify different strains of E. coli (for example, E. coli O157 versus E. coli O111), as well as other Gram-negative
organisms.

The role of endotoxin can be seen in infections with
the Gram-negative diplococcus Neisseria meningitidis
(Fig. 25.22A), a major cause of bacterial meningitis. N. meningitidis has, as part of its pathogenesis, a septicemic phase
in which the organism can replicate to high numbers in the
bloodstream. The large amount of endotoxin present causes
a massive depletion of clotting factors, which leads to internal
bleeding, most prominently displayed to a physician as small
pinpoint hemorrhages called petechiae on the patient’s hands
and feet (Fig. 25.22B). Capillary bleeding near the surface
of the skin causes petechiae. One danger of treating massive
Gram-negative sepsis with antibiotics is that the enormous
release of endotoxin from dead bacteria could well kill the

B.

FIGURE 25.22

MEDISCAN/VISUALS UNLIMITED

© DENNIS KUNKEL MICROSCOPY, INC.

A.

■

Effect of Neisseria meningitidis endotoxin. A. N. meningitidis (cell 0.8–1 μm in diameter; SEM). B. Petechial rash

caused by N. meningitidis.

1014

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

patient. Untreated Gram-negative sepsis is, however, almost
always fatal, so its treatment, albeit risky, is imperative.
An approach to prevent endotoxic shock currently under
study is based on the knowledge that LPS must bind to Tolllike receptor TLR4 to cause endotoxic shock. What if we could
neutralize TLR4 by antibody and prevent it from binding LPS
during an infection? Several investigators have shown that
injecting antibody raised to TLR4 (anti-TLR4) into infected
mice will successfully block TLR4 receptors and protect the
mice from E. coli–induced septic shock. Unfortunately, this
approach has not yet proved successful in human trials.

To Summarize
There are nine categories of protein exotoxins based
on mode of action. These include toxins that disrupt
membranes, inhibit protein synthesis, or alter the synthesis of host cell signaling-molecules, as well as toxins
that are superantigens or target-specific proteases.

■

Many bacterial toxins are two-component, AB subunit
toxins. The B subunit promotes penetration through host
cell membranes, whereas the A subunit has toxic activity.

■

Staphylococcus aureus alpha toxin forms pores in host
cell membranes.

■

Cholera toxin, E. coli labile toxin, and pertussis toxin
are AB toxins that alter host cAMP production by adding ADP-ribose groups to different G-factor proteins.

■

Shiga toxin is an AB toxin that cleaves host cell 28S
rRNA in host cell ribosomes.

■

Anthrax toxin is a three-part AB toxin with one B subunit (protective antigen) and two different A subunits
that affect cAMP levels (edema factor) and cleave host
protein kinases (lethal factor).

■

■

Lipopolysaccharide (LPS), known as endotoxin, is an
integral component of Gram-negative outer membranes
and an important virulence factor that triggers massive
release of cytokines from host cells. The indiscriminate
release of cytokines can trigger fever, shock, and death.

25.5

Deploying Toxins
and Effectors

A recurring theme among bacterial pathogens is the secretion of proteins that destroy, cripple, or subvert host target cells. The bacterial toxins described in Section 25.4
are secreted into the surrounding environment, where
they float randomly until chance intervenes and they hit a
membrane-binding site. However, many pathogens attach
to tissue cells and inject bacterial proteins (called effectors)
directly into the host cell cytoplasm. The proteins may not
kill the cell, but they redirect host signaling pathways in
ways that benefit the microbe.
Protein secretion pathways were introduced in Section 8.5, focusing on ATP-binding cassette (ABC) proteins
as a model. Additional secretion models are described here
in their critical role of delivering pathogenicity proteins
such as toxins. A particularly interesting aspect of these
secretory systems is that many of them evolved from, and
bear structural resemblance to, other cell structures that
serve fundamental cell functions. The molecular processes
that are evolutionarily related to secretion include:
■

Type IV pilus biogenesis (homologous to type II protein
secretion)

■

Flagellar synthesis (homologous to type III protein
secretion)

■

Conjugation (homologous to type IV protein secretion)

TABLE 25.5-Secretion Systems for Bacterial Toxins
Secretion
type
Features

Examples

I

SecA dependent, one effector per system

E. coli alpha hemolysin, Bordetella pertussis adenylate cyclase

II

SecA dependent, similar to type IV pili

Pseudomonas aeruginosa exotoxin A, elastase, cholera toxin

III

SecA independent, syringe, related to flagella, multiple
effectors secreted

Yersinia Yop proteins, Salmonella Sip proteins,
enteropathogenic E. coli (EPEC) EspA proteins, TirA

IV

Related to conjugational DNA transfers, multiple
effectors secreted

B. pertussis toxin, Helicobacter CagA

V

Autotransporter, SecA dependent to periplasm,
self-transport through outer membrane, one effector
per system

Gonococcal and Haemophilus influenzae IgA proteases

VI

Related to phage tails, single effector, harpoon mechanism

Burkholderia and Vibrio cholerae VgrG

VII

Unrelated to other systems

Mycobacterium tuberculosis Esx and Esp

CHAPTER 25

■

MICROBIAL PATHOGENESIS

■

1015

Table 25.5 lists features of the seven export systems of
Gram-negative bacteria and examples of associated virulence effector proteins. Secretion system types II, III, and
IV will be described in more detail.

Type II Secretion Resembles
Type IV Pilus Assembly

Cholera toxin, discussed in Section 25.4, is a well-known
example of a toxin secreted by a type II secretion system.
Type II secretion offers a clear example of how nature has
modified the blueprints of one system to do a very different task. DNA sequence analysis has revealed that the genes
used for type IV pilus biogenesis (see Section 25.3) were
duplicated at some point during evolution and redesigned
to serve as a protein secretion mechanism. Type IV pili have
the unusual ability to extend and retract from the outer
membrane—a property that produces the gliding motility
of Myxococcus (see Section 4.6) and the twitching motility of Neisseria and Pseudomonas. As you might guess,
assembly/disassembly of these appendages is quite complex.
Type II protein secretion mechanisms mirror this complexity. Proteins to be secreted first make their way, via the
SecA-dependent general secretion pathway, to the periplasm, where they are folded and then encounter the appropriate type II secretion system. Type II secretion systems
cyclically assemble and disassemble the pilus-like structure,
using it as a piston to ram folded toxins or effector proteins
through an outer membrane pore structure and into the
surrounding void (Fig. 25.23).

Type III Secretion Injects Effector
Proteins into Host Cells

Yersinia, Salmonella, and Shigella are the etiological agents
of Black Death and various forms of diarrhea. In the 1990s
it was discovered that these organisms could somehow take
the bacterial virulence proteins made in their cytoplasm and
drive them directly into the eukaryotic cell cytoplasm without the protein ever getting into the extracellular environment. Direct delivery is a good idea because it eliminates the
dilution that happens when a toxin is secreted into media.
Another advantage of this strategy is that it avoids the need
to tailor the toxin to fit a preexisting host receptor.
What kind of molecular machine can directly deliver
cytoplasmic bacterial proteins into target cells? Some
microbes use tiny molecular syringes embedded in their
membranes to inject proteins directly into the host cytoplasm; this mechanism of delivery is called a type III
secretion system (T3SS). Figure 25.24
shows electron
micrographs of type III secretion needles and a model of
the complex. Genes encoding type III systems are actually

Outer
membrane

D

Polymerization
C

N

Periplasm
Depolymerization

G
M
L

SecAdependent
export

Toxin or
effector
protein

Inner
membrane

E

Cytoplasm

ATP

FIGURE 25.23

ADP + Pi

Type II secretion. C, D, E, G, L, M, and N are
protein components of the secretion system.
■

related to flagellar genes, whose products export the flagellin proteins through the center of a growing flagellum
(discussed in Section 3.6). It appears that flagellar genes
were evolutionarily reengineered to encode proteins that
act more like molecular syringes (Fig. 25.24C).
The bacterial virulence proteins secreted by type III systems subvert normal host cell signaling pathways, some of
which cause dramatic rearrangements of host cytoskeleton
at the cell membrane that lead to engulfment of the microbe
(Fig. 25.25). The genes encoding type III systems are usually located within pathogenicity islands inherited from
other microbial sources. Many bacterial pathogens use this
type of secretion system, including plant pathogens such
as Pseudomonas syringae (the cause of blight, a disease of
many plants in which leaves or stems develop brown spots).
Secretion is normally triggered by cell-cell contact between
host and bacterium.
E. coli pathogens use a T3SS to “inject” their own
receptor into host cells. Enteropathogenic E. coli (EPEC)

and enterohemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC) are two diarrheaproducing forms of E. coli. These pathogens use pili to initially bind to the host’s intestinal epithelial cells; however,
the bacterium must establish a more intimate attachment to
these cells to cause disease. The bacterial outer membrane

JORGE E. GALÀN AND ALAN COLLMER.
SCIENCE 284: 1322-1328. 2ND

1016

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY
C.

A.

PrgI

150 nm

JORGE E. GALÀN AND ALAN COLLMER. SCIENCE 284
1322–1328, 2ND

B.
Outer
membrane
InvG
PrgH

Periplasm

PrgK
100 nm

Inner
membrane

The needle complex of the
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium
type III secretion system. Unlike other secretion
■

SpaP, Q, R, S
systems, the type III mechanism injects proteins directly
InvA
OrgB
from the bacterial cytoplasm into the host cytoplasm. The
proteins in these systems are related to flagellar assembly proteins. A. In
these TEMs of osmotically shocked S. Typhimurium, needle complexes
(arrows) are visible in the bacterial envelope. B. Purified needle complexes
ATP
(EM). C. Schematic representation of the S. Typhimurium needle complex
and its putative components. Source: Parts A-C modified from Moat, Foster, and
Spector. 2002. Microbial Physiology, 4th ed. © Wiley-Liss, Inc.

protein called intimin mediates this intimate attachment.
The only problem is that the host lacks a receptor for intimin. No problem. EPEC and EHEC use a type III secretion
system to insert their own receptor, Tir (for translocated
intimin receptor), into the target cells. (Fig. 25.26A). Brett
Finlay and his colleagues in Vancouver, British Columbia,
discovered this system and found that the genes encoding
intimin, Tir, and the secretion apparatus are all part of an
EPEC pathogenicity island.
Once injected and placed in the host membrane, Tir
binds intimin on the bacterial surface (Fig. 25.26B).
Think of Tir as a wall anchor you poke into a board in
order to attach something to it. The result is a tighter, more
intimate adherence between the bacterium and host cell
surface, which is required for infection to proceed. In addition, host protein kinases phosphorylate Tir at tyrosine residue 474. Phosphorylated Tir directly triggers a remarkable
reorganization of host cellular cytoskeletal components
(actin, alpha-actinin, ezrin, talin, and myosin light chain)
such that a membrane “pedestal” is formed, raising the
microbe up (Fig. 25.26C). The result of this attachment
is the characteristic attaching and effacing (A/E) lesion,

SpaO

InvC

Cytoplasm

ADP + Pi

Shigella flexneri

FIGURE 25.25

Shigella invades a host cell ruffle produced
as a result of type III secretion. Shigella flexneri entering a
■

HeLa cell (SEM). The bacterium (small diameter, approx. 1 μm) interacts with the host cell surface and injects (via its type III secretion
apparatus) its invasin proteins, which choreograph a local actin-rich
membrane ruffle at the host cell. The ruffle engulfs the bacterium
and eventually disassembles, internalizing the bacterium.

ROGER WEPF, ARIEL BLOCKER (MICROSCOPY, EMBL). JOELLE MOUNIER,
PHILIPPE SANSONETTI (INSTITUTE PASTEUR, PARIS).

FIGURE 25.24

CHAPTER 25
A.

B.

■

MICROBIAL PATHOGENESIS

■

1017

C.

Pedestal

Intimin
_-Actinin

Tir
Y P
NcK

0.25 +m

KNITTON ET AL. 1998. EMBO J. 17:2166

Hostt factor
ffactor
aac
ctor
ct
c
o
Host
N-WASP

Arp2/3
Actin

Host
Host
H
ostfactors
o
fa
factors
ac
cto
cto
orsthat
th
that
haatt
control
control
co
on
ntt lactin
ntro
aactin
ac
ctin
cti
c
in
filamentation
filamentation
filam
filament
me
me
en
nttat
tattion
ta

COVER. CELL HOST AND MICROBE 2009. 5 VOL. 3. IMAGE COURTESY OF
MANFRED ROSE (HZI; BRAUNSCHWEIG, GERMANY)

EPEC

FIGURE 25.26

■ E. coli type III secretion and cell-cell interaction. A. EspA filaments form a bridge between enteropathogenic
E. coli (EPEC) and an epithelial cell during the early stages of attaching and effacing (A/E) lesion formation (SEM). These filaments are part
of the type III secretion apparatus, functioning as a molecular syringe to inject proteins from pathogenic E. coli into the host cell. B. Model of
cytoskeletal components within the EPEC pedestal. EPEC injects Tir protein into the host cell, where it moves to the membrane and acts as a
receptor for intimin. Tir also communicates through phosphorylation with other host proteins to cause a change in actin cytoskeleton, which
leads to pedestal formation. C. Pedestal formation (colorized SEM).

characterized by destruction of the microvilli and pedestal
formation. By placing itself on a “pedestal,” EPEC avoids
engulfment and the perils of the phagolysosome.
Salmonella pathogenesis. The Gram-negative bacterium
Salmonella enterica is currently the most common bacterial food-borne pathogen in the United States. Its transmission has been linked to everything from cantaloupe
and peanut butter (in 2012) to poultry (pick any year). As
part of its pathogenesis, Salmonella uses type III secretion systems to invade the eukaryotic host cell and replicate intracellularly. Following ingestion of contaminated
food or water, this bacterium attaches to and invades M
cells that are interspersed along the wall of the small intestine. M cells are specialized intestinal epithelial cells (see
Fig. 23.25B) that sample normal intestinal microbes and
transfer pathogens across the epithelial barrier for recognition by the immune system. Salmonella subverts the
normal function of M cells and causes an inflammatory
response that leads to diarrhea.
During its evolutionary journey toward becoming a
pathogen, Salmonella has acquired as many as 14 pathogenicity islands. Five of those islands can be found in all
S. enterica serovars, but only two will be discussed here.
Salmonella pathogenicity island 1 (SPI-1) encodes a type
III protein secretion system that delivers a cocktail of at
least 13 different protein toxins (called effector proteins)
directly into the cytosol of host epithelial cells in the gut
(Fig. 25.27A, step 1). Inside epithelial cells, these effector proteins interfere with signal transduction cascades and

modulate the host response. One mission of these effectors
is to induce cytoskeletal actin rearrangements that cause
ruffling of the eukaryotic membrane around the microbe
(step 2; also see Fig. 25.25). The membrane ruffling
starts the process of engulfment. Salmonella induces this
response as a way to avoid the normal endocytic process.
While engulfment is under way, some SPI-1 effectors act
to loosen tight junctions that hold together adjacent epithelial cells (Fig. 25.27A, step 3). Uncontrolled chloride secretion (triggered by another effector) produces diarrhea as
water leaves infected cells to compensate for an electrolyte
imbalance. Other SPI-1 effectors activate transcription pathways that alter cytokine expression (step 4). One of the cytokines made, IL-8, helps lure phagocytic neutrophils (PMNs)
to the area of infection, which initiates inflammation (step 5).
Initiating inflammation may seem counterintuitive, but
Salmonella’s strategy is to employ the neutrophils as “mercenaries” to kill competitors among the microbiota. The
neutrophils squeeze between epithelial cells to reach the
gut lumen, where they begin to engulf microbiota and produce reactive oxygen species (ROS) as part of their oxidative burst (see Chapter 23). Besides killing competitors, the
oxidative burst converts thiosulfate, a compound made by
gut microbiota, into tetrathionate which Salmonella, but
not its competitors, can use as an alternative electron acceptor (Fig. 25.27A, step 6). Tetrathionate provides a competitive advantage to Salmonella growing in the lumen.
Once Salmonella enters an epithelial cell or a macrophage,
it finds itself in a vacuole called the Salmonella-containing
vacuole, or SCV (Fig. 25.27B, step 1). In the normal course

1018

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY
A.

of events, an enzyme-packed lysosome would fuse with the phagosome
and release its contents in an effort
to kill the invader. Salmonella, however, possesses a second pathogenicity
island, called SPI-2, which subverts
this host response. SPI-2 uses another
type III secretion system to inject
proteins that alter vesicle remodeling
(step 2) and vesicle trafficking (step
3), thereby reducing phagosomelysosome fusion so that the intracellular bacteria are spared.
Some SPI-2 effectors downregulate production of IL-8 and
TNF-alpha to limit inflammation;
other effectors inhibit migration of
dendritic cells, which will subvert antigen presentation (Fig. 25.27B, step
4). Salmonella eventually escapes from
the initial host cell when the SCV
traffics to the cell periphery and fuses
with the host membrane. In addition,
some SPI-2 effectors will trigger host
cell apoptosis (step 5), a programmed
cell death that kills the host cell in a
way that prevents further inflammation. Freed from the initial cell, Salmonella can now infect other cells,
including macrophages.
Because of their importance to
virulence, type III secretion systems
are the subject of intensive research
designed to exploit them as potential
drug targets.

Type IV Secretion
Resembles Conjugation
Systems

Many bacteria can transfer DNA
from donor to recipient cells via a
cell-cell contact system known as
conjugation (see Section 9.1). The
conjugation systems of some pathogens have been modified, through
evolution, into new systems that
transport proteins, or proteins plus
DNA, directly into target cells.
Agrobacterium tumefaciens, for
example, uses its Vir system to transfer the tumor-producing Ti plasmid
and some effector proteins into plant

Salmonella
Microbiota

Membrane
ruffling
Salmonella

Tetrathionate
Thiosulfate

Intestinal
lumen

1. SPI-1 effectors
are injected into
host cell.
Type III secretion
(SPI-1)

2. Effectors trigger
membrane ruffling
for entry.

3. Effectors alter host
transcriptional activators;
induce cytokine synthesis.
NF-κβ

6. ROS molecules
from PMNs convert
thiosulfate to tetrathionate. Salmonella
uses tetrathionate
as an alternate
electron acceptor.

Actin
Effector
proteins

STAT-3

ROS

Cdc42

JNK

4. Effectors loosen
tight junctions,
increase chloride
secretion and
fluid loss.

Nucleus

Gene
expression
Host cell

IL-8

Intestinal
mucosa

5. Proinflammatory
cytokine IL-8
attracts polymorphonuclear
leukocytes (PMNs).
PMNs migrate
to gut lumen.

Cytokines
PMN
B.

Salmonella
1. Salmonella in SCV
injects SPI-2 effectors
into cytoplasm.

Phagosome

SPI-2
Effector
proteins
5. Effector protein
initiates apoptotic
cell death.

Modification
of SCV
2. Effectors
modify surface
of SCVs.

Salmonellacontaining
vacuole

3. SCV traffics
along microtubules
to nucleus and
then periphery.

4. Effectors downregulate IL-8 and
TNFα, and limit
dendritic cell motility.

FIGURE 25.27

■

Schematic overview of Salmonella

Dissemination

pathogenesis. Effector proteins injected by Salmonella
into a host M cell affect many aspects of host physiology. A. SPI-1 effector functions. B. SPI-2
effector functions. PMN = polymorphonuclear leukocyte; ROS = reactive oxygen species;
SCV = Salmonella-containing vacuole; SPI = Salmonella pathogenicity island.

CHAPTER 25

cells. The result is a plant cancer called crown gall disease.
The bacterium that causes whooping cough in humans,
Bordetella pertussis, also uses a type IV secretion system,
to export pertussis toxin, but it simply exports the toxin,
without injecting it into the host (Fig. 25.28). Type IV
systems also differ with respect to whether the protein is
taken directly from the cytoplasm, like CagA from Helicobacter, or from the periplasm, as with pertussis toxin. In
the latter case, the SecA-dependent general secretory system first delivers the toxin to the periplasmic space.
Another unique toxin delivery system, type VI secretion,
resembles a harpoon or blowgun (see Special Topic 25.1).

■

MICROBIAL PATHOGENESIS

Pertussis
toxin
Periplasm

25.6 Protein and DNA have very different structures. Why
would a protein secretion system be derived from a DNApumping system?

■

■

■

■

Many pathogens use specific protein secretion pathways to deliver toxins.
Type II secretion systems use a pilus-like extraction/
retraction mechanism to push proteins out of the cell.
Type III secretion uses a molecular syringe to inject proteins from the bacterial cytoplasm into the host cytoplasm.
Type IV secretion utilizes a group of proteins homologous to conjugation machinery to secrete proteins from
either the cytoplasm or the periplasm.

25.6

Surviving within the Host

Once inside a host, how does a successful pathogen avoid
detection and destruction? Many of the virulence factors in the pathogen’s arsenal help the microbe escape or
resist innate immune mechanisms. Others are dedicated
to stealth—that is, hiding from the immune system. But
before discussing how these organisms survive in a host, we
must ask how the pathogen knows it is in a host.

Where Am I?

A pathogen that can grow either outside or inside a host
must adjust its physiology to match its whereabouts. Why
make a type III secretion system if there are no host cells
around? But how do microbial pathogens know whether
they are in a host or in a pond? And which bacterial genes
are expressed exclusively while in a host?

1019

Outer
membrane

Thought Question

To Summarize

■

Inner
membrane
SecA-dependent
export

ATP
Cytoplasm
ADP + Pi

Pi + ADP

FIGURE 25.28

ATP
■

Type IV secretion of pertussis toxin.

Evolutionarily related to conjugation systems, this type IV system in
Bordetella pertussis takes pertussis toxin from the periplasm (moved
there by SecA-dependent transport) across the outer membrane.

The same types of regulatory mechanisms that sense
environmental conditions in a pond are used by the microbe
to intuit its whereabouts in a host. That is, various sensing systems act in concert to recognize a specific environmental niche. Two-component signal transduction systems,
discussed in Section 10.1, are used to monitor magnesium
concentrations, which are characteristically low in a host
cell vacuole. Other regulators measure pH, which will be
low (acidic) in the same vacuole. The point is that there is
no single in vivo sensor system. The various regulators collaborate to trigger the expression of virulence genes.
Enterohemorrhagic E. coli uses positive and negative signals to determine where in a host it should express virulence
genes. As mentioned earlier, EHEC uses a T3SS to inject
effector proteins into gastrointestinal cells, so synthesis of
the T3SS apparatus is best induced only in the intestine. One
signal that induces T3SS synthesis is fucose. Fucose ends
up in the intestine because fucosidases from the nonpathogenic gut microbe Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron cleave fucose
from the host glycans present on intestinal epithelial cells.
EHEC senses the fucose via a two-component system and
responds by synthesizing the T3SS. However, other metabolites in the host can inhibit expression of the T3SS apparatus

1020

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

SPECIAL TOPIC 25.1- - Type VI Secretion: Poison Darts
Pygmies living in Central Africa and the Yagua from Peru
both use an ancient weapon for hunting—namely, blowguns.
Blowguns are carefully crafted, hollowed-out tubes designed
to shoot curare-tipped poison darts that can penetrate and
paralyze animal prey. What do blowguns and microbes have in
common? Many Gram-negative microbes, such as E coli, Vibrio cholerae, Pseudomonas, and Burkholderia, make incredible blowgun-like devices that deliver either virulence proteins
to eukaryotic prey, or antimicrobials into bacterial competitors to kill them.
These molecular weapons, called type VI secretion systems (T6SSs), comprise at least 13 proteins and are present
in at least one copy in about 25% of all sequenced Gramnegative bacteria. The genomes of some bacteria, such as
Burkholderia, carry five or six distinct T6SS gene clusters.
Structure and function. The components of T6SSs appear
to be repurposed phage tail parts normally used to deliver
phage DNA into bacterial host cells (see Fig. 6.11A). VipA/B
proteins of V. cholerae T6SS, and their orthologs in other species, are homologous to the phage T4 tail sheath, a structure
that contracts and drives the T4 needlelike core through the
host cell wall. T4 DNA is delivered through the core and into
the cytoplasm. Hcp proteins of T6SSs are homologs of the
phage T4 needle proteins, while VgrG proteins are structural

A.

homologs of the T4 spike complex that sits atop the T4 core.
The T4 spike complex initially punctures the target bacterial
cell surface. T6SSs actually resemble an inverted phage tail
inside a bacterial cell. T6SSs translocate substrates from one
cell directly into a target cell only after physical contact with
the target.
Bacterial T6SSs kill or maim by translocating (firing) toxic
effector molecules into bacterial competitors or into eukaryotic target cells. But do they actually fire like phage tails?
Grant Jensen (California Institute of Technology; Fig. 1A) and
John Mekalanos (Harvard University; Fig. 1B) wanted to find
out.
The team and their colleagues used time-lapse fluorescence light microscopy to visually track what happens to a
Vibrio cholerae T6SS sheath tagged with green fluorescent
protein (VipA-GFP). As shown in Figure 1C, the sheaths of
the type VI secretion system cycled from assembly to quick
contraction to disassembly and then reassembly. Real-time
video of this cycling can be seen at the links provided in the
supplementary data of the paper cited at the end of this Special Topic.
When examined using cryo-EM imaging, T6SS appeared as
straight, intracellular tubular structures aligned perpendicular
to the cytoplasmic membrane. One structure was long, thin,
and stretched almost the entire width of the cell. The second

B.

COURTESY OF MARTIN PILHOFER

COURTESY OF JOHN MEKALANOS

FIGURE 1 ■ Extension and contraction
of type VI secretion system. Grant

Jensen (standing, with Martin Pilhofer at
the electron microscope) (A) and John
Mekalanos (B) headed the study to visualize
the T6SS mechanism of Vibrio cholerae.
C. Time-lapse images showing the extension
of the VipA-GFP structure from one side of
the cell to another (arrows), followed by a
contraction event and apparent disassembly
of the contracted VipA-GFP structure.

1 µm

NATURE, 483, 182–186, MARCH 8,
2012, FIG 1

C.

CHAPTER 25

1. Assemb
Assembly. Baseplate
complex init
initiates Hcp
tube polyme
polymerization.
Outer
membrane

■

MICROBIAL PATHOGENESIS

■

1021

Target cell
2. Extension.
Ready to fire.

3. Contraction. Contact with host cell
triggers contraction of VipA/B sheath.
VgrG is fired into the host cell.

Periplasm
Inner
membrane

Host cell membrane

Slice through
baseplate

VgrG
Extracellular
space

VipA/VipB
Hcp
ClpV
pV
ATP + H
ATP
H22O
O
Cytoplasm

ADP + PP

4. Disassembly.
ClpV protease
disassembles the
sheath and core.
VipA/B dimers are
recycled into a new
T6SS apparatus.

FIGURE 2

■ Model of type VI secretion mechanism. A Gram-negative bacterium is shown here using a type VI secretion system
to attack another Gram-negative bacterium. A similar series of events takes place when a pathogen attacks a eukaryotic host cell.

form was shorter, wider, and appeared contracted. The
researchers concluded that these structures corresponded
to what was seen expanding and contracting in the fluorescent microscopic study. They further suggested that the rapid
contraction (firing) of the type VI secretion system sheath
provides the energy needed to shoot proteins out of the
bacterium and into an adjacent target cell.
After being fired, the VipA/B sheath and Hcp core proteins
are depolymerized by another T6SS gene product, called
ClpV, a type of chaperone. The authors of the study propose
that the disassembled Hcp and VipA/B monomers and dimers
are reused to assemble a new microbial “blowgun.” The model
for T6SS assembly (loading), extension (ready to fire), contraction (firing), and disassembly is illustrated in Figure 2.
Secretion. What do type VI secretion systems secrete? When
engaged with eukaryotic cells, VgrG proteins appear to be the
main effector, although some effectors can bind to VgrG and
hitchhike into the target cell. VgrG proteins carry extended
C-terminal regions that function in the eukaryotic host cell

cytoplasm. For example, the C-terminal extension of Vibrio
cholerae VgrG1 carries an RtxA toxin domain that, after being
fired into target cells, cross-links actin. VgrG1 from Aeromonas hydrophila induces host cell toxicity by ADP-ribosylating
host cell actin, which ultimately triggers apoptotic cell death.
Depending on the pathogen, T6SS-mediated phenotypes
include aspects of adhesion, internalization, cytoskeletal rearrangements, cytotoxicity, phagocytosis, and giant-cell formation (Fig. 3).
In addition to delivering VgrG effector “darts” into eukaryotic cells, the T6SSs have been characterized as mediators of
competitive interbacterial interactions. The only antimicrobial T6SS effector characterized to date is the Pseudomonas
aeruginosa protein Tse2, which appears to be the toxin component of a toxin immunity system (see eTopic 10.4). Bacterial cells lacking Tsi2, the cognate immunity protein to Tse2,
suffer arrested growth when Tse2 is expressed intracellularly.
Some organisms can also sense when they are under attack
by another T6SS. Pseudomonas, for instance, can detect a
T6SS assault from Vibrio cholerae and assemble a retaliatory

1022

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

SPECIAL TOPIC 25.1- -(continued!)
T6SS at the very point of attack. Pseudomonas somehow
survives the Vibrio attack and launches a counterstrike that
kills the Vibrio. How Pseudomonas senses the attack is still
unclear.
With its role in virulence, its prevalence among Gramnegative bacterial genomes, and its predicted phage-like
structure, the type VI secretion system has become an
exciting area of research. Identification of pathogenspecific T6SS components and substrates may reveal
novel targets for treating bacterial disease.
Uninfected
macrophages

Giant cell is
forming

FIGURE 3

■ T6SS-mediated multinucleate giant-cell
formation. Burkholderia thailandensis (green, GFP) uses the

RESEARCH QUESTION
Before searching for, or designing, a potential antimicrobial that would target one of the T6SS components, what
experiment(s) could you do to determine whether a single
antimicrobial compound could potentially target T6SS
from many different organisms?
Basler, Marek, Martin Pilhofer, Gregory P. Henderson,
Grant J. Jensen, and John J. Mekalanos. 2012. Type VI
secretion requires a dynamic contractile phage tail-like
structure. Nature 483:182–186.

T6SS-5 effector to induce the fusion of infected macrophages.
Nuclei are stained blue; actin is stained red. Notice that the intracellular Burkholderia form actin tails. This image shows many infected
macrophages fusing into a giant cell. Source: Paul Brett, University of South
Alabama.

in unfavorable body sites. Andrew Roe and his team at the
University of Glasgow found that the host metabolite D-serine can inhibit EHEC T3SS expression. D-Serine is found
at high concentrations at extraintestinal sites such as the urinary tract and brain, two sites that EHEC does not infect.
How D-serine inhibits T3SS gene expression is not clear.
Many bacterial pathogens will sense the concentration
of free iron, which is typically very low in the host, to regulate virulence genes. For instance, Corynebacterium diphtheriae sensing a low iron environment will induce synthesis of
diphtheria toxin (see eTopic 25.7; Figure 7.2). The toxin kills
host cells to release their iron, which the bacteria can now use.
For other pathogens, iron concentration alone is usually not
enough to provoke virulence. Regulators sensitive to other in
vivo signals must be activated to achieve a successful infection.
Cell-cell communication is also important during infections. Pseudomonas aeruginosa, for example, has at least two
quorum-sensing systems that detect secreted autoinducers.
As the number of bacteria in a given space increases, so, too,
does the concentration of the chemical autoinducer. When
the autoinducer reaches a critical concentration, it diffuses

back into the bacterium or binds to a surface receptor and
triggers the expression of bacterial target genes. Genes
included in the P. aeruginosa quorum-sensing regulons
encode Pseudomonas exotoxin A and other secreted proteins, such as elastase, phospholipase, and alkaline protease.
Why would a pathogen employ quorum sensing to regulate virulence factors? One reason may be to prevent alerting
the host that it is under attack before enough microbes can
accumulate through replication. Tripping the host’s alarms
too early would make eliminating infection easy. Waiting
until a large number of bacteria have amassed before releasing toxins and proteases will increase the chance that the
host can be overwhelmed.

Extracellular Immune Avoidance

This topic was first covered in the discussions of host defense
(Chapter 23) and immunology (Chapter 24). Many bacteria,
such as Streptococcus pneumoniae and Neisseria meningitidis,
produce a thick polysaccharide capsule that envelops the cell.
Capsules help organisms resist phagocytosis in several ways.

CHAPTER 25

Recall that phagocytes must recognize bacterial cell-surface
structures or surface-bound C3b complement factor to begin
phagocytosis (see Section 23.6). A capsule will cover bacterial cell wall components and mannose-containing carbohydrates that phagocytes normally use for attachment. The
uniformity and slippery nature of capsule composition make
it difficult for phagocytes to lock on to the bacterial cell.
But what about complement factor C3b, which can bind
to the bacterial cell? Phagocytes have surface C3b receptors
that latch on to C3b molecules. Capsules will envelop any
C3b complement factor that binds to the bacterial surface,
thereby hiding it from the phagocyte. Fortunately, immune
defense mechanisms can eventually circumvent this avoidance strategy by producing opsonizing antibodies (IgG)
against the capsule itself (see Section 24.2). The Fc regions
of antibodies that bind to the capsule point away from the
bacterium, so they are free to bind Fc receptors on phagocyte membranes. Binding of the Fc region to the phagocyte’s Fc receptor triggers phagocytosis.
Pathogens can also use proteins on the cell surface to
avoid phagocytosis. Staphylococcus aureus has a cell wall protein called protein A that binds to the Fc region of antibodies, hiding the bacteria from phagocytes. This works in two
ways. Protein A can bind to the Fc region of any antibody
before the antibody-binding site ever finds its bacterial target.
Thus, the business end of the antibody—that is, the part with
antigen-binding sites—is pointing away from the microbe.
However, even if the antibody finds its antigen target on one
bacterium, protein A from a second bacterium can bind to
that Fc region, once again blocking phagocyte recognition.
Some microbes can trigger apoptosis in target host cells.
Proteins made by the pathogen enter the host cell and trigger this programmed cell death. How does this help the
pathogen? If a macrophage is targeted for self-destruction,
it cannot destroy the microbe.
Another immune avoidance strategy used by microorganisms, both the extracellular and intracellular types, is to
change their antigenic structure. Genes encoding flagella,
pili, and other surface proteins often use site-specific gene
inversions to express alternative proteins (for example, Salmonella phase variation) or slipped-strand mispairing (see
eTopic 10.1) to add or remove amino acids from a sequence
(see Section 10.1). You can think of these processes as
shape-shifting to avoid recognition.

Intracellular Pathogens

In an effort to escape both innate and humoral immune
mechanisms (see Chapters 23 and 24), many bacterial
pathogens, called intracellular pathogens, seek refuge by
invading host cells. (Viruses, of course, are, by definition,
intracellular pathogens.) Hiding within a host cell temporarily provides the pathogen safe harbor from antibodies

■

MICROBIAL PATHOGENESIS

■

1023

and phagocytic cells. Some bacteria dedicate their entire
lifestyle to intracellular parasitism and are called obligate
intracellular pathogens. Rickettsia, for example, for reasons unknown, will not grow outside a living eukaryotic
cell. Other microbes, such as Salmonella and Shigella, are
considered facultative intracellular pathogens because
they can live either inside host cells or free. We have already
discussed how intracellular pathogens get into cells, but
how do they withstand intracellular attempts to kill them?
Once inside the phagosome, intracellular pathogens
have three options to avoid being killed by a phagolysosome (Fig. 25.29). They can escape the phagosome, prevent phagosome-lysosome fusion, or prefer growth inside
the phagolysosome.
Escaping the phagosome. The Gram-negative bacillus Shi-

gella dysenteriae and the Gram-positive bacillus Listeria
monocytogenes, both of which cause food-borne gastrointestinal disease, use hemolysins to break out of the phagosome
vacuole before fusion (described earlier). By escaping the
phagosome, the bacteria completely avoid lysosomal enzymes.
Once free in the cytoplasm, they enjoy unrestricted growth.
Yet even in the cytoplasm, these microbes have found a way
to redirect host cell function to their own ends.
A fascinating aspect of escaping the phagosome involves
motility. Shigella and Listeria are both nonmotile at 37°C
in vitro; however, they both move around inside the host
cell, even though they have no flagella. How do they move?
These species are equipped with a special device at one end
of the cell that mediates host cell actin polymerization. The
polymerizing actin, called a “rocket tail,” propels the organism forward through the cell (Fig. 25.30A) until it reaches
a membrane. The membrane is then pushed into an adjacent cell, where the organism once again ends up in a vacuole (Fig. 25.29, fate 3). This strategy allows the microbe to
spread from cell to cell without ever encountering the extracellular environment, where it would be vulnerable to attack.
Actin motility is also a feature of some species of Rickettsia
(Fig. 25.31), Mycobacterium, and Burkholderia (see Fig. 3 in
Special Topic 25.1).
Inhibiting phagosome-lysosome fusion. Some intracellular
pathogens avoid lysosomal enzymes by preventing lysosomal
fusion with the phagosome. Salmonella, Mycobacterium,
Legionella, and Chlamydia are good examples. For example,
Legionella pneumophila grows inside alveolar macrophage
phagosomes and produces the potentially fatal Legionnaires’
disease, so named for the veterans group that suffered the first
recognized outbreak, in 1976. The organism, once inside a
phagosome (called a Legionella-containing vacuole, or LCV),
uses a type IV secretion system to secrete proteins through
the vesicle membrane and into the cytoplasm. These bacterial
proteins interfere with the cell signaling pathways that cause

1024

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

phagosome-lysosome fusion. A bacterial protein
called LegC7, for instance, inhibits endosome
trafficking that would lead to lysosome fusion.
The result is that L. pneumophila can grow in
a friendlier vesicle. Interestingly, L. pneumophila is actually a soil and water microbe. Its ability to survive inside macrophages evolved from
its ability to survive in amebas, which serve as a
natural reservoir for this pathogen.
Salmonella Typhi is another pathogen that
prevents phagosome-lysosome fusion, but
this organism eventually leaves the host cell
(exocytosis) and enters extracellular tissue
spaces where macrophages await (Fig. 25.29,
fate 2). The bacterium is once again engulfed,
by a macrophage this time, but again survives inside the macrophage phagosome. The
infected macrophage homes to a regional
lymph node, enters the bloodstream, and,
like a Trojan horse, disseminates Salmonella
throughout the body.

Injected protein effectors

1. A bacterial pathogen attaches
to a host cell membrane.

2. The pathogen induces phagocytosis.

3. Once inside the phagosome, the pathogen has
one of three fates, depending on the pathogen.

Thought Question

25.7 Figure 25.31A shows Shigella forming an

actin tail at one pole. Why do organisms such as
Shigella and Listeria assemble actin-polymerizing proteins at only one pole?

Thriving under stress. In what could be called

Coxiella
Fate 1: Pathogens like
Coxiella burnetii allow
phagosome-lysosome
fusion and differentiate
into a form able to
replicate in the
phagolysosome,
resulting in inclusion
bodies.

the “bring it on” strategy, some intracellular
pathogens prefer the harsh environment of the
phagolysosome. Coxiella burnetii, for example,
grows well in the very acidic phagolysosome
environment (Fig. 25.30B). This obligate
intracellular organism (an organism that grows
only inside another living cell) causes a flu-like
illness called Q fever (query fever). The symptoms of Q fever include sore throat, muscle
aches, headache, and high fever. The illness has
a mortality rate of about 1%, so most people
recover to good health. The organism allows phagosomelysosome fusion because the acidic environment that results
is needed for it to survive and grow.

FIGURE 25.29

Inclusion bodies

Lysosome

■

Alternative fates of intracellular pathogens.

Different pathogens have different strategies for surviving in a host
cell. Some tolerate phagolysosome fusion (Coxiella), others prevent
phagolysosome fusion (Salmonella), and still others escape the
phagosome to replicate in the cytoplasm (Shigella and Listeria).

Thought Question

25.8 How can you determine whether a bacterium is an
intracellular pathogen?

Why some bacteria are obligate intracellular pathogens
is unclear. One intracellular bacterium, Rickettsia prowazekii, a cause of epidemic typhus, appears to be an “energy

parasite” that can transport ATP from the host cytoplasm
and exchange it for spent ADP in the bacterium’s cytoplasm. But this does not explain its obligate intracellular
status, since giving Rickettsia ATP outside a host does not
allow the bacterium to grow. Other factors remain to be
discovered.

CHAPTER 25

■

MICROBIAL PATHOGENESIS

Breakout

■

1025

Actin motility

Actin motility
Breakout

Intercellular spread

Fate 3: Pathogens like Shigella and Listeria break out of the phagosome and then
move throughout the cytoplasm into adjacent cells by forming actin tails.

Shigella/Listeria

Transcytose

Lymph node

Blood vessel

Salmonella

Fate 2, step 1: Pathogens like
Salmonella can remain inside
a phagosome and prevent
fusion with the lysosome.

Fate 2, step 2: Salmonella
Typhi will remain in the
phagosome, which moves
to the host membrane and
expels Salmonella into
extracellular space.

Fate 2, step 3: From there
the bacterium can be engulfed
by a macrophage and survive
within the phagosome.

Thought Question

25.9 Why might killing a host be a bad strategy for a pathogen?

Sleeping with the Enemy

As just described, many bacterial and, of course, viral
pathogens find safe haven by growing inside host cells.
However, from our knowledge of innate and adaptive
immune responses, it is not intuitively obvious why this is
so. After all, infected cells present microbial antigens on

Fate 2, step 4: The
macrophage can travel to
regional lymph nodes and
disseminate the organism
through the circulatory system.

Bacteria
Macrophage

their class I or class II MHC receptors to alert the innate
and adaptive immune systems that the infected host cell
must be killed to resolve the infection. In addition, pieces
of intracellular microbes (flagella, LPS, peptidoglycan) will
bind pattern recognition receptors (TLRs and NLRs) that
activate intracellular inflammasomes. Inflammasomes trigger production of pro-inflammatory cytokines that mediate
inflammation.
So how do intracellular pathogens avoid destruction? It
turns out that these invaders employ a variety of molecular
tricks that misdirect the immune system much as a magician
misdirects an audience. All of these strategies, summarized

1026

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

Actin tail

ELLISON, D. ET AL. INFECTION AND IMMUNITY, FEBRUARY 2008, P. 542-550, VOL. 76, NO. 2 (PHOTO COURTESY OF E. R. FISCHER
AND T. HACKSTADT.)

A. Shigella flexneri (red) and actin tails (green)

Shigella

MARCIA B. GOLDBERG, 2002.

Cytoskeletal
actin

B. Coxiella burnetii

FIGURE 25.31

HOWE ET AL. 2000. INFECT. IMMUN. 68:3815

■ The obligate intracellular pathogen
Rickettsia rickettsii. This SEM shows R. rickettsii (blue, approx.

0.7 μm in length), the cause of Rocky Mountain spotted fever, in
association with host actin (gold). Several pathogens propel themselves through host cytoplasm by polymerizing host actin at one
pole of the bacterial cell.

150 nm

150 nm

FIGURE 25.30 ■ Intracellular pathogens: Shigella motility
and Coxiella development. A. Intracellular Shigella flexneri (fluorescence microscopy), fluorescently stained red (1 µm in length),
moves through the host cytoplasm propelled by actin tails, stained
green. B. A typical vacuole in J774A.1 mouse macrophage cells
infected with Coxiella burnetii at 2 hours (left) and 6 hours (right)
postinfection (TEM). The organism lives in an acidified vacuole and
undergoes a form of differentiation that changes its shape and
alters its interactions with the host cell.

in Figure 25.32, are designed to buy the microbe more
time to overwhelm the host.
Molecular mimicry and subverting antigen presentation.

A variety of bacteria and viruses use mimicry to confuse the
immune system (discussed in Section 24.7). In some cases,
microbial proteins are made that look like cytokines or that
bind to host cells and hitchhike via normal host trafficking
to the nucleus, where the bacterial protein interferes with
cytokine gene expression. One example involving Shigella
is discussed in eTopic 25.9. These factors can manipulate

the balance of helper T cells, for example, and send immunity down the wrong path for combating the microbe.
Microbes, especially viruses, can also interfere with
antigen presentation on the surfaces of infected cells.
Recall from Chapter 24 that proteins made by infectious
agents growing in the cytoplasm of a host cell are broken
down in the cytosol and transported into the ER by the
transporter of antigen peptides (TAP). The viral or bacterial antigens are loaded onto MHC I molecules found on
the ER membrane, and the complexes are sent to the cell
surface. Surface MHC I presents those peptide antigens
to roaming CD8 cytotoxic T cells that will then kill the
infected cell. Any scheme that interrupts MHC I presentation will spare the infected cell and its infectious cargo
from destruction. So how do pathogens derail MHC
presentation?
Collectively, pathogens have four basic ways to subvert
antigen presentation: (1) Make proteins that resist digestion by host proteasomes so that antigens are not processed. (2) Make a protein that blocks the TAP protein
so that processed antigens cannot be loaded onto MHC I
(herpes viruses such as HSV, CMV, and VZV are famous
for this approach). (3) Make a protein that induces TAP

CHAPTER 25

Pathogen

Mimic cytokines

Down-regulate
inflammatory
cytokine
production

Inhibit
apoptosis,
pyroptosis,
necrosis

Alter
antigen
presentation

Inhibit
autophagy

Nucleus

FIGURE 25.32

■ Summary of microbial strategies that
misdirect the immune system. Bacteria and viruses produce

different molecules that can mimic cytokines or transcriptional
regulators, alter cytokine production, prevent programmed cell
death, alter antigen presentation, or inhibit autophagy.

degradation via ubiquitylation (Pseudomonas aeruginosa).
(4) Induce degradation of MHC molecules via ubiquitylation. Ubiquitylation strategies that coerce the host to
degrade MHC proteins are described later.
Flipping cytokine profiles. Many pathogens defy death
by growing inside macrophages that are “armed” with
numerous antimicrobial weapons. Pathogens that can
grow inside macrophages include bacteria such as Salmonella, Yersinia, Listeria, Mycobacterium tuberculosis,
Francisella tularensis, and Chlamydia; as well as protozoans such as Leishmania and Trypanosoma cruzi. How do
they survive? These, and many other pathogens, interrupt
host cell signaling pathways designed to activate macrophage antimicrobial mechanisms. To perform this trick,
most intracellular pathogens inhibit production of proinflammatory cytokines, such as TNF-alpha, IL-8, IL-12,
and IFN-gamma, but encourage production of antiinflammatory cytokines like IL-10, TGF-beta (transforming growth factor beta), and IL-4.
Mycobacterium, T. cruzi, and Leishmania also down-regulate the expression of host membrane receptors for IFNgamma (thereby inhibiting inflammation), and interfere
with downstream regulators that activate the production
of MHC class I proteins, which dulls host immune mechanisms. Reduced MHC I production means less antigen presentation, fewer activated T H1 helper cells, and, thus, fewer
cytotoxic T cells to attack the infected cell.

■

MICROBIAL PATHOGENESIS

■

1027

Stopping programmed cell death. A macrophage that fails
to eliminate infecting pathogens will eventually give up
and try to kill itself and the infecting pathogens through
one of three programmed-cell-death pathways (apoptosis,
necrosis, or pyroptosis). This is a last resort to clear the
infection. Apoptotic cells maintain membrane integrity
during apoptotic death and are engulfed by nearby phagocytes. Inflammation is not provoked, because cytokines are
not released. In contrast, necrosis and pyroptosis initiate
rapid inflammatory responses by secreting inflammatory
cytokines. All of these mechanisms can kill the intracellular pathogen.
To “keep hope alive” and retain their intracellular niche,
intracellular microbes can prevent host cell suicide by interfering with the molecular signals that initiate host death
programs, or they can activate pro-survival mechanisms.
Some pathogens even synthesize microbial mimics of host
anti-apoptotic proteins. Yersinia enterocolitica and Mycobacterium tuberculosis, for instance, prevent pyroptotic cell
death by inhibiting inflammasome formation and caspase-1
activation. Caspase-1 is a protease that initiates pyroptosis.
Herpes viruses (discussed in Chapter 11), which cause
cold sores, genital herpes, mononucleosis, and some cancers, can enter into a latent state. Latency requires shutting down viral replication and integrating viral DNA into
a host genome. But why doesn’t the virus trigger apoptosis in the host cell before becoming latent? Herpes viruses
produce a number of small RNA molecules called microRNAs (miRNAs) that can interfere with the apoptosis program. One such miRNA prevents the translation of two
host cell proteins required for cell death. The miRNAs
bind to regions in the apoptosis mRNAs and promote their
degradation. Once latent, the virus no longer produces any
viral proteins, so the immune system of the infected individual cannot detect the infected cell.
Some intracellular pathogens (Trypanosoma cruzi, Leishmania, and Yersinia pseudotuberculosis) actually tilt macrophage suicide pathways toward apoptosis to promote
pathogen dissemination (recall that apoptotic cells are
engulfed by other phagocytes). Some intracellular pathogens both inhibit and activate host cell death—just not at
the same time. Early in infection, M. tuberculosis (the cause
of tuberculosis) orchestrates the inhibition of host cell suicide pathways to enable the organism to grow, but then
later it promotes suicide as a way to disseminate.
Autophagy is a highly regulated mechanism by which
eukaryotic cells form intracellular vesicles around damaged organelles to scavenge them for nutrients. Autophagy is also used as a universal innate defense mechanism
to fight intracellular pathogens (Fig. 25.33). Autophagic
vacuoles (autophagosomes) can encase these pathogens
and deliver them to degradative lysosomes for destruction. Pathogen components are then sent to endosomes,

1028

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

protein central to autophagosome production. Interactome
studies indicate that RNA viruses, as a group, encode proteins that can interact with 35% of autophagy-associated
proteins, suggesting that autophagy is widely targeted by
pathogens.
Shigella, a cause of bacterial dysentery, avoids autophagy by making tails of polymerized host actin that propel
the microbe through host cytoplasm (described earlier).
This tactic may sometimes work, but the host can stop the
bacterium from making actin tails by wrapping Shigella
in septin filaments, as shown in the 3D rendering in Figure 25.34. Septin cages initially require actin to form, but
then they inhibit actin polymerization. The septin-caged
microbe is now trapped and marked for autophagy. One of
the discoverers of autophagy, Yoshinori Ohsumi, won the
2016 Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine.

Group A streptococci
(GAS)

Plasma
membrane

1. A cluster of Streptococcus
pyogenes cells is endocytosed.

Endosome
2. The pathogen uses the
hemolysin streptolysin O
to escape the phagosome.

Isolation
membrane

Redirecting host ubiquitylation signals. How do bacte-

3. An autophagosome
forms around the
microbe...

ria and viruses misdirect the immune system? One way is
to target a regulatory mechanism common to many host
systems—namely, ubiquitylation (ubiquitination). Ubiquitin is a highly conserved, 76-amino-acid polypeptide in
eukaryotes that can be covalently attached to other proteins. Attachment involves an enzymatic cascade of three
enzymes: E1, E2, and E3 (reviewed in eTopic 8.5). Depending on where ubiquitin is placed on a protein, the protein
can be activated or, alternatively, tagged for destruction by
the host proteasome. While there are only a few E1 and
E2 enzymes, there are hundreds of E3 ubiquitin ligase
enzymes that recognize and tag target proteins with polyubiquitin. There are also deubiquitylation enzymes that can
reverse the process.

Lysosome
4. ...and fuses
with a lysosome.
GAS-specific
autophagosome

5. Lysosomal enzymes kill
and digest the microbe.

■

Autophagy as an innate immune mechanism.

When a pathogen escapes the phagosome, the host cell will try to
form an intracellular vacuole (autophagosome) around the organism
in a second attempt to kill it.

where microbial structures are recognized by endosomal
Toll-like receptors that trigger the innate immune system
(see Chapter 23). The microbial components (antigens)
are also sent to cell compartments rich in major histocompatibility complex II (MHC II) molecules. MHC II molecules then rise to the cell surface and present the microbial
antigens to the adaptive immune system as described in
Chapter 24.
Intracellular pathogens, however, have evolved mechanisms that can prevent autophagy and prolong their
survival. For example, the Nef protein of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and protein M2 of influenza prevent autophagosome formation by targeting beclin 1, a

Septin cage

MOSTOWY ET AL., CELL HOST & MICROBE, VOL 8, NO 5,11/18/2010

FIGURE 25.33

Shigella cell

~0.5 µm

FIGURE 25.34

■ Entrapment of intracytoplasmic bacteria
by septin cage-like structures. Shigella may move in the host

cytoplasm by actin tails or may become trapped by a septin cage
and marked for autophagy.

CHAPTER 25

In contrast to their eukaryotic hosts, viral and bacterial pathogens lack ubiquitylation systems but have evolved
E3 ligases and deubiquitylases that effectively subvert normal host ubiquitylation pathways (Fig. 25.35). Like someone changing signs on a highway, the viral enzymes cause
host signaling systems, and the immune system, to veer off
course.
There are several ways ubiquitylation normally directs
the immune system. In the innate immune system, TLR
pathway proteins are ubiquitylated as a way to induce production of inflammatory cytokines. When a MAMP binds
to a TLR, ubiquitylation of signal induction proteins will
activate the signal. In contrast, proteins that inhibit the
pathway are marked by ubiquitin for destruction. The
result is an activated signal pathway that leads to the formation of inflammatory cytokines (Fig. 25.35, step 1).
To subvert this system, some pathogens produce their
own E3 ligases that divert the normal signal induction
pathways. For example, rotavirus, a major cause of infant
diarrhea, produces an E3 ligase that adds ubiquitin to
activators of NF-kappaB, the transcription regulator that
induces cytokine production (Fig. 25.35, step 2). The
ubiquitylated proteins are destroyed, and NF-kappaB is not
activated. Using a different strategy, the bacterial pathoatt
gen Salmonella enterica produces a deubiquitylase that

MICROBIAL PATHOGENESIS

■

■

1029

removes ubiquitin from a normal inhibitor of NF-kappaB.
The inhibitor is not degraded, which means that NF-kappaB
is not activated and inflammatory cytokines are not made
(step 3). In both instances, inflammation is minimized,
allowing the pathogen to survive.
Ubiquitylation is an important mechanism for adaptive
immunity too. For example, the process regulates when
cell-surface MHC class I and II molecules are expressed in
dendritic cells (Fig. 25.36). Before dendritic cells mature,
MHC molecules are polyubiquitylated and degraded, limiting their placement on cell surfaces. After maturation, however, the MHC molecules are no longer ubiquitylated and,
as a result, accumulate on the cell surface, making dendritic
cells better equipped for antigen presentation. A number
of viruses exploit this process by producing viral E3 ligases
that polyubiquitylate MHC proteins (Fig. 25.36). The
MHC molecules that would present viral proteins to the
immune system are degraded.
Some pathogens even make E3 ligases that ubiquitylate
host proteins that are not normally tagged. One example

TLR

1. MAMP binds TLR.
Triggers cytokine synthesis
and inflammation.

MAMP

2. Rotavirus E3 ligase
marks component in
pathway for proteolysis.
Inhibits inflammation.

Host E3 ligase–mediated
ubiquitylation activates
pathway.

FIGURE 25.35

■ Microbial E3 ligases
and deubiquitylases alter innate
immune systems. When a MAMP binds

to a Toll-like receptor (TLR), a series of
events, including a host E3 ligase–
mediated ubiquitylation, activates the
transcriptional regulator NF-kappaB,
which activates transcription of
inflammatory cytokine genes. The
cytokines are secreted and initiate
inflammatory processes. Microbial E3
ligases (for example, rotavirus E3 ligase)
can ubiquitylate other components
of the NF-kappaB activation pathway and
mark them for destruction. As a result,
cytokine synthesis is inhibited and inflammation is limited. Salmonella makes a
deubiquitylase that removes polyubiquitin
from an inhibitor of NF-kappaB activation.
Deubiquitylation saves the inhibitor from
destruction, allowing continued inhibition
of NF-kappaB activation.

Rotavirus
E3 ligase

Inhibitor

Protease

Salmonella
deubiquitylase

3. Salmonella
deubiquitylase stops
proteolysis of inhibitor.
Limits inflammation.

Host E3
ligase–mediated
ubiquitylation.

Inhibitor
Polyubiquitin

Degradation

NF-κB
activation

Cytokines

Proteasome

Degradation

Inflammation

1030

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY
MHC I

Thought Question

25.10 You have discovered an E3 ligase that specifically
modifies surface proteins of Listeria monocytogenes. Using
what has been presented about toxin entry and protein secretion in Chapter 25, suggest some strategies for delivering this
enzyme into host cells infected with this pathogen.

MHC II

Viral E3
ligases
ER vesicle
Polyubiquitin

To Summarize

Viral E3
ligases

Endosomal
degradation

■

MHC I
ER-associated
degradation

■

■

FIGURE 25.36

Microbial E3 ligases and deubiquitylases
alter adaptive immune systems. MHC class I and class II
■

molecules present antigens on host cell surfaces to helper T cells.
Some viral E3 ligases can ubiquitylate the MHC molecules, marking
them for degradation via endosomal pathways. Other E3 ligases can
ubiquitylate MHC I molecules while in the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER), leading to degradation of the MHC I receptors before they can
be placed on the cell surface.

is found in the interferon signal cascade. Interferons are
secreted by virus-infected host cells, bind to interferon
receptors on uninfected cells, and induce the expression
of numerous genes that protect the uninfected cell from
virus infection. Paramyxoviruses such as mumps and measles viruses produce E3 ligases that ubiquitylate key regulatory components (JAK-STAT) of the interferon signal
cascade, which marks them for destruction. The host cell
then becomes quite vulnerable to virus attack.
These examples demonstrate that ubiquitylation is a
crucial part of immune regulation and a popular target of
pathogens. Gaining an understanding of the ways ubiquitylation directs the immune system and how pathogens
influence that direction could lead to new ways of enhancing host defense.
Not all bacterial E3 ubiquitin ligases target hostencoded proteins. Legionella secretes an E3 ligase effector protein (LubX) that targets another Legionella effector
(SidH) for destruction by the host cell proteasome. LubX
triggers SidH degradation late during the infection. The
role of SidH during the early phase of Legionella infection,
however, is not yet known.
Clearly, facultative and obligate intracellular pathogens
have developed many ingenious strategies to take control of
host cell defenses, but the host, for its part, has also evolved
effective countermeasures.

■

■

■

■

■

■

Two-component signal transduction systems can regulate virulence gene expression in response to the host
environment.
Quorum sensing may prevent pathogens from releasing
toxic compounds too early during infection.
Extracellular pathogens evade the immune system by
hiding in capsules, by changing their surface proteins, or
by triggering apoptosis.
Intracellular bacterial pathogens attempt to avoid the
immune system by growing inside host cells. They use
different mechanisms to avoid intracellular death.
Hemolysins are used by certain pathogens to escape
from the phagosome and grow in the host cytoplasm.
Actin tails are used by some microbes to move within
and between host cells.
Inhibiting phagosome-lysosome fusion is one way
pathogens can survive in phagosomes.
Molecular mechanisms for avoiding the immune system include molecular mimicry, altering cytokine profiles, stopping programmed host cell death, interfering
with autophagy, and redirecting ubiquitylation signals.
Specialized physiologies enable some organisms to
survive in the normally hostile environment of fused
phagolysosomes.

25.7

Experimental Tools That
Probe Pathogenesis

For any scientist studying pathogenic microbes, it is essential to identify virulence genes and determine what they do.
As mentioned in Section 25.2, Falkow’s molecular Koch’s
postulates argue that once a gene has been singled out as a
possible virulence factor, proof requires knocking out the
gene and observing a decrease in virulence, followed by

CHAPTER 25

restoring virulence by replacing the mutant gene. But how
do you identify which genes to test? Earlier, in Section 25.2
(and see also eTopics 25.1 and 25.2), we discussed how virulence genes in microbes can be identified using some clever
selection techniques. Today there exist amazing molecular
techniques that can broadly, and quickly, reveal a microbe’s
overall pathogenic strategy and help scientists focus on
likely virulence genes. In addition, powerful techniques
can now deeply probe how pathogens and hosts respond to
each other during an infection.

Genomics

The sequencing of a pathogen’s genome (discussed in Chapter 7), followed by bioinformatic analysis of the sequence
(described in Chapter 8), can yield valuable information
about a pathogenic organism’s metabolism and can identify
potential pathogenicity islands and virulence genes.
Clues about potential virulence genes can also be
gained by comparing the sequences of virulent and attenuated strains of a pathogen. For example, Leptospira species are spirochetes that cause a zoonotic renal disease in
humans called leptospirosis. Dereck Fouts (J. Craig Venter
Institute), Joseph Vinetz (UC San Diego), and colleagues
recently compared the genome sequences of numerous
Leptospira species differentially classified as pathogenic,
intermediate, and nonpathogenic. They discovered a
subset of genes whose distribution was restricted to the
pathogenic strains, meaning that these genes potentially
contribute to Leptospira pathogenesis or host adaptation. The pathogen-unique genes included, among others, a catalase, a protease able to degrade complement, a
large family of virulence-modifying proteins of unknown
function, and a CRISPR-Cas system. The results provided
many new directions for research that probes leptospiral
pathogenesis.
DNA sequencing can also reveal how to grow so-called
obligate intracellular pathogens in the laboratory. The
Gram-positive microorganism Tropheryma whipplei is an
intracellular pathogen that causes the gastrointestinal illness called Whipple’s disease. The symptoms of Whipple’s
disease include diarrhea, intestinal bleeding, abdominal
pain, loss of appetite, weight loss, fatigue, and weakness.
Though identified, the causative agent had never been
grown outside of fibroblast cells, making it nearly impossible to study its physiology. Once the complete genome
sequence of T. whipplei became available, however, Didier
Raoult and colleagues at the Marseille School of Medicine discovered that the organism lacks the machinery
to make several amino acids. The investigators were then
able to design a cell-free culture medium that supported
the growth of T. whipplei. Similar approaches were used to
coax cell-free growth of the so-called obligate intracellular

■

MICROBIAL PATHOGENESIS

■

1031

pathogen Coxiella burnetii. C. burnetii causes the respiratory infection Q fever. Genomic strategies like these should
lead to other successes in growing previously unculturable
intracellular pathogens.

Transcriptomics

Other major goals of infectious disease research include
learning how a pathogen causes an infection, how the host
responds to the infection, and how the pathogen responds
to the host’s response. The situation is much like watching
two armies waging war with numerous weapons at their
disposal. Is there a way to view the molecular drama of
host-pathogen interactions? There is now.
Dual RNA sequencing. RNAseq analysis has been used to
separately monitor transcript modulation in pathogens during the course of an infection, or to view the host’s transcriptional response to a pathogen. Jörg Vogel (Fig. 25.37A) at
the University of Würzburg and colleagues recently used
RNAseq to simultaneously profi le the changing host and
pathogen transcriptomes during Salmonella infection of
human host cells. The scientists started by infecting human
cells with GFP-labeled Salmonella and using fluorescenceactivated cell sorting (FACS; see Section 4.3) to select host
cells at two different stages of infection: 4 hours (10 bacteria
per cell) and 24 hours (75 bacteria per cell) (Fig. 25.37B,
see also Fig. 25.27). The researchers then used Illumina
technology (see Sections 7.6 and 10.6) to simultaneously
sequence pathogen and host cell transcripts. Their analysis
showed that 4 hours postinfection, bacterial transcripts of
SPI-1 genes decreased relative to levels just prior to infection, while the transcript levels of SPI-2 genes increased
(Fig. 25.37C). Their analysis also found that host genes
activated by NF-kappaB were elevated at 4 hours postinfection (Fig. 25.37D). NF-kappaB is a transcriptional activator of cytokine genes. The NF-kappaB result illustrates the
host response to Salmonella invasion.
The scientists then refined the strategy to identify Salmonella small RNA transcripts that became induced during
infection. The most highly induced was the 80-nt sRNA
called PinT (PhoP-induced sRNA in intracellular Salmonella). This sRNA was found to control the transition from
SPI-1 to SPI-2 expression. By altering the timing of this
transition, PinT also influenced many other aspects of host
cell physiology, including production of cytokine IL-8 and
mitochondrial gene expression. Figure 25.38 shows how
the loss of PinT led to relocalization of mitochondria (red)
in infected host cells.
The simultaneous examination of host and pathogen
transcriptional profiles by dual RNAseq techniques will
reveal other hidden gene functions in pathogens with profound effects on host cells.

1032

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

A.

B.

Infection
1. GFP Salmonella
infect host cells.

GFP-expressing
Salmonella

HeLa
GFPNoninfected

EMBL PHOTOLAB MARIETTA SCHUPP

Fix

2. Host cells are collected,
fixed, and passed through
a FACS machine to
separate infected and
uninfected cells.

C. 4 hours postinfection

Sequencing
of total RNA

FACS

GFPInfected

3. RNA is extracted and
converted to cDNA, and
bacterial and host cDNA
sequences are analyzed.
Transcriptomes are
separated by computer.

D. 24 hours postinfection

FIGURE 25.37

SAA1

IL24

IL33

SAA2

PLAT

NRG1

PI3

1

SERPINE2

0.1

10

CEPBD

1

GFP+
GFP–

SOCS3

SPI-1

100

SERPINB1

Fold change in expression
(compared to mock)

10

sopD
sipD
sopE
sopE2
sopB
sipC
sptP
sipB
sipA
sopA
sseK1
gogB
steA
sseG
sspH2
sseF
sopD2
sseI
pipB2
pipB
steC

Fold change in expression
(compared to 0 h)

SPI-2
100

Dual RNAseq captures the full transcript repertoire of Salmonella-infected human cells. A. Jörg Vogel uses
dual RNAseq to study the interactions between pathogens and their hosts. B. Dual RNAseq work flow. C. Compared to extracellular Salmonella (0 h), intracellular bacteria at 4 hours postinfection repress SPI-1 and induce SPI-2 effector genes. D. Invaded (GFP+) host cells at 24 hours
postinfection activate NF-kappaB-associated immunity genes. Source: Alexander J. Westermann et al. 2016. Nature 529:496–501, fig. 1A, C, E.
■

∆pinT

pinT +

15 µm

FIGURE 25.38

■ Impact of PinT on host mitochondria. Uninfected (mock) host cells were compared to host cells infected with wildtype (WT) Salmonella, ΔpinT Salmonella, or complemented pinT+ Salmonella (a ΔpinT strain containing a separate copy of wild-type pinT+).
The white arrowhead points to a prominent cluster of relocalized mitochondria. Green = Salmonella; red = mitochondria; blue = nuclei.

CHAO ET AL. 2016. NATURE 529: 496-501.

WT

Merge

Mock

CHAPTER 25

Cell Biology

■

MICROBIAL PATHOGENESIS

Secreted protein

You have seen numerous examples throughout this and previous chapters in which fluorescent stains, proteins (GFP), and
antibodies combined with fluorescent microscopy were used
to identify dramatic alterations in host cell structures, as well
as the movement/location of bacterial or host cell proteins
during the course of an infection. A relatively new fluorescent
technology has been developed that can identify which host
cells during an infection have been targeted by translocated
microbial effector proteins. The affected host cells fluoresce
and can be sorted by a FACS machine for closer examination.
The technique relies on fluorescence resonance energy
transfer, FRET (Fig. 25.39). FRET employs a fluorescent probe molecule composed of a donor fluorophore
linked to an acceptor fluorophore. The emission spectrum
of the donor overlaps with the absorption spectrum of the
acceptor, essentially quenching donor fluorescence. Breaking the link between the two fluorophores, however, separates them. The donor fluorophore, now free from the
quenching molecule, will produce strong, detectible emission upon excitation. This FRET strategy has been used to
identify subsets of host cells targeted by any of the type III,
IV, or VI secretion systems that pathogens employ to translocate effector proteins into host cells.
The technique involves constructing a translational
fusion between a gene encoding a bacterial effector protein
and a beta-lactamase gene (Fig 25.39, step 1; see Chapter 12). Beta-lactamase is an enzyme that cleaves the antibiotic penicillin and will also cleave the fluorescent probe
(see Chapter 27). Once expressed, the fusion protein can
be translocated from the pathogen directly into host cells
(step 2), but not all types of host cells are targeted. Host
cells that receive the protein can be identified by adding the
fluorescent reporter CCF4-AM. The quenched fluorescent
reporter enters all host cells, but fluorophore and quencher
can be separated only by host cells that received the betalactamase-effector fusion protein (step 3). Fluorescence
microscopy or FACS analysis can then identify those cells.
A.

Bacterial
cell

1033

β-Lactamase

1. A translational fusion
between an effector
protein and β-lactamase
is constructed in the
bacterial cell.

Effector/β-Lactamase
hybrid protein

Type III, IV, or
VI secretion

Acceptor
fluorophore
Donor
fluorophore

2. Protein secretion
system translocates
fusion protein to target
host cell.

3. After incubating the
pathogen and host cells
together, the fluorescent
probe CCF4-AM is
added to all host cells.
Host cells that received
the fusion protein can
cleave the probe and
will fluoresce blue.

CCF4-AM
cleavage

CCF4-AM

■

Eukaryotic
cell

FIGURE 25.39

■ FRET detection of bacterial effector
protein translocation to host cells. The emission wavelength

of the released donor fluorophore is detected (blue). The emission
wavelength of the acceptor fluorophore (green) is different from that
of the donor.

Sunny Shin (Fig. 25.40A) and colleagues at the University of Pennsylvania used this technology to identify which in vivo host cells are targeted by the T4SS of

B.
Cleaved

Legionella

Merge

COURTESY OF SUNNY SHIN

Uncleaved

T4SS-positive

T4SS-negative

©JASMINE RAMIREZ

1

2

3

4

FIGURE 25.40 ■ Legionella pneumophila translocates BlaM-RalF into mouse macrophages. A. Sunny Shin studies how bacterial pathogens manipulate host defenses. B. Macrophage

monolayers were infected with dot+ (T4SS-positive) and Δdot (T4SS-negative) Legionella and
treated with CCF4-AM fluorescent probe. Column 1: Uninfected cells were scanned for uncleaved
probe (green). Column 2: Infected host cells were scanned for cleaved probe (blue). Column 3:
Infected cells were immunostained for Legionella (red). The immunostain does not differentiate live
from dead bacteria. Column 4: Merged images from columns 1, 2, and 3.

CHAPTER 26

■

MICROBIAL DISEASES

■

1037

CHAPTER 26
Microbial Diseases

T

26.1 Diagnosing Microbial Diseases

he impact of infectious disease on the world’s
population is staggering. The number of
deaths caused directly by infections or as a
consequence of underlying conditions such as cancer, smoking, or drug abuse, makes infectious disease
the leading contributor to death in the world. There
are over 1,400 different species of viruses, bacteria,
fungi, and protozoa that infect humans. In Chapter 26
we explore the major types and etiologies of infections and introduce the art of diagnosis.

26.2 Skin, Soft-Tissue, and Bone Infections
26.3 Respiratory Tract Infections
26.4 Gastrointestinal Tract Infections
26.5 Genitourinary Tract Infections
26.6 Cardiovascular and Systemic Infections
26.7 Central Nervous System Infections

C U R R E N T R E S E A RC H

highlight

A N I N T E RV I E W W I T H

Zika virus. Initially discovered in 1947 from the Zika Forest of
Uganda, this Aedes mosquito–borne virus was thought to cause
only mild rashes and fever. In May 2015, however, Zika virus
spread from central Africa to South America, where it infected
thousands. Many pregnant women became infected and delivered babies with very small heads, a consequence of incomplete
brain development. Could the virus have caused neonatal microcephaly? Recently, Tatjana AvŠiČ Županc and colleagues discovered direct evidence of the link when they found Zika virus in
the brain of a microcephalic fetus (arrows in the figure).

TATJANA AVŠIČ ŽUPANC, MICROBIOLOGIST, UNIVERSITY OF

UNIVERSITY OF LJUBLJANA

LJUBLJANA, SLOVENIA

We began studying the link between
Zika and microcephaly after receiving autopsy material from a fetus
suspected of having an intrauterine
infection. The mother was a volunteer
in Brazil when she became pregnant. At
28 weeks of pregnancy she returned to Europe, where ultrasound uncovered fetal anomalies. By week 32, there were
clear signs of intrauterine growth retardation, microcephaly,
and brain calcifications. The fetus was given a poor prognosis, and the mother decided to terminate the pregnancy.

100 nm

MLAKAR ET AL., N.ENGL J MED 374: 951-958. FIG 3

Source: Mlakar et al. N. Engl. J. Med. 374:951–958.

Zika virus

Zika virus is not common in Slovenia, where you work. What compelled
you to study this virus?

What is the significance of recovering the entire genome
of Zika virus in fetal brain tissue?
Our results present strong evidence of the teratogenic
potential of Zika virus. While not definitive proof, demonstrating viral particles and a high load of Zika virus RNA in
the brain samples, noting the absence of other pathogens,
and recovering a complete Zika genome sequence represent compelling evidence that congenital brain malformations associated with Zika virus infection during pregnancy
are a consequence of viral replication in the fetal brain.
1037

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

Infectious diseases have challenged human existence for
millions of years. Our tenacity as a species is due in no small
way to our growing ability to diagnose, treat and prevent
known infections, and to identify new emerging ones. The
Current Research Highlight is an example of the latter.
By discovering the viral genome in the brain of a microcephalic fetus, Tatjana Avšič Županc and neuropathologist
Mara Popović (Fig. 26.1) provided a direct link between
Zika virus and microcephaly. The story of Zika virus is still
unfolding; we don’t yet know how discovering Zika virus
in fetal brain tissue will impact diagnosis or treatment. But
ultimately it will.
In Chapter 26 we discuss a wide variety of infectious
microbes by describing their infectious routes, the pathologies they cause, and the symptoms that result. We also
examine prevention strategies such as vaccinations when
available. Antimicrobial treatments are surveyed later in
Chapter 27, while laboratory diagnostics and epidemiological considerations are examined in Chapter 28.
What we present in this chapter is not an exhaustive
compendium of microbial illnesses, but a representative
sampling of infections that illustrate key aspects of microbial disease. The material is arranged and presented so as to
integrate your knowledge of microbiology and immunology within the framework of the practice of medicine and
the study of infectious disease.

26.1

Diagnosing Microbial
Diseases

What is the best way to classify microbial diseases? Microbial diseases are often presented from the microbe’s point
of view; for example, where in the body does E. coli cause
disease? Classifying diseases by organism is useful when
examining the ways a given species can cause disease in different organ systems. For instance, E. coli can cause genitourinary tract infections, gastrointestinal infections, and
meningitis. How do the various strains causing these diseases differ from one another?
Pathogens can also be classified by their route of infection (or portal of entry; see Chapter 25). In this approach,
pathogens are grouped as food-borne, airborne, bloodborne, or sexually transmitted; or grouped by transmission
such as fecal-oral, respiratory, or insect-borne. However,
once having entered the body, different pathogens can
again infect widely diverse organ systems. In Chapter 26,
we look at infectious agents from the vantage point of the
infected organ. We ask, for example, what pathogens cause
lung infections, and how are they differentially diagnosed?
The organ approach for classifying microbial diseases is
more attuned to how health care workers interact with a

SIMON BREZOVAR, PH.D.

1038

FIGURE 26.1 ■ Linking Zika and microcephaly. Neuropathologist Mara Popović (pictured) worked with Tatjana Avšič Županc
to provide an important link between the Zika virus and neonatal
microcephaly. The background image shows a fetal brain affected by
Zika (left), which is threefold smaller than the age-matched control
(right).

patient. An individual who goes to a clinician complaining
of a fever, cough, and chest pain does not typically report
having encountered a particular bacterium. The clinician
must determine from the patient that the disease is localized to the chest and then theorize that it may be a respiratory tract infection. Appropriate samples are then collected
and sent to a clinical microbiology laboratory, where data
are generated to confirm or dispute the presence of a specific etiological agent, such as Streptococcus pneumoniae or
other lung pathogens. So how is the infectious cause of a
disease diagnosed?

The Art of Diagnosis

Diagnosing an infectious disease is not just a matter of taking a specimen, ordering a test, and prescribing a drug. The
clinician first needs to figure out which microbes, out of
hundreds, are possible causes. When you go to the clinic,
what does a clinician first ask? “What brings you here
today?” followed by “How long have you had these symptoms?” and perhaps “Where have you traveled recently?”
This is not idle conversation; the clinician is taking a patient
history.
Because many infectious diseases display similar symptoms, a patient history can provide clues about the possible

CHAPTER 26

■

MICROBIAL DISEASES

■

1039

DENNIS KUNKEL/PHOTOTAKE

1 +m

1 +m

NIAID/CDC

B.

A.

FIGURE 26.2

■ Examples of bacteria that cause zoonotic diseases. A. Francisella tularensis, the cause of tularemia, a highly infectious disease spread usually via a tick vector but also through cuts (colorized SEM). B. Coxiella burnetii, the cause of Q fever (colorized TEM).
This irregularly shaped organism undergoes developmental stages that range in size from 0.2 to 1 µm.

culprit. For example, Vibrio cholerae and enterotoxigenic
E. coli both produce diarrheal diseases characterized by
cramps, lethargy, and liters of watery stool each day. So
when a patient presents these symptoms, how does the clinician know what microbes to look for? Here is where a
good patient history can make all the difference. Although
cholera is not commonly seen in the United States, a clinician might suspect cholera if the patient recently traveled
to or emigrated from an endemic area where the disease is
regularly observed. This travel information is not gained
by examining the patient but comes from talking with the
patient and taking a patient history.
Many questions asked during the course of taking a
patient’s social history can seem irrelevant or intrusive to
the patient, who only wants relief from the symptoms. For
instance: “Do you have any hobbies? What is your occupation? What foods have you eaten recently? Does your child
attend day care? Has anyone in your family had similar
symptoms?” All of those questions address possible sources
of the infectious agent. Other questions can reveal highrisk behavior that can lead to certain infections. “Do you
smoke, drink, or take recreational drugs? Have you had
multiple sex partners? Do you use contraception?”
Answers to these questions can provide important diagnostic clues to the astute clinician. For example, learning that a man suffering from enlarged glands, fever, and
headaches also likes to hunt and recently killed rabbits can
be important. The patient may have been exposed to the
Gram-negative, rod-shaped bacterium Francisella tularensis (Fig. 26.2A), a facultative intracellular pathogen that
infects various wild animals and is the cause of tularemia,

an illness also known as “rabbit fever.” The patient could
have accidentally infected a cut while cleaning his kill. Tularemia is an example of a zoonotic disease, an infection that
normally affects animals but can be transmitted to humans.
Or consider the case of a woman with acute pneumonia. Upon learning that the woman is a sheep farmer, the
clinician considers Coxiella burnetii as one of the possible
causes of the infection (the list of possible causes is called
the differential). C. burnetii is a pathogenic bacterial species that infects sheep and is shed in large quantities in the
animal’s amniotic fluid or placenta (Fig. 26.2B). Dried
soil contaminated with C. burnetii can become aerosolized whenever the dirt is disturbed, and any human (such
as a farmer) who inhales the dried particles can develop the
lung infection Q fever. If the woman were an accountant,
C. burnetii would be lower on the differential.
Because patient histories are so helpful in diagnosing
infectious diseases, we will present several case histories in
the following sections and segue into discussions of various
microbes that can infect each organ system. Key aspects of
infectious diseases will emerge as we proceed.

To Summarize
■

■

Pathogens can be classified as food-borne, airborne,
blood-borne, or sexually transmitted.
Understanding infectious disease requires knowledge
of the organ system, the portal of entry, and the infectious organism.

■

■

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

Patient histories are vital in diagnosing microbial
diseases.

Gram-positive organism, often a normal inhabitant of the
nares (nostrils), can infect a cut or gain access to the dermis via a hair follicle. It possesses a number of enzymes that
contribute to disease, including coagulase, which helps coat
the organism with fibrin, thereby walling off the infection
from the immune system and antibiotics. As a result, boils
generally require surgical drainage in addition to antibiotic
therapy. As noted earlier, some strains of S. aureus also produce toxic shock syndrome toxin, a superantigen that can
lead to serious systemic symptoms. Recall that a superantigen links and activates antigen-presenting cells and T cells
by binding to the outside of MHC class II receptors and
T-cell receptors. Antigen recognition is not required. As a
result, many different T cells become activated to release a
flood of cytokines (see Chapters 24 and 25).
A particularly dangerous strain of Staphylococcus aureus
is called methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA). S. aureus
infections are commonly treated with penicillin-like drugs,
such as oxacillin (a form of methicillin). MRSA has developed
resistance to methicillin (oxacillin) and many other penicillinlike drugs through a mutation that alters one of the proteins
(called a penicillin-binding protein, PBP) involved in cell wall
synthesis (see Chapter 27). Because methicillin is normally
used as a first line of defense against staphylococcal infections, treatment failure of MRSA can be life-threatening, and
we need to use alternative drugs, such as vancomycin.
MRSA, originally seen mainly as hospital-acquired
(nosocomial) infections, are no longer contained only in
hospitals. Individuals who have not been in a hospital are
being infected with MRSA in what are called communityacquired MRSA (CA-MRSA) infections. CA-MRSA infections are occurring at an epidemic rate in the United States
(an incidence of approximately 20 per 100,000 population).

Zoonotic diseases are animal diseases accidentally transmitted to humans.

26.2

Skin, Soft-Tissue, and
Bone Infections

The basic shape and appearance of the human body is dictated by bones, skin, and soft tissues such as muscle and
underlying connective tissues. Because these organ systems
and tissues collectively shape and maintain body architecture, infections that threaten their integrity will be discussed together. Infections that can affect one of these
tissues can also spread directly to another tissue.
Skin and soft-tissue infections range from simple boils to
severe, complicated, so-called flesh-eating diseases that can
be caused by a variety of bacteria, fungi, and viruses (see
Table 26.1). Recall that the integrity of the skin, as well as
the presence of normal skin microbiota, prevents infection.
However, even minor insults to the skin (such as a paper
cut) can result in infections, most of which are caused by
the Gram-positive pathogen Staphylococcus aureus. Healthy
individuals develop infections of the skin only rarely,
whereas people with underlying immunosuppressive diseases such as diabetes are at much higher risk.

Boils

Staphylococcus aureus (Fig. 26.3A) is a common cause of
painful skin infections called boils, or carbuncles. This

B.

3 µm

FIGURE 26.3
skin syndrome.

■

DENNIS KUNKEL/PHOTOTAKE

A.

2007 INTERACTIVE MEDICAL MEDIA LLC

1040

Staphylococcus aureus. A. S. aureus (colorized SEM). B. Exfoliative toxin from some strains of S. aureus causes scalded

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

Seventy percent of staphylococcal skin infections are now
caused by MRSA. Thus, a physician can no longer assume
that a patient walking into the office with a staphylococcal
infection will respond to methicillin-like drugs such as oxacillin. The doctor must assume that it may be MRSA. As
a result, treatment regimens around the country, and the
world, are being forced to change. Today, vancomycin and
linezolid are typically used to treat staph infections. Antibiotics are discussed in Chapter 27.
Other staphylococcal diseases are caused by toxin-producing strains in which the organism remains localized but
the toxin disseminates. We have already mentioned TSST,
but there are other toxins. For example, some strains of
S. aureus produce a toxin called exfoliative toxin, which
causes a blistering disease in children called staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome (Fig. 26.3B). Exfoliative toxin,
like TSST, is a superantigen (described in Section 24.3). In
addition, exfoliative toxin cleaves a skin cell adhesion molecule that, when inactivated, results in blisters.
Thought Question

26.1 Does Staphylococcus aureus have to disseminate

through the circulation to produce the symptoms of scalded
skin syndrome (SSS)? Explain why or why not.

Table 26.1 presents this and other common infections
of the skin and soft tissues.

Case History: Necrotizing Fasciitis
by “Flesh-Eating” Bacteria

One weekend in June, Cassi was camping with her three
children. She suffered a minor cut on her finger, which she

FIGURE 26.4

What kind of organism can cause this type of devastating disease? The disease necrotizing fasciitis, also known
incorrectly as “flesh-eating disease,” is rare and is often
caused by the Gram-positive coccus Streptococcus pyogenes
(Fig. 26.4A), a microbe normally associated with throat
infections (pharyngitis). Although sometimes described as a
recently emerging infectious disease, necrotizing fasciitis was
first discovered in 1783, in France. Its incidence may have
risen recently owing to the increased use of nonsteroidal,
anti-inflammatory drugs (such as ibuprofen), which increase
a person’s susceptibility to infection (see Section 25.2).
In this case history, Cassi probably had this organism on
her skin when the injury to her side occurred. The injured
area probably suffered an invisible microabrasion, providing

B.
COURTESY OF WILLIAM SCHWANN, UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN-LA
CROSSE

A.

bandaged properly. She also injured the left side of her body
while playing sports with her kids. Not thinking much of
either of her minor injuries, she went to bed. Two days later,
Cassi was extremely ill. Her symptoms included vomiting,
diarrhea, and a fever. She was also in severe pain where she
had injured her side, and the area had begun to bruise (the
skin was not broken). By the next day she could barely get out
of bed, and by the end of that night she was having difficulty
breathing and could not see. Her side began to leak fluid and
blood. Cassi was admitted to the hospital in septic shock, with
no detectable blood pressure. An infectious disease specialist
diagnosed the problem as necrotizing fasciitis, and she was
rushed into surgery. In an effort to save her life, about 7% of
her body surface was removed. Because the large wound infection in her side would need to resolve before a skin graft could
be performed to repair it, the hole in Cassi’s body was left wide
open (Fig. 26.4B). Long-term efforts to maintain her blood
pressure included vasopressors that led to gangrene in her fingers (Fig. 26.4C). After nearly 3 months and several operations, Cassi recovered.

C.

4 +m

COURTESY CASSI MOORE

■

COURTESY CASSI MOORE

1042

■ Flesh-eating Streptococcus pyogenes. A. Flesh was removed from patient Cassi in an effort to stop the spread of necrotizing fasciitis. B. Sepsis resulting from the infection caused Cassi’s blood pressure to fall to critical levels. The gangrene of her fingers was
an unavoidable consequence of the vasopressor agents given to maintain her blood pressure. Vasopressors raise blood pressure by constricting blood vessels. Unfortunately, long-term use of the vasopressors limited blood flow to Cassi’s fingers, causing death of her tissues (necrosis). C. Gram stain of S. pyogenes. Each cell is approx. 1 µm in diameter.

CHAPTER 26

a good growth environment for the organism, leading to the
secretion of potent toxins and death of surrounding tissues.
The bacteria will spread in subcutaneous tissue, destroying fat
and fascia without initially harming the skin itself. Fascia is the
sheath of thin, fibrous tissue that covers muscles and organs.
Rapid, aggressive surgical removal of affected tissue and
antibiotic treatment is required in these extreme cases, even
before the clinical microbiology lab has had time to identify
the organism. In this approach to antibiotic treatment, called
empiric therapy, one or more antibiotics are given to “cover”
(kill) the most likely causative agents. Therapy can include
clindamycin and metronidazole (which act against anaerobes
and Gram-positive cocci) and gentamicin (a drug particularly
effective against Gram-negative microbes). (Chapter 27 further
discusses these and other antibiotics.) Often, however, antibiotic treatment of patients with necrotizing fasciitis is ineffective
because of insufficient blood supply to the affected tissues.
A less aggressive but similar skin infection is cellulitis.
Cellulitis is a non-necrotizing inflammation of the dermis
that does not involve the fascia or muscles, but is characterized by localized pain, swelling, tenderness, erythema, and
warmth. S. pyogenes is the most frequent cause of cellulitis
in immunocompetent adults, but a number of other bacteria, including Staphylococcus aureus, Gram-negative bacilli,
and anaerobes, can also cause this skin infection.
Streptococcus pyogenes wields many different virulence
factors, including M protein (pilus-like), superantigen exotoxins, and secreted enzymes such as hyaluronidase and
DNase (some of these are described in Chapter 25). The
sources of many established virulence factor genes in S. pyogenes are the numerous prophages (phage genomes) integrated into the bacterial genome. Prophages constitute
approximately 10% of the organism’s genome. One study
found that a soluble factor produced by human pharyngeal
cells can facilitate activation of at least some of these phages
and cause horizontal transfer of the associated virulence
factors between strains of this pathogen. Prophage activation and phage production are discussed in Chapter 6.

Thought Question

26.2 Why would treatment of some infections require
multiple antibiotics?

Osteomyelitis

Osteomyelitis is a bone infection caused by bacteria with
accompanying inflammation and bone destruction. All
bones can be infected, but the lower extremities are most
commonly involved. Bone can be infected in several ways.
Acute trauma or surgery can directly introduce organisms
into affected bone. Organisms from an adjacent soft-tissue
infection can spread to nearby bone. Organisms can also

■

MICROBIAL DISEASES

■

1043

spread from peripheral sites of infection to bone through
the circulation (hematogenous seeding), most commonly
the vertebrae because they are well vascularized.
Organisms that commonly cause osteomyelitis include
staphylococci (Staphylococcus aureus), streptococci (Streptococcus pyogenes), Gram-negative bacilli (Pseudomonas,
Escherichia), and some anaerobes (Bacteroides). Bone biopsy is
usually needed to identify the organism. Host factors that contribute to osteomyelitis include diabetes (when a diabetic foot
wound goes untreated), children with sickle-cell disease, joint
prosthetics, and intravenous drug use. Antibiotic treatment of
osteomyelitis is challenging because most bones are not well
vascularized. So debridement is also necessary.

Viral Diseases Causing Skin Rashes

Several viruses can produce skin rashes, although their
route of infection is usually through the respiratory tract.
Measles, for example (see Section 6.1), is a highly contagious viral infection caused by a paramyxovirus, whose
hallmark symptom is skin rash (see Fig. 6.2D). The first
signs of measles, also known as rubeola, are fever, cough,
runny nose, and red eyes occurring 9–12 days after exposure. A few days later, spots (Koplik’s spots) appear in the
mouth, along with a sore throat. Then a skin rash develops
that typically starts on the face and spreads down the body.
The virus replicates in the lymph nodes and spreads to the
bloodstream (viremia), where it can infect endothelial cells
of the blood vessels. The rash occurs when T cells begin to
interact with these infected cells.
Although skin rash is the main symptom of measles,
infection can also cause respiratory symptoms and complications, including pneumonia, bronchitis, croup, and even
a fatal encephalitis in immunocompromised patients. In the
United States, measles has been almost completely eliminated by the measles, mumps, and rubella (MMR) multivalent vaccine. Worldwide, however, measles is still a serious
problem in places where vaccinations are not routine.
Rubella virus, a togavirus, causes a maculopapular rash
known as German measles, or three-day measles. The rash
is similar to but less red than that of measles (Fig. 26.5).
German measles is an infection that affects primarily the
skin and lymph nodes and is usually transmitted from person to person by aerosolization of respiratory secretions. It is
not dangerous in adults or children; the virus can, however,
cross the placenta in a pregnant woman and infect her fetus.
If the virus crosses the placenta within the first trimester, the
result is congenital rubella syndrome, which can cause death
or serious congenital defects in the developing fetus.
Other viruses affecting the skin, such as chickenpox,
the related disease shingles, smallpox, and human papillomavirus, are included in Table 26.1 and discussed in
eTopic 26.1. The vaccination schedule for preventing these
diseases is provided in Table 24.1.

1044

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

FIGURE 26.5

Rubella virus

400 nm

CDC/DR. FRED MURPHY; SYLVIA WHITFIELD

B.

PETER ROWE, MD/ DERMATLAS

A.

German measles. A. Skin rash caused by rubella virus. B. Rubella virus budding from the cell surface to form an enveloped virus particle (approx. 50–70 nm; TEM).
■

To Summarize
■

■

■

■

■

■

Staphylococcus aureus and Streptococcus pyogenes are
common bacterial causes of skin infections. The organisms usually infect through broken skin.
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA)
has become an important cause of community-acquired
staphylococcal infections.
Necrotizing fasciitis is usually caused by Streptococcus
pyogenes, but it can be the result of other infections.
Infections of the skin can disseminate via the bloodstream to other sites in the body.
Osteomyelitis, usually caused by Staphylococcus aureus,
begins with direct bone trauma, hematogenous seeding,
or contact with a nearby soft-tissue infection.
Rubeola and rubella viruses infect through the respiratory tract, but their main manifestation is the production
of similar maculopapular skin rashes.

26.3

Respiratory Tract
Infections

Lung and upper respiratory tract infections are among the
most common diseases of humans. Many different bacteria, viruses, and fungi are well adapted to grow in the lung.
Successful lung pathogens come equipped with appropriate attachment mechanisms and countermeasures to avoid
various lung defenses (such as alveolar macrophages). One
reemerging bacterial pathogen, Bordetella pertussis, the

cause of whooping cough, inhibits the mucociliary escalator by binding to lung cilia (eTopic 26.2). Although many
microbes can infect the lung, most respiratory diseases are
of viral origin, and most viral infections (such as the common cold) do not spread beyond the lung. Fortunately, viral
diseases by and large are self-limiting and typically resolve
within 2 weeks; however, the damage caused by a primary
viral infection can lead to secondary infections by bacteria.
Bacterial infections of the lung, whether of primary or
secondary etiology, require intervention. Today this means
antibiotic therapy. Before the advent of antibiotics, the only
recourse was to insert a tube into the patient’s back to drain
fluid accumulating in the pleural cavity around the lung
(a pathological process known as pleural effusion). Unless
released, the pressure on the lung will collapse the alveoli
and make breathing difficult.
Viral infections predispose patients to secondary bacterial infections in several ways. Viral lung infections cause
the patient to dehydrate, which increases mucus viscosity in
the airways. Increased mucus viscosity limits motility of the
mucociliary escalator (described in Section 23.1), making it
harder to eliminate bacterial pathogens. To keep the escalator moving, cold sufferers are advised to drink plenty of
fluids to decrease mucus viscosity. Another factor leading
to secondary bacterial infections is that viruses can inhibit
key aspects of lung innate-immune mechanisms that prevent
bacterial growth. Note that many deaths resulting from
viral influenza are caused by secondary bacterial infections.

Case History: Bacterial Pneumonia

In March, James, an 80-year-old resident of a New Jersey nursing home, had a fever accompanied by a productive
cough with brown sputum (mucous secretions of the lung that

CHAPTER 26

COURTESY YALE SCHOOL OF MEDICINE

RML
fissure

Bacteria

B. Streptococcus pneumoniae
C. Relative incidence of pneumonia
Streptococcus pneumoniae 36%
Chlamydophila pneumoniae 16%
Viruses 11%
Mycoplasma pneumoniae 11%
Legionella 7%
Haemophilus influenzae 6%
Gram-neg. enteric bacteria 4%
Chlamydophila psittaci 2%
Coxiella burnetii 1.6%
Staphylococcus aureus 1.6%
Moraxella catarrhalis 1%
Other 2.7%

FIGURE 26.6 ■ Pneumonia caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae. A. X-ray view of a patient with lobar pneumonia. Infiltrate

in the right upper lobe (RUL) is caused by S. pneumoniae. The sharp
lower border represents the upper boundary of the right middle lobe
(RML) fissure (arrow). B. Micrograph of S. pneumoniae. Sputum sample showing numerous PMNs and extracellular diplococci in pairs and
short chains. Bacteria range from 0.5 to 1.2 µm in diameter. C. Relative incidence of pneumonia caused by various microorganisms.

can be coughed up). He reported to the attending physician
that he had pain on the right side of his chest and suffered
from night sweats. Blood tests revealed that his white blood
cell (WBC) count was 14,000/μl (normal is 5,000–10,000/μl)
with a makeup of 77% segmented forms (polymorphonuclear

LEBEAU/CMSP

PMN

5 µm

MICROBIAL DISEASES

■

1045

leukocytes, PMNs; normal range 40%–60%) and 20% bands
(immature PMNs; normal range 0%–5%). The chest radiograph revealed a right-upper-lobe infiltrate with cavity
formation (Fig. 26.6A). From this information, the clinician diagnosed pneumonia. Microscopic examination of the
patient’s sputum revealed Gram-positive cocci in pairs and
short chains surrounded by a capsule (Fig. 26.6B). Bacteriological culture of his sputum and blood yielded Streptococcus
pneumoniae.

A. Lobar pneumonia

RUL
infiltrate

■

Pneumonia is a disease that can be caused by many different microbes (Table 26.2). The pneumococcus Streptococcus
pneumoniae accounts for about 25% of community-acquired
cases of pneumonia, but pneumococcal pneumonia occurs
mostly among the elderly and immunocompromised,
including smokers, diabetics, and alcoholics. A breakdown
of pneumonia cases by causative organism is shown in
Figure 26.6C.
The noses and throats of 30%–70% of a given population can contain S. pneumoniae. The microbe can be spread
from person to person by sneezing, coughing, or other
close, personal contact. Pneumococcal pneumonia may
begin suddenly, with a severe shaking chill usually followed
by high fever, cough, shortness of breath, rapid breathing,
and chest pains.
Pneumococcal lung infection begins when the pneumococcus is aspirated into the lung. Once in the lung, the
microbe grows in the nutrient-rich edema fluid of the alveolar spaces. Neutrophils and alveolar macrophages then
arrive to try to stop the infection. They are called into the
area from the circulation by chemoattractant chemokines
released by damaged alveolar cells. The thick polysaccharide
capsule of the pneumococcus, however, makes phagocytosis very difficult (see Section 25.6). In an otherwise healthy
adult, pneumococcal pneumonia usually involves one lobe
of the lungs; thus, it is sometimes called lobar pneumonia.
The infiltration of PMNs and fluid leads to the typical radiological findings of diffuse, cloudy areas. In contrast, infants,
young children, and elderly people more commonly develop
an infection in other parts of the lungs, such as around the
air vessels (bronchi), causing bronchopneumonia.
The white blood cell count in the case history is telling.
The patient had an elevated WBC count (normal is 5,000–
10,000/μl) and an elevated proportion of band cells (normal is 0%–5%). These increases are indicative of a bacterial,
not viral, infection. Neutrophils (PMNs), the front-line
combatants against infection, rise in response to bacterial infections and are first released from bone marrow as
immature band cells, whose presence is a sure sign of bacterial infection.
Several outbreaks of pneumococcal pneumonia have
occurred over recent years in nursing homes, where numerous residents have been affected. These incidents underscore

CHAPTER 26

MICROBIAL DISEASES

1047

1998-2007. THE JOHN HOPKINS UNIVERSITY ON BEHALF OF ITS DIVISION OF
RHREUMETOLOGY. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.

A. Pneumonia infiltrate

B. Leg lesion

Case History: Disseminated Disease
from a Fungal Lung Infection

C. Colony of Blastomyces dermatitidis

IMAGE COURTESY OF CREIGHTON UNIVERSITY DEPARTMENT OF PATHOLOGY.

A 35-year-old male boxer named Tyrrell, who installs home
insulation for a living, was admitted to a Maryland hospital
when he presented with difficulty walking, fever, chills, night
sweats, and a recent 10-kg (22-lb) weight loss. He denied having prior pneumonia, sinus infection, arthritis, hematuria
(blood in the urine), numbness, or muscle weakness. Tyrrell
also denied any history of intravenous drug use and had
been in a monogamous relationship for 4 years. There was
no history of travel outside of the area for the past 4 years.
Tyrrell’s past medical history showed that he had visited the
emergency department 6 months earlier with flu-like symptoms, a chronic cough that produced blood-tinged white sputum, shortness of breath, loss of appetite, and weight loss.
One month prior to the current admission, he had developed
some painless subcutaneous nodules and had become so short
of breath that he could no longer continue boxing. At that
time, an X-ray taken in the emergency room showed rightupper-lobe infiltrate, indicating pneumonia (Fig. 26.7A). A
tuberculosis skin test was negative. He was given a prescription for the antibiotic azithromycin (a macrolide antibiotic

■

1998-2007. THE JOHN HOPKINS UNIVERSITY ON BEHALF OF ITS DIVISION OF
RHREUMETOLOGY. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.

the importance of elderly people receiving the pneumococcal
polysaccharide vaccine (PPSV) as a hedge against infection.
While there are over 80 antigenic types of pneumococcal
capsular polysaccharides, the injected vaccine contains only
the 23 types that are most often associated with disease
(see Section 24.6). A vaccine that is formulated to respond
to multiple antigens is called a “multivalent vaccine.” The
resulting immune response will protect vaccinated individuals against infection by those antigenic types. The vaccine
is recommended for individuals over 65, as well as for those
who are immunocompromised. The patient in this case history failed to receive the vaccine.
In addition to causing serious infections of the lungs
(pneumonia), S. pneumoniae can invade the bloodstream
(bacteremia) and the covering of the brain (meningitis).
The death rates for these infections are about one out of
every 20 who get pneumococcal pneumonia, about four
out of 20 who get bacteremia, and six out of 20 who get
meningitis. Individuals with special health problems, such
as liver disease, AIDS (caused by HIV), or organ transplants, are even more likely to die from the disease, because
of their compromised immune systems.
An emerging infectious disease problem throughout the
United States and the world is the increasing resistance of S.
pneumoniae to antibiotics. At least 30% of the strains isolated
are already resistant to penicillin, the former drug of choice
for treating the disease. Chapter 27 discusses why antibiotic
resistance is on the rise for this and other microbes.

■

FIGURE 26.7

■ Pneumonia and metastatic disease caused
by Blastomyces dermatitidis. A. Diffuse infiltrate in the right

lung (arrow). B. Metastatic leg lesion at the tibia. C. Fungal colony of
B. dermatitidis.

1048

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

commonly used to treat bacterial infections of the respiratory tract) and discharged. Despite antibiotic treatment, the
cough and weight loss continued. Physical exam at the time of
admission revealed several painful subcutaneous nodules (one
filled with pus) and a tender tibia (indicating bone involvement) that prevented him from walking (Fig. 26.7B). A
CBC (complete blood count) obtained at the time of current
admission showed normal counts and differential.

In this case, the expression of frankly purulent material (pus)
from the left-leg nodule suggested an infectious process. The
infection in this patient probably started in the lung (clued
by the cough), after which the organism spread throughout
the body via the bloodstream. Fungus is a probable cause,
given the chronic nature of the patient’s symptoms. An
alternative possibility would be tuberculosis, caused by the
bacterium Mycobacterium tuberculosis. M. tuberculosis also
causes a chronic lung infection and might have been suspected, except for the negative TB skin test. In the tuberculin skin test, a small amount of mycobacterial antigen called
PPD (purified protein derivative) is injected under the skin
of the lower arm. A person who has been infected with M.
tuberculosis will exhibit a localized delayed-type hypersensitivity reaction at the site of injection, although this does not
equate to currently active disease.
Cryptococcus, an encapsulated yeast, is not the likely cause,
since it typically requires an immunocompromised host to
cause disease—not the case in this instance. (Cryptococcus,
which causes cryptococcosis, is an opportunistic pathogen
that commonly infects AIDS patients.) The most prevalent clinical form of cryptococcosis is meningoencephalitis,
although disease can also involve the skin, lungs, prostate
gland, urinary tract, eyes, myocardium, bones, and joints.
The most likely fungal causes of infection in this case history are the endemic mycoses, such as histoplasmosis, blastomycosis, and coccidioidomycosis. This patient had never
traveled to the western United States, where coccidioidomycosis is endemic, so exposure to Coccidioides was ruled out.
Histoplasmosis most commonly presents as a flu-like pulmonary illness, with erythema nodosum (tender bumps on skin)
and arthritis (swollen joints) or arthralgia (joint pain), none
of which the patient had. Blastomycosis can disseminate to
the lung, skin, bone, and genitourinary tract, consistent with
the pattern of organ involvement seen in this patient.
Amphotericin B, an antifungal agent (discussed in Section 27.5), was given to this patient. His fever lowered
almost immediately, and the skin nodules diminished.
After 2 weeks, a fungus was found in the cultures of the
nodule biopsy, bronchoalveolar lavage (washes), and urine.
This fungus was identified by a DNA probe as Blastomyces dermatitidis (Fig. 26.7C), confirming the diagnosis of
blastomycosis.

B. dermatitidis is a dimorphic fungus that resides in the
soil of the Ohio and Mississippi river valleys and the southeastern United States. The portal of entry is the respiratory
tract, and infection is usually associated with occupational
and recreational activities in wooded areas along waterways,
where there is moist soil with a high content of organic
matter and spores. The incubation period ranges from 21
to 106 days. This patient most likely inhaled conidia (fungal spores) from the soil while crawling underneath houses
installing insulation. The physician learned that the patient
used only a T-shirt to cover his mouth and nose—not an
effective method of keeping spores from entering the respiratory tract. He should have worn a respirator.
Several critical features of this case help differentiate it
from the preceding case of pneumococcal pneumonia. First,
the initial macrolide antibiotic, azithromycin, should have
killed most bacterial sources of infection. Second, the X-ray
finding of diffuse infiltrate is more indicative of fungal lung
infection than bacterial infection, which in a patient of this
age would likely be confined to one lobe. The patient was
young and in good health prior to the infection, making it
unlikely to be pneumococcal pneumonia. The blood count
was also a clue. Fungal infections do not usually cause an
increase in WBCs or an increase in band cells. Finally, the
metastatic lesions (infectious lesions that develop at a secondary site away from the initial site of infection) on the leg
were in no way consistent with Streptococcus pneumoniae.
They arise when the organism moves through the bloodstream from the primary site of infection to another body
site, where it can begin to grow. Many infectious diseases
start out as a localized infection but end up disseminating
throughout the body to cause metastatic lesions.

Note:

The term “metastasis” means the spread of disease
from one organ to another, noncontiguous organ. Only microbial
infections and malignant cancer cells can metastasize.

Tuberculosis as a Reemerging Disease

Tuberculosis, caused by the acid-fast bacillus Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Fig. 26.8 inset), was once considered
of passing historical significance to physicians practicing
in the developed world. In 1985, however, owing primarily to the newly recognized HIV epidemic and a growing
indigent population, TB resurfaced, especially in innercity hospitals. In 1991, highly virulent multidrug-resistant (MDR) strains of M. tuberculosis were reported. These
strains not only produced fulminant (rapid-onset) and fatal
disease among patients infected with HIV (the time from
TB exposure to death is 2–7 months), but also proved
highly infectious. Tuberculin skin test conversion rates of
up to 50% were reported in exposed health care workers
(the conversion rate today is less than 1%).

CDC

CHAPTER 26

4 +m

FIGURE 26.8

Calcified Ghon complex of tuberculosis. The
arrow points to a Ghon complex in a patient’s right upper lobe. Note the
difference in appearance compared to Figure 26.7A. Inset: Acid-fast
stain of Mycobacterium tuberculosis. (Cells approx. 2–3 µm in length.)
■

A positive tuberculin skin test (also known as the Mantoux test) is seen as a delayed-type hypersensitivity reaction
to M. tuberculosis proteins (called purified protein derivative, or PPD) injected under the skin. Note, however, that a
positive tuberculin skin test does not signify active disease,
but only that the person was infected at one time. The bacterium may have been killed by the immune system without
having caused disease or may lie dormant, waiting to reactivate. MDR-TB cases in 2014 represented approximately
1.3% of new TB cases (9,421). More information on mycobacterial structure can be found in Section 18.3, and on its
pathogenesis, in Section 25.6.
M. tuberculosis causes primarily a respiratory infection (pulmonary TB), but it can disseminate through
the bloodstream to produce abscesses in many different organ systems (extrapulmonary TB). Extrapulmonary
TB is sometimes called miliary TB because the size of the
infected nodules (1–5 mm), called tubercles, approximates
the size of millet seeds. Tubercles in the lung are filled with
M. tuberculosis cells that drain into bronchial tubes and the
upper respiratory tract. Aerosolization of respiratory secretions (coughing) directly spreads the tubercle bacilli from
someone with active disease to an uninfected person (person-to-person transmission, no animal reservoir).
Once inhaled into the lung, the bacilli are subject to
three possible outcomes: They can die, they can produce
primary disease, or they can become latent. In all three
cases the bacteria are initially phagocytosed by alveolar

■

MICROBIAL DISEASES

■

1049

macrophages, and if not killed, they survive ensconced
within modified phagolysosomes. The bacilli can multiply
in these vacuoles, kill the macrophage (via induced apoptosis), and then be released to infect other macrophages. Four
to six weeks postinfection, an infected person can develop
active primary disease marked by a productive cough that
generates sputum. The patient also experiences fever, night
sweats, and weight loss. Patients with active disease are
contagious and produce a delayed-type hypersensitivity
that makes them tuberculin-positive.
An alternative to primary disease is an asymptomatic
latent tuberculosis infection (LTBI). Here the tubercle
bacilli remain hidden in macrophages and may even become
dormant. The delayed-type hypersensitivity response to the
organism builds small, hard tubercles around these cells.
Over time, the tubercles develop into caseous lesions that
have a cheese-like consistency and can calcify into the hardened Ghon complexes seen on typical X-rays (Fig. 26.8).
The bacteria can remain dormant in these tubercles for
many years. Even primary tuberculosis can resolve and
become latent tuberculosis, unless the organisms were
killed with antibiotics.
In a patient with LTBI, M. tuberculosis can sometimes,
years after initial infection, overcome the imposed confinement of the immune system. The bacteria begin to multiply and cause secondary, or reactivation, tuberculosis.
Secondary TB commonly occurs in immunocompromised
people (such as HIV patients). The symptoms of secondary TB are more serious than those of primary TB and
include severe coughing, greenish or bloody sputum, lowgrade fever, night sweats, and weight loss. The gradual
wasting of the body led to the older name for tuberculosis:
“consumption.”
Ten drugs are currently approved by the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) for treatment of tuberculosis. Initial
treatment of active disease is aggressive and involves a fourdrug regimen of what are called first-line drugs (or drugs of
choice)—isoniazid, rifampin, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol—given over a course of several months. MDR strains are
defined as being resistant to two or more first-line drugs. An
MDR strain is treated with a regimen of four to five drugs
that do not include the first-line drugs to which it is resistant.
Extensively drug-resistant tuberculosis (XDR-TB) strains are
resistant to three or more second-line drugs (drugs used
when drugs of choice fail), as well as two or more first-line
drugs. These strains are almost untreatable.

Thought Question

26.3 Explain why patient noncompliance (failure to take
drugs as directed) is thought to have led to XDR-TB.

1050

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

Viral Diseases of the Lung

Numerous viruses can cause lung infections (see
Table 26.2). Influenza virus and rhinovirus are described
in Chapters 6 and 11, and compared in eTopic 26.3. The
recently emerged infection SARS (severe acute respiratory
syndrome) is discussed in Chapter 28. However, an important viral lung infection not discussed elsewhere is respiratory syncytial disease, caused by respiratory syncytial virus
(RSV). A negative-sense, single-stranded RNA, enveloped
virus, RSV is the most common cause of bronchiolitis and
pneumonia among infants and children under 1 year of age.
Illness begins most frequently with fever, runny nose,
cough, and sometimes wheezing. RSV is spread from respiratory secretions through close contact with infected persons or by contact with contaminated surfaces or objects.
Infection can occur when the virus contacts mucous membranes of the eyes, mouth, or nose and possibly through
the inhalation of droplets generated by a sneeze or cough.
Unlike rubella or rubeola, which infect the respiratory tract
and disseminate though the body, RSV remains localized
in the lung.
The majority of children hospitalized for RSV infection are under 6 months of age. RSV can cause repeated
infections throughout life, usually associated with moderate to severe cold-like symptoms. Severe lower respiratory
tract disease may occur at any age, especially among the
elderly or people with compromised cardiac, pulmonary, or
immune systems. As yet, a vaccine to control this disease
is not available. However, a monoclonal antibody called
palivizumab, which binds to an RSV epitope, can prevent
RSV in high-risk infants that were born premature or with
medical problems such as congenital heart failure.
Table 26.2 presents many other bacterial, fungal, and
viral microbes that can cause respiratory tract infection.
Be aware that very different diseases can produce similar
symptoms. For instance, people constantly confuse influenza (the flu) with the common cold. Symptomatically,
they may start out similarly, but there are telling differences. Influenza is characterized by fever, myalgia (muscle
aches), pharyngitis (sore throat), and headache (viral infection is discussed in Chapter 11). A runny nose is not one
of the symptoms. The common cold, however, manifests as
a runny nose, nasal congestion, sneezing, and throat irritation. No myalgia. The observant clinician will note the
difference.

■

■

■

■

■

■

An elevated white cell count in blood is an indicator of
bacterial infection.
Pneumococcal vaccine should be administered to the
elderly because they are often immunocompromised.
Fungal agents commonly cause long-term, chronic
infections.
Localized bacterial infections in the lung can disseminate via the bloodstream to form metastatic lesions
at other body sites.
Tuberculosis is an ancient bacterial disease with an
increasing mortality rate resulting from multidrug-resistant strains, the susceptibility of HIV patients, and an
increasing indigent population.
Respiratory syncytial virus is one of several viruses that
can cause lung disease, but it rarely disseminates.

26.4

Gastrointestinal
Tract Infections

Nearly everyone has experienced diarrhea, a condition
characterized by frequent loose bowel movements accompanied by abdominal cramps. Hundreds of millions of
cases occur each year in the United States and are a major
cause of death in developing countries. As with respiratory
tract infections, most diarrheal disease is viral in origin,
with rotavirus being the primary culprit. Among the bacteria, the Gram-negative rod Salmonella enterica serovar
Typhimurium and the spiral-shaped or curved bacillus
Campylobacter are the most frequent causes of self-limiting
diarrheal disease.
You might wonder why some microbes prefer the chaos
of diarrhea to the relative stability of a nice commensal relationship. After all, isn’t finding a niche and sticking to it
the goal of every microbe? The simple answer is that diarrhea enables the dissemination of microbes that might
otherwise kill their host or be killed themselves after too
aggressively provoking the host’s immune system. Dissemination allows the microbe to reach new hosts and proliferate. A diarrhea-causing microbe is sort of like a serial bank
robber fleeing from city to city to avoid capture and find
more banks to rob.

To Summarize
■

■

Lung infections are mostly viral, but most deadly lung
infections are caused by bacteria.
The mucociliary escalator is a primary defense mechanism used by the lung to avoid infection.

Types of Diarrhea

What causes diarrhea? Normally, intestinal mucosal cells
absorb water (8–10 liters per day) from the intestinal contents,
essentially drying out stool. Diarrhea occurs when water is
not absorbed or when it actually leaves intestinal cells and

CHAPTER 26

enters the intestinal lumen. The excess water loosens stool,
and diarrhea results. There are several types of diarrhea.
■

Osmotic diarrhea follows the intake of nonabsorbable
substrates, such as lactulose, a synthetic sugar, used to
treat constipation. Lactulose increases osmolarity in the
intestine, which causes water to leave mucosal cells. The
result is osmotic diarrhea. Infectious organisms (such
as rotavirus) that prevent nutrient absorption can cause
osmotic diarrhea. Osmosis is discussed in eAppendix 2.

■

Secretory diarrhea develops when microbes cause
mucosal cells to increase ion secretion, as seen with cholera toxin. Mucosal cells expel water to try to equilibrate
the resulting electrolyte imbalance.

■

Inflammatory diarrhea forms when an infectious agent
triggers the production of inflammatory cytokines that
attract PMNs. Subsequent damage to the intestinal wall
will limit water and nutrient absorption, and cause red
and white blood cells to enter the stool (bloody diarrhea
or dysentery). Shigella, Salmonella species, and some
strains of E. coli can cause infections leading to inflammatory diarrhea.

■

Motility-related diarrhea can develop when enterotoxins made by pathogens such as rotavirus cause intestinal hypermotility. Food moves so quickly through the
intestine (hypermotility) that there isn’t sufficient time
to absorb water or nutrients.

Terms used to describe the inflammation of different
parts of the GI tract include:
■

Gastritis (inflammation of the stomach lining, for
instance, ulcers);

■

Gastroenteritis (nonspecific term for any inflammation
along the gastrointestinal tract);

■

Enteritis (inflammation mainly of the small intestine);

■

Enterocolitis (inflammation of the colon and small
intestine); and

■

Colitis (inflammation of the large intestine—colon).

Diarrhea due to viral growth, bacterial growth, or toxin
production can cause large amounts of water and electrolytes to leave the intestinal cells and enter the intestinal
lumen. As a result, the patient not only suffers diarrhea but
can become dangerously dehydrated. Most deaths resulting
from infectious diarrhea are the result of dehydration.

Staphylococcal Food Poisoning

We have all heard of the local church picnic where scores of
people become violently ill within hours of eating unrefrigerated potato salad. Staphylococcus aureus is the usual cause

■

MICROBIAL DISEASES

■

1051

of these disasters, but it is not an infection. The culprit is
an enterotoxin (an exotoxin that affects the gastrointestinal tract) secreted by some strains of S. aureus into tainted
foods such as pies, turkey dressing, or potato salad. After
ingestion, the toxin travels to the intestine, where it enters
the bloodstream and stimulates the vagus nerve leading to
the vomit center in the brain.
Because the toxin is preformed, symptoms occur quickly
after ingestion. Within 2–6 hours, the poisoned patient
will begin vomiting and may also experience diarrhea. The
disease, though violent, is not life-threatening and usually
resolves spontaneously within 24–48 hours. In contrast,
diarrhea caused by infectious agents, such as Salmonella
enterica, which must first grow in the victim, do not occur
until 12–24 hours after ingestion, sometimes longer. A clinician noting quick onset of symptoms in a patient will
immediately suspect staphylococcal food poisoning. Obviously, antibiotic treatment is not needed for staph food poisoning, but it may be indicated for other gastrointestinal
infections. Staphylococcal enterotoxins are also heat resistant, so simply heating a food already containing enterotoxin will not destroy the toxic activity.
It is important to recognize that the most important
treatment for diarrhea is rehydration therapy. Vomiting
and diarrhea can cause huge losses in water volume. Because
the exit of water from tissues causes an osmotic imbalance,
salts also leave the cells, to try to reestablish that balance.
The problem is that the resulting electrolyte imbalance can
severely affect cardiovascular, respiratory, and renal systems. Consequently, replacing body fluids orally or by IV is
imperative to prevent death. Rehydration solutions, therefore, must contain glucose as well as sodium and potassium
salts in proper balance (for example, Pedialyte).
Antibiotics are often inappropriate when treating diarrhea. Although antibiotic treatment of infectious gas-

troenteritis seems intuitive, it is rarely used and actually
contraindicated. Most gastrointestinal infections are viral
(norovirus or rotavirus), so antibiotics are ineffective. Likewise, gastroenteritis caused by bacteria usually resolves
spontaneously, without antibiotic treatment. However,
severe systemic disease stemming from gastroenteritis
can develop, often in the young or elderly. Diseases such
as typhoid fever (Salmonella Typhi) or bacillary dysentery
(Shigella dysenteriae) respond well to antibiotics.
In some cases, antibiotic treatment can actually trigger
gastrointestinal disease. For example, many antibiotics used
to treat infectious diseases (especially clindamycin) can
kill most normal intestinal bacteria, except the naturally
resistant Gram-positive anaerobe Clostridioides difficile
(formerly Clostridium difficile), the causative agent of pseudomembranous enterocolitis. Unrestrained by microbial
competition, C. difficile growing at the epithelial surface of

1052

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

the intestine will produce specific toxins that damage and
kill intestinal cells. The organism’s growth leads to inflammation and the formation of exudative plaques along the
intestinal wall (refer to Fig. 23.10). The plaques eventually
coalesce into larger pseudomembrane structures that block
the intestinal mucosa. The blockage causes the malabsorption of nutrients and water, which results in diarrhea. As
the pseudomembrane enlarges, it begins to slough off and
pass into the stool. Diagnosis of this disease involves PCR
identification of the organism or immunological identification of the toxin in fecal samples.
Some patients suffer recurrent C. difficile infections. It
is not clear why, but one suggestion is that spores lodged
in colon folds may escape clearance by peristalsis. Another
hypothesis is that patients with recurrent disease have an
impaired response to the C. difficile toxins. How do you
prevent recurrences? In some instances, after vegetative C.
difficile has been killed by antibiotic treatment, a procedure known as a fecal transplant (see Section 23.2) can be
used to restore a healthy gastrointestinal microbiota that
prevents the recurrence of C. difficile disease.

Shigella dysenteriae, Salmonella enterica, and enteroinvasive E. coli (EIEC) actually invade enterocytes and are considered intracellular pathogens. Enterohemorrhagic E. coli
(EHEC), which also produces leukocytes and blood in
stools, is not an intracellular parasite (it is not invasive), but
causes damaging attachment and effacing lesions, described
in Section 25.3, which destroy the mucosal epithelium.
The resulting inflammation, in conjunction with damage
caused by the Shiga toxin it produces, leads to blood and
white cells in the stool. E. coli O157:H7, the etiological
agent in the case history, is a common serotype of EHEC.
There are at least six different classes of pathogenic
E. coli that differ in their repertoire of pathogenicity islands,
plasmids, and virulence factors. They include EIEC and
EHEC, already mentioned; enterotoxigenic E. coli (ETEC)
and uropathogenic E. coli (UPEC), both described in
Chapter 25; as well as enteropathogenic E. coli (EPEC) and
enteroaggregative E. coli (EAEC). All but UPEC causes
gastrointestinal disease. (A new diarrheagenic strain is
described in Special Topic 26.1) To tell these strains apart,
each group has telltale O and H antigens that can be identified using serology.

Case History: Enterohemorrhagic E. coli

Note:

Tammy, a 6-year-old girl from Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, arrived at the ER with bloody diarrhea, a temperature of 39°C (102.2°F), abdominal cramping, and vomiting.
She was admitted to the hospital 5 days after a kindergarten
field trip to the local dairy farm. When the parents were questioned about Tammy’s activities during the trip, they said she
had purchased a snack while at the farm. Upon laboratory
analysis, a fecal smear was positive for leukocytes, and isolation of organisms confirmed the presence of Gram-negative
rods that produced Shiga toxins 1 and 2. In subsequent testing by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis, the isolate was indistinguishable from E. coli O157:H7. By this time, Tammy had
developed additional problems. Her face and hands became
puffy, she had decreased urine output despite being given IV
fluids (suggesting kidney damage), and she was beginning to
develop some neurological abnormalities. Laboratory analyses of blood samples revealed thrombocytopenia (reduced blood
platelet count) and confirmed hemolytic uremic syndrome
(HUS; renal failure). The child was treated by IV fluid and
electrolyte replacement. Antibiotics were not administered.
Tammy eventually recovered.
In this case history, the presence of leukocytes in a fecal
smear is a sign that the intestinal pathogen may have
invaded the epithelial mucosa of the intestine (or severely
damaged it). Breaching this barrier sends out a chemical
call to neutrophils, which then enter the area and, in an
effort to kill the pathogen, also damage the intestinal cells.

“O antigen” is part of the bacterium’s LPS, while “H antigen” is a flagellar protein. Thus, “O157:H7” denotes the specific
version of LPS (O157) and flagellar protein (H7) found on E. coli
O157:H7. Other pathogenic strains of E. coli have different O and
H antigens.

Shiga toxin. Shigella and EHEC, the agent in the preceding case history, both produce toxins, called Shiga toxins 1 and 2, that are encoded by genes of bacteriophage
genomes embedded in the bacterial chromosome. These
toxins inhibit host protein synthesis and, in the process,
damage endothelial cells in the intestine, kidney, and brain.
Shiga toxin–induced death of vascular endothelial cells in
the intestine causes the breakdown of blood vessel linings,
followed by hemorrhage that manifests as bloody diarrhea.
Shiga toxin 2 also triggers the release of pro-inflammatory
cytokines.
Endothelial damage initiates the formation of plateletfibrin microthrombi (clots) that occlude blood vessels in the
various organs, leading to two major syndromes: hemolytic
uremic syndrome (HUS) and thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP). HUS occurs when the microthrombi
are limited to the kidney. The microclots clog the tiny
blood vessels in this organ and cause decreased urine output, ultimately leading to kidney failure and death. In TTP,
the clots occur throughout the circulation, causing reddish
skin hemorrhages called petechiae and purpuras. Neurological symptoms (for example, confusion, severe headaches,
and possibly coma) then arise from microhemorrhages

CHAPTER 26

in the brain. The hemorrhaging occurs because platelets
needed for normal clotting have been removed from the
circulation as they form the microthrombi. The decreased
number of platelets is called thrombocytopenia.
The toxins, which are absorbed through the intestine
and disseminated via the bloodstream, have five B subunits
used to bind to target cell membranes, and one A subunit
imbued with toxic activity (see Section 25.4). The A subunit, upon entry, destroys protein synthesis by cleaving an
adenine from 28S rRNA in eukaryotic ribosomes.
Enterohemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC). E. coli O157:H7 is a

recently emerged pathogen that can colonize cattle intestines at the recto-anal junction without affecting the
animal and, as a result, can contaminate meat products following slaughter. Initially identified in 1982, the organism
came to national prominence during a large-scale U.S. outbreak, in 1993, linked to a Washington State Jack in the
Box restaurant in which 732 people were sickened.
E. coli O157:H7 rarely affects the health of the reservoir animal. But when an infected steer is slaughtered, the
carcass can become contaminated with EHEC-containing
feces despite manufacturers’ considerable efforts to prevent it. Grinding the tainted meat into hamburger distributes the microbe throughout. Cooking burgers to 160°C
is essential to kill any existing EHEC. Cross-contamination between foods is possible too. Using the same cutting
board to prepare meat and salad is a great way to contaminate the salad, which will not be cooked.
Despite EHEC’s common association with hamburger,
vegetarians are not safe from this organism. During heavy
rains, waste from a cattle farm can easily wash into nearby
vegetable fields unless precautions are taken. If the cattle
waste contains E. coli O157:H7, the crops become contaminated. One such outbreak occurred in 2006, when spinach
from certain areas of California were contaminated with
this pathogen, prompting a nationwide recall of bagged
spinach and a month without spinach salad.
Early on, the remarkably low infectious dose of E. coli
O157:H7 mystified researchers. However, we have since
learned that E. coli has an impressive level of acid resistance,
rivaling that of the gastric pathogen Helicobacter pylori.
Acid resistance mechanisms permit E. coli to survive in the
acidic stomach and enable a mere 10–100 individual organisms to cause disease.
As already noted, EHEC strains produce two toxins
that are identical to the Shiga toxins produced by Shigella
species. The toxins cleave host ribosomal RNA, thereby
halting translation. As discussed earlier, one consequence
of Shiga toxin is HUS. The development of HUS, as in the
case history described, is a common consequence of E. coli
O157:H7 infection. Unfortunately, HUS can be treated
only with supportive care, such as blood transfusions and

■

MICROBIAL DISEASES

■

1053

dialysis throughout the critical period until kidney function resumes. Antibiotic treatment can increase the release
of Shiga toxins from the organisms and actually trigger
HUS. Thus, antimicrobial therapy is not recommended.
In contrast to the case just described, many gastrointestinal infections do not produce fecal leukocytes or blood
in the stool. Diarrheal diseases caused by Vibrio cholerae
(cholera) or enterotoxigenic E. coli (ETEC), which produces a cholera-like disease, do not involve invasion of the
intestinal lining by the microbe, and they yield copious
amounts of watery diarrhea. In these two toxin-driven diseases, the bacteria attach to cells lining the intestine and
secrete toxins that are imported into the target cells (see
Section 25.4).
Epidemiology of EHEC. Epidemiology is the study of factors

and mechanisms involved in the spread of disease. Researchers at the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) used epidemiological principles (discussed later, in
Chapter 28) to identify the risk factors associated with the
case study presented earlier. They interviewed 51 infected
patients and 92 controls (children who visited the farm but
did not become ill). Infected patients were more likely than
controls to have had contact with cattle, an important reservoir for E. coli O157:H7. All 216 cattle on the farm were
sampled by rectal swab, and 13% yielded E. coli O157:H7
with a DNA restriction pattern indistinguishable from that
isolated from the patients. This fi nding indicated that the
cattle were the source of infection.
Furthermore, separate areas were not established for
eating and interactions with farm animals. Visitors could
touch cattle, calves, sheep, goats, llamas, chickens, and a
pig while eating and drinking. Hand-washing facilities
were unsupervised and lacked soap, and disposable hand
towels were out of the children’s reach. All of these circumstances provided opportunity for infection.
How can we prevent disease caused by enterohemorrhagic E. coli? Industry approaches include thoroughly
washing carcasses before processing, maintaining cold temperatures, and testing for possible contamination. In addition, the use of gamma irradiation to sterilize beef, spinach,
and lettuce has been approved. Recent outbreaks of EHEC
disease caused by contaminated hamburger have declined
dramatically because of industry practices and USDA
inspections. Irradiation could eliminate the problem
(described in Chapter 5), but less than 1% of hamburger
meat is currently irradiated in the United States.
Type III secretion and diarrhea. Type III secretion systems
were fi rst described in Section 25.5, where we discussed
the pathogenesis of Salmonella enterica, but these systems
are present in numerous Gram-negative pathogens, such

1054

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

SPECIAL TOPIC 26.1- - Sprouts and an Emerging Escherichia coli
In May 2011, people in Germany began dying from hemolytic
uremic syndrome (HUS) (Fig. 1). As of June, 3,228 cases and
35 deaths had been reported. By then, a massive epidemiological hunt was under way for the cause of the disease and
its source. The organism isolated in each case was a form
of E. coli rarely seen before. Its LPS and flagellar serotype
was O104:H4. The organism secreted type 2 Shiga toxin,
which contributed to HUS but, strangely, did not produce
the attaching and effacing proteins often associated with
enterohemorrhagic E. coli (for instance, strain O157:H7).
Unfortunately, this unique pathovar also harbored a plasmid that conveyed resistance to all penicillins, cephalosporins, and co-trimoxazole. Another feature was the presence
of enteroaggregative adherence fimbriae (aaf), which allow
E. coli to adhere like stacked bricks to host cells. Again, AAF
factor is not usually seen in Shiga toxin–producing E. coli
(called STEC), but it is a defining feature of enteroaggregative E. coli (EAEC).
One more odd thing about this HUS outbreak was that a
majority of the patients (90%) were adults rather than children, the usual victims of EHEC or other STEC strains. All of
this evidence, plus extensive DNA sequence analysis, indicates
that the deadly O104:H4 strain is a genetic hybrid between
enterohemorrhagic and enteroaggregative strains of E. coli.
As a result, it is officially referred to as EAHEC O104:H4. What
series of unfortunate events produced this “chimeric” patho-

gen? The stx-2 gene is part of a prophage that can horizontally transfer between strains of E. coli, but the trafficking of
the aaf and drug resistance characteristics is less apparent
and under investigation.
A particularly hideous aspect of disease produced by
O104:H4 is that the prevalence of HUS symptoms in diarrheagenic patients far exceeds the usual rate for typical
EHEC victims. But why? One hypothesis is that this variant
produces high amounts of Shiga toxin (Stx-2) as compared
to other STEC strains. Victor Gannon and his colleagues at
the University of Lethbridge and the Public Health Agency
of Canada demonstrated this in vitro using mitomycin C.
Mitomycin C is a DNA intercalating agent that can trigger
reactivation of prophages via the SOS response (see Chapter 9), and in so doing, it stimulates the expression of phageencoded toxin genes. Figure 2 shows that after mitomycin
C treatment, the O104:H4 strain produced five to six times
more Shiga toxin than did other EHEC strains. It is thought
that conditions in the gastrointestinal tract could induce a
similar response.
The HUS outbreak started in May 2011. By early June, the
finger-pointing had begun. Germany initially blamed Spanish cucumbers, which led to a huge economic loss in Spain
as foreign countries refrained from importing these vegetables. Later it was shown that Spain was not the source of this
organism. Finally, the German agricultural minister of Lower
Saxony announced that an organic farm near Uelzen, which
produces a variety of sprouted foods, was the likely source
of the E. coli outbreak (Fig. 3). Before the source was found,
however, several tourists visiting Germany ingested the
organism and returned to their home countries, including the
United States and Canada, where they then developed HUS.
Fortunately, as of this writing, no further major outbreaks
caused by this pathogen have been reported.

MARKUS SCHOLTZ/DPA

RESEARCH QUESTION

FIGURE 1 ■ Hemolytic uremic syndrome patient in Germany. This patient was being treated in the medical intensive

care unit of the University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein in Lübeck.
Note the biosafety precautions taken by the medical personnel
(gloves, gown, and mask).

Which features of the O104:H4 strain might be suitable targets for antimicrobial drug design? Explain why they might be
suitable and what pitfalls there may be to using these drugs
in a patient.
Laing, C. R., Y. Zhang, M. W. Gilmour, V. Allen, R. Johnson,
et al. 2012. A comparison of Shiga-toxin 2 bacteriophage
from classical enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli serotypes
and the German E. coli O104:H4 outbreak strain. PLoS
One 7:e37362. [Online.] http://www.plosone.org/article/
info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0037362.

CHAPTER 26

4,500

■

MICROBIAL DISEASES

■

1055

500

4,000

Stx-2 produced (ml/ng)

3,500

400

3,000

300

2,500

200

2,000
1,500
1,000

100
0

ON-2011

Sakai
EDL933
Uninduced

500
0

FIGURE 2

ON-2011

Sakai
EDL933
Uninduced

ON-2011
Sakai
EDL933
Mitomycin C induced

Shiga toxin production by E. coli pathovars. Stx-2 production by E. coli O104:H4 outbreak-related strain ON-2011
and E. coli O157:H7 strains EDL933 and Sakai in uninduced and mitomycin C–induced states as measured by an Stx-2-specific ELISA.
Error bars represent standard deviations from three independent replicates. Mitomycin C is a DNA intercalating agent that can trigger
reactivation of prophages. Lytic replication can stimulate expression of phage-encoded toxin genes. Source: Adapted from Laing, C. R. et al.
■

2012. PLoS One 7(5):e37362. © dpa.

FIGURE 3

■ What’s the source? A. Early on, the source of the new strain of E. coli was unclear, prompting this cartoon by Martin
Sutovec, depicting a police lineup composed of the suspects: cucumbers, sprouts, and avocados. B. Ultimately, fenugreek sprouts grown
at an organic farm in Germany were identified as the source. These sprouts are commonly used in salads.

WWW.THEMAHANANDI.ORG

B.

MARTIN SUTOVEC

A.

1056

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

as EHEC in our case history. Recall that type III protein
secretion systems directly inject proteins from the cytoplasm of a bacterial pathogen into the cytoplasm of a target eukaryotic host cell. The system delivers proteins across
three membranes—two from the Gram-negative bacterial
pathogen and one surrounding the target cell.
In addition to stimulating bacterial entry into host cells,
bacterial proteins injected by type III transport systems
cause host cells to secrete pro-inflammatory cytokines.
The cytokines then “call in” inflammatory cells and alter
ion transport through the epithelial membrane. Excessive
export of ions such as chloride causes water to leave the cell
in an attempt to equilibrate the internal and external ionic
concentrations. The water entering the intestine results in
diarrhea. Type III–translocated effector proteins induce
many host cellular responses that contribute to intestinal
inflammation during an infection.

Rotavirus and Norovirus

Many people wrongly think that most cases of diarrhea
are caused by a bacterial agent. Actually, two viruses—
rotavirus and norovirus—cause more intestinal disease
than any bacterial species. See Table 6.1: Rotavirus is classified in Group III (dsRNA viruses); norovirus is in Group
IV (positive-sense single-stranded RNA viruses). Rotavirus
is highly infectious, spreading by the fecal-oral route; it is
endemic around the globe, and it affects all age groups,
although children between 6 and 24 months are the most
severely affected. It is estimated that by age 3, all children
have had a rotavirus infection.
The incubation period is approximately 2 days, after
which the victim commonly suffers frequent watery, dark
green, explosive diarrhea. All of this may be accompanied
by nausea, vomiting, and abdominal cramping. Severe dehydration and electrolyte loss due to the diarrhea will cause
death unless supportive measures, such as fluid replacement,
are undertaken. There is no cure, but most patients recover
if rehydrated properly. Few deaths from rotavirus occur in
the United States, but each year more than 400,000 children worldwide die from this viral diarrhea (2014 estimate).
The mortality and incidence of this disease have decreased
because of the introduction in 2006 of a safe and effective
vaccine (see Section 24.6). In Mexico alone, the vaccine
resulted in a 50% decline in diarrheal deaths.
With the success of the rotavirus vaccine, norovirus is set
to become the most common worldwide cause of nonbacterial gastroenteritis. Norovirus infections have already surpassed rotavirus in the United States. The virus is perceived
as the scourge of cruise ships and assisted-living facilities,
but norovirus can also spread quickly in hotels or anywhere
there are many people in a small area. The virus spreads by

the fecal-oral route among children or adults, via contaminated food or person-to-person contact. Within 24 hours
of infection, the victim experiences sudden vomiting, stomach cramps, and watery diarrhea that mercifully resolves
within 12–24 hours. Treatment is similar to that for rotavirus, and there is no vaccine. Death is rare, but most common among infants and the elderly.

Note:

Norovirus infection is sometimes called the “stomach
flu,” but that is a misnomer. It is not the flu and has nothing to do
with influenza virus.

Diarrhea and the gut microbiome. An obvious question to
ask about diarrhea is how does it affect the microbiome? A
study headed by Shannon Manning (Michigan State University) found that the composition of intestinal microbiota
of patients with diarrhea differs significantly from that of
their healthy family members.
For one thing, the gut microbiomes of diarrhea patients
who were not given antibiotics were less diverse than those
of their uninfected family members. Abundance of Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes was higher in the healthy individuals, whereas Proteobacteria dominated the patient
microbiomes. Escherichia coli, for instance, predominated
in all patients regardless of the pathogen causing the infection. The composition of diarrheal microbiomes also varied
with the bacterial cause of infection. As one example, the
microbiome of Campylobacter-infected patients differed
from that of patients infected with Salmonella or Shigella.
How does the intestine restore its bacterial population
after being decimated by diarrhea or antibiotic treatment?
Lawrence David (Duke University), Peter Turnbaugh
(UC San Francisco) (Fig 26.9A), and their colleagues
used metagenomic procedures to characterize the stools
of 41 people in Bangladesh (children and adults) who had
diarrhea caused by E. coli or V. cholerae. Stools were monitored before, during, and after diarrhea episodes.
The researchers identified a consistent succession of
repopulation events in nearly every case, regardless of the
cause of diarrhea (Fig 26.9B). After diarrhea (or antibiotic
treatment for the diarrhea) clears out much of the microbiome, carbohydrates and oxygen accumulate in the gut.
Carbohydrates and oxygen would normally be metabolized
by gut microbiota. During the early stage of repopulation,
facultative, oxygen-respiring and carbohydrate-utilizing
bacteria (especially those using simple carbohydrates, such
as Escherichia, Enterococcus, and Streptococcus) colonize
the gut and consume these nutrients. Midstage recovery
begins when the lack of simple sugars and oxygen (as well
as increased phage predation) leads to a decline in the earlystage species. This decline allows succession to anaerobic,
complex carbohydrate-fermenting bacteria (Bacteroides).

CHAPTER 26

■

MICROBIAL DISEASES

■

1057

PHOTO BY CHRISTINA CRUZ

STEPHANIE MITCHELL/HARVARD STAFF PHOTOGRAPHER

A.

FIGURE 26.9 ■ Successive repopulation of the gut microbiome
following Vibrio cholerae infection. A. Lawrence David (left) and

Peter Turnbaugh unravel the complexities of the human microbiome.
B. Fecal samples were taken at 1, 7, and 30 days past presentation of
diarrhea (dpp). Patients were given a single dose of azithromycin on the
day of presentation, which nearly eliminated V. cholerae by 1 dpp. Healthy
contacts of patients are shown on the left. Letters indicate patient identifications; numbers indicate separate healthy contacts for each patient.
Colored boxes reflect groups of different genera that are prominent
during the infection and afterward during early, mid, and late stages of
repopulation. The x-axis values reflect relative abundances of genera. “All
swab” microbes were present only in rectal swab samples.

B.

Within-subject
group levels (fraction)

HARVARD PRESS OFFICE

Healthy
contacts
A_1
A_2
A_3
A_4
B_1
C_1
D_1
D_2
E_1
E_2
F_1
F_3
F_4
G_1
G_2
H_1
H_2
J_1
J_2
K_1
K_2
K_3
L_1
M_1
M_2

1 dpp

V. cholerae patients
7 dpp

30 dpp

0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8

0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8

0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M

0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8

Finally, in late-stage recovery, the gut microbiome once
again resembles the complex community that existed prior
to infection—the same composition seen in healthy contacts (Fig. 26.9B). The entire process takes about 30 days
to complete but depends on a variety of factors, such as
diet, antibiotic use, and duration of diarrhea.
Repopulation occurs, in part, by reingesting microbes
from food. But exciting research suggests that the much
maligned and trivialized appendix is, among other things,
an important reservoir of gut microbes that can seed the
intestine and reestablish the microbiota. Once properly reestablished, gut microbiota are capable of fending off pathogens such as C. difficile. As evidence, researchers found
that patients with appendectomies were more than twice as
likely to develop repetitive infections with C. difficile.

Protozoan Causes of Diarrheal Disease

As we learned in Chapter 20, some protozoa (also called
protists) cause serious human diseases. For instance,

Infection stage
Vibrio
Early stage
Enterococcus
Escherichia
Streptococcus
Mid stage
Bacteroides
Late stage
Prevotella
Roseburia
All swab
Anaerococcus
Corynebacterium
Finegoldia
Peptoniphilus
Staphylococcus

Entamoeba histolytica and Cryptosporidium parvum cause
the diarrheal diseases amebic dysentery and cryptosporidiosis, respectively. In 2013, the CDC tallied 9,056 cases
(up from 2,640 in 2005) of cryptosporidiosis, a reportable
disease in the United States. Two other amebas, Naegleria and Acanthamoeba, cause amebic meningoencephalitis. Because some species of Acanthamoeba can infect the
eye, soft-contact wearers should take precautions to prevent
contamination of their lenses.
The flagellated protozoan Giardia lamblia is a major
cause of diarrhea throughout the world. In the United
States alone, G. lamblia caused 15,106 reported cases of
giardiasis diarrhea in 2013 (over 19,000 in 2010) and likely
caused thousands more that were not reported. G. lamblia
enters a human or other host as a cyst present in drinking water contaminated by feces (Fig. 26.10A). Aside from
humans, G. lamblia can be found in various rodents, deer,
cattle, and even household pets. It is very infectious. Ingestion of as few as 25 cysts can lead to disease. Following
ingestion, the hard, outer coating of the cyst is dissolved
by the action of digestive juices to produce a trophozoite

1058

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

A.

B.

10 +m

5 +m

FIGURE 26.10

■ Giardia lamblia. This protist is a major cause of diarrhea in the world. A. Cysts (7–14 µm) present in fecal matter (colorized SEM). B. Trophozoite form (5–15 µm in length; colorized SEM).

(Fig. 26.10B), which attaches itself to the wall of the small
intestines and reproduces. Offspring quickly encyst and are
excreted out of the host’s body.
Asymptomatic carriers of G. lamblia are common; it
has been estimated that anywhere from 1% to 30% of children in U.S. day-care centers are carriers. Disease usually
manifests as greasy stools alternating between a watery
diarrhea, loose stools, and constipation. However, some
patients will experience explosive diarrhea. Diagnosis
usually comes from observing the cysts or trophozoite
forms of the protozoan in feces. Metronidazole is a drug
often used to cure the disease. To prevent it in the first
place, proper treatment of community water supplies is
essential.
Although most gastrointestinal disease is intestinal in
locale, specialized microbes can also target the stomach,
with its harsh acidic environment.

Case History: Ulcers—It’s
Not What You Eat

Gary was a 34-year-old accountant who had immigrated
to Nebraska from Poland 7 years earlier. Since his teenage
years, he had been bothered periodically by episodes of epigastric pain (pain around the stomach), nausea, and heartburn.
Antacids usually alleviated the symptoms. Over the years, he
had received several courses of treatment with Tagamet or

Pepcid to reduce acid secretion and provide relief. Recently,
an upper-GI endoscopy had been performed, in which a long,
thin tube tipped with a camera and light source was inserted
into Gary’s mouth and threaded down into his stomach. The
view through the endoscope showed some reddened areas in
the antrum (bottom part) of the stomach. The endoscope was
also equipped with a small clawlike structure that obtained
a small tissue sample from the lining of Gary’s stomach. A
urease test performed on the antral biopsy turned positive in
20 minutes. Histological examination of the biopsy confirmed
moderate chronic active gastritis (inflammation of the stomach lining) and revealed the presence of numerous spiralshaped organisms. Cultures of the antral biopsy were positive
for Helicobacter pylori.
Painful and sometimes life-threatening gastric ulcers were
for many years blamed on spicy foods and stress. These
factors were believed to cause increased acid production
that ate away at the stomach lining, even though the gastric mucosa is normally well protected from stomach acid,
which can fall as low as pH 1.5. This protection argued
against the model but was ignored. In the 1980s, after discovering odd, helical bacteria present in the biopsies of gastric ulcers, Australians J. Robin Warren and Barry Marshall
(a medical intern at the Royal Perth Hospital at the time)
(Fig. 26.11A) proposed that bacteria, not pepperoni, cause
ulcers (Fig. 26.11B and C).
Their hypothesis was viewed with skepticism and
declared as heresy by the established medical community.

OLIVER MECKES / NICOLE OTTAWA/SCIENCE SOURCE

Fecal flora

DR. GARY GAUGLER/SCIENCE SOURCE

G. lamblia
cyst

CHAPTER 26

■

1059

C.

1 +m

ASTRAZENECA

COURTESY OF BARRY MARSHALL.

B.

MICROBIAL DISEASES

EMDICINE.COMN/A

A.

■

FIGURE 26.11

■ A bacterial cause of gastric ulcers. A. Physician Barry
Marshall was so sure he was right about the cause of stomach ulcers that he
swallowed bacteria to prove his point. B. H. pylori (SEM). Note the tuft of flagella at one pole. Cell length approx. 2 µm. C. Helicobacter (arrows) attached
to gastric mucosa.

Faced with disbelief bordering on ridicule, the
young intern drank a vial of the helical organisms and waited. A week later he began vomiting
and suffered other painful symptoms of gastritis.
Barry Marshall could not have been happier. He
had proved his point. We now know that this
curly microbe causes the vast majority of stomach ulcers.
The discovery of Helicobacter pylori and its
association with gastric ulcer disease led to an
upheaval in gastroenterology. Prior to this discovery, treatment had focused on suppressing acid production via proton pump inhibitors,
which did not provide long-term relief. Within
1 year after acid suppression therapy, up to 80%
of patients suffer a relapse of their ulcer. Therapy
now includes antimicrobial treatment to kill the
bacteria and acid suppression therapy to prevent
further inflammation while the ulcer heals. Warren and Marshall, who recovered from his gastritis, received the 2005 Nobel Prize in Physiology
or Medicine for their groundbreaking work.
The exact mechanism by which H. pylori
causes gastric ulcers is not known, although a
variety of virulence factors have been identified
by gene array (see eAppendix 3) and signaturetagged mutagenesis (see eTopic 25.1). The basic
scheme of Helicobacter pathogenesis is shown
in Fig. 26.12. After the pathogen is ingested,
H. pylori flagella propel the organism toward

1. H. pylori flagella propel the
organism toward the mucosa.

Flagella

Mucus layer
Urease

2. The pathogen produces extracellular urease, which locally
raises the pH of the stomach. Urease protects the bacterium
from the stomach's acid defense barrier.

3. Collagenase and mucinase assist bacteria
in reaching the stomach’s epithelial lining.

Collagenase/
mucinase

4. Adhesins such as BapA or HpaA allow
H. pylori to bind to host cells.

BapA

VacA

HpaA

NAP

5. Tissue damage follows
the release of vacuolating
cytotoxin (VacA) and
neutrophil-activating
protein (NAP).

CagA

6. CagA injected into host epithelial
cells activates host signal transduction
pathways that can stimulate growth,
possibly leading to cancer.

FIGURE 26.12

■

Steps in Helicobacter pathogenesis.

1060

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

the mucosa (Fig. 26.12, step 1). As it approaches the
mucosa, the pathogen produces intracellular and extracellular urease, an important virulence factor that converts
urea to CO2 and ammonia. The ammonia neutralizes acid
around Helicobacter and allows the organism to survive
the extreme acidity of the stomach (step 2).
Two other enzymes—collagenase and mucinase—then
soften the mucous lining, which allows the bacteria to reach
the stomach’s epithelial lining (Figs. 26.11C and 26.12,
step 3). The epithelial lining is much less acidic than the
lumen, so the organism can grow and divide. Once at the
epithelium, Helicobacter produces various adhesins, such as
BapA or HpaA, to bind host cells (step 4). After the organism has adhered, tissue damage develops with the release
of vacuolating cytotoxin (VacA) and neutrophil-activating
protein (NAP). NAP activates neutrophils and mast cells to
damage local tissue (step 5). VacA forms a hexameric pore in
the host membrane and induces apoptosis (programmed cell
death) by damaging mitochondria. Apoptotic cells decrease
the immune response, which will stabilize a chronic infection. Another protein, CagA, is injected into host epithelial
cells, where it is phosphorylated; CagA then interacts with
host signaling proteins and activates host signal transduction pathways that can stimulate growth, possibly leading
to cancer (step 6).
Tools useful for diagnosing H. pylori include a fecal antigen test, rapid urease testing, and serology [for example,
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) to detect
antibody to the CagA antigen]. ELISA is a common immunological tool to detect the presence, in serum, of antibodies to a specific organism—an indication of infection. The
assay, described more fully in Section 28.2, is performed by
coating wells in a plastic dish with an antigen (for example,
Helicobacter CagA). Serum from the patient is then added
to the well. If antibodies to CagA are present, they will
bind to the CagA antigen. Unbound antibody is removed
by washing, and a secondary antibody that binds human
IgG is added to the well.
The anti–human IgG antibodies have an enzyme linked
to them. A sandwich is formed as follows: [plastic dish]–
[CagA protein]–[anti-CagA antibody]–[anti-human IgG
antibody]–[enzyme]. When substrate is added to the well,
the enzyme acts on it to produce light or a chromogenic
(colored) product. The more anti-CagA antibody present
in the serum, the more light or product that is produced
by the linked enzyme. Applications of ELISA and further details of the methodology involved are described in
Section 28.2.

also been associated with gastric cancer. Here is some of
the evidence establishing the connection:
■

Many individuals with gastric cancer are also colonized
by H. pylori.

■

Gerbils infected with H. pylori develop gastric cancer.

■

Human gastric cells infected with H. pylori downregulate genes required for DNA repair.

■

When injected into gastric epithelial cells, H. pylori CagA is
phosphorylated on a tyrosine residue and activates a regulatory cascade that causes the gastric cell to proliferate.

The link between H. pylori and gastric cancer is sobering
when you consider that H. pylori can be detected in about
two-thirds of the world’s population, especially in impoverished countries.
We have examined in this section only a handful of the
bacterial, viral, and protozoan microbes that cause gastrointestinal infection. Others are listed in Table 26.3 and are
described in Chapter 20.

To Summarize
■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

Helicobacter pylori and cancer. Problems caused by

H. pylori are not limited to gastric ulcers. The microbe has

Diarrhea leads to dehydration, for which fluid replacement is a critical treatment. Antibiotic treatment is usually not recommended.
Staphylococcal food poisoning is not an infection. It is
a toxigenic disease.
Antibiotic treatments can sometimes cause gastrointestinal disease (for example, pseudomembranous
enterocolitis by Clostridium difficile).
The presence of red and white blood cells in fecal
contents is an indication of invasive bacterial infection
by intracellular pathogens such as Shigella, Salmonella,
and EIEC. Bacteria that do not invade intestinal cells
usually produce watery diarrhea. EHEC is an exception:
the attachment and effacing lesions it produces result in
bloody stools.
Bacterial toxins produced by bacterial enteric pathogens can cause systemic symptoms.
Rotavirus is still the single greatest cause of diarrhea
worldwide. Increasing use of rotavirus vaccine may eventually leave norovirus as the world’s leading cause of diarrhea.
Giardia lamblia is a major protozoan cause of diarrhea
worldwide.
The bacterium Helicobacter pylori, a common cause of
gastric ulcers, lives in the stomach and is highly acid resistant.

CHAPTER 26

■

MICROBIAL DISEASES

■

1061

TABLE 26.3-Selected Microbes That Cause Diseases of the Gastrointestinal Tract
Etiological agenta

Disease

Symptoms

Virulence factors

Source

Treatment

Campylobacter
jejuni (G–)

Gastroenteritis

Fever, muscle pain,
watery diarrhea, blood in
stool, headache

Cytotoxin,
enterotoxin, adhesin

Poultry,
unpasteurized
milk

Erythromycin

Clostridium
botulinum
(G+, anaerobe)

Botulism

Symptoms begin quickly;
flaccid paralysis

Neurotoxin

Preformed toxin in Antiserum
foods

Clostridium
difficile (G+)

Pseudomembranous Fever, abdominal
enterocolitis
pain, diarrhea,
pseudomembrane in
colon

Cytotoxin, antibiotic
resistance

Animals, normal
microbiota

Vancomycin

Clostridium
perfringens (G+)

Gastroenteritis

Watery diarrhea, nausea

Alpha toxin

Soil, food

Self-limiting

Enterohemorrhagic
E. coli

Gastroenteritis

Bloody diarrhea,
HUS

Intimin, Tir, type III
Contaminated
Oral rehydration;
secretion, Shiga toxin foods (hamburger) antibiotics if severe
and crops

Enterotoxigenic
E. coli

Traveler’s diarrhea

Watery diarrhea

Labile and stable
toxins

Helicobacter
pylori (G–)

Gastric ulcers

Salmonella
enterica (G–)

Bacterial

Humans; food,
water

Oral rehydration

Abdominal pain, bleeding, Adhesin, urease
heartburn
CagA, vacuolating
toxin

?

Triple drug
(omeprazole,
clarithromycin,
metronidazole)

Salmonellosis

Symptoms after 18 h;
abdominal pain, diarrhea;
invade intestinal M cells

Type III secretion,
intracellular growth

Chickens, other
animals; fecal-oral
route

Oral rehydration;
antibiotics if severe

Salmonella enterica
serovar Typhi (G–)

Typhoid fever

Headache, fever,
chills, abdominal pain,
rash (rose spots),
hypotension, diarrhea in
late stages

Type III secretion,
intracellular growth,
PhoPQ regulators, Vi
antigen capsule

Human carriers
(gallbladder
reservoir); food,
water

Quinolones

Shigella spp. (G–)

Shigellosis

Bloody diarrhea,
HUS

Shiga toxin,
type III secretion,
intracellular growth,
actin-based motility,
escape phagosome

Humans; fecal-oral Oral rehydration;
route
antibiotics if severe

Staphylococcus
aureus (G+)

Staphylococcal food Symptoms within 4 h
poisoning
of ingestion; nausea,
vomiting, diarrhea

Enterotoxin

Preformed toxin in Supportive
foods

Vibrio cholerae (G–)

Cholera

Watery diarrhea

Cholera toxin,
toxin-coregulated
pili (TCPs), ToxR
regulator

Human waste–
contaminated
water

Oral rehydration,
antibiotics

Diarrhea, blood in stool

Enterotoxin

Raw seafood

Self-limiting

Vibrio
Gastroenteritis
parahaemolyticus (G–)
Viral
Norovirus (Norwalk
virus)

Stomach “flu”

Nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea

VP1

Fecal-oral route

Oral rehydration

Rotavirus (most
common cause)

Stomach “flu”

Nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea

NSP4

Fecal-oral route

Oral rehydration

a

G+ = Gram-positive; G– = Gram-negative.

1062

■

PART 5

26.5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

Genitourinary
Tract Infections

Although the genital and urinary tracts are different organ
systems with different purposes (procreation versus the filtering and excretion of waste products from blood), the close
association of these organ systems in the body has often led
them to be grouped together when discussing infections.
Note that viruses and bacteria are capable of infecting the
genital tract, but viruses rarely cause urinary tract infections.
Also, very few pathogens can infect both organ systems.

■

Deposition of bacteria from the bloodstream to the
kidney. Kidney infections (called pyelonephritis) can
arise when microorganisms from infections elsewhere in
the body disseminate via the bloodstream.

■

Descending infection from the kidney to the bladder.
Descending infection occurs when bacteria from an
infected kidney are shed into the ureters. The microbes
are then carried by urine into the bladder.

■

Ascending infection to the kidney. In ascending infection, bacteria from an established infection in the bladder ascend along the ureter to infect the kidney.
Thought Question

Urinary Tract Infections

The urinary tract includes the kidneys, ureters, urinary
bladder, and urethra. Infections anywhere along this route
are called urinary tract infections (UTIs). UTIs are the second most common type of bacterial infection in humans,
ranking in frequency just behind respiratory infections
such as bronchitis or pneumonia. In the United States,
bladder infections and other UTIs result in over 6 million
patient visits annually, mostly by women. Estimates are
that at least 25% of women between 20 and 40 years of age
have experienced a UTI, and 20%–40% of those infected
develop recurrent infections. UTIs result in 100,000 hospital admissions in the United States and $1.6 billion in
medical expenses each year.
Urine, as produced in the kidneys, is normally sterile and
was thought to be sterile when stored in the bladder. Studies now show that the bladder has a normal microbiome,
although its role in human health is unclear. Why didn’t we
notice this earlier? All known bacterial causes of urinary tract
infections are facultative anaerobes that grow under aerobic
conditions. The microbiota of our urinary bladder are anaerobic and do not grow when urine is plated aerobically on blood
agar—the normal procedure used to identify urinary tract
pathogens. The current thought that bladder microbiota do
not cause disease and do not grow under the conditions used
to identify uropathogens is convenient for the clinical laboratory seeking pathogens.
Bacteria that cause UTIs are introduced into the bladder
or kidney in one of four ways:
■

Infection from the urethra to the bladder. This is
the most common route for bladder infections (called
cystitis). Bacteria residing along the superficial urogenital membranes of the urethra can ascend to the bladder. This is a more common occurrence in women than
in men. Uropathogenic bacteria colonizing the urethra
can also be introduced into the bladder by means of
mechanical devices such as catheters or cystoscopes that
are passed through the urethra into the bladder.

26.4 Why do you think most urinary tract infections occur in
women?

Urine is bacteriostatic to most of the commensal organisms inhabiting the perineum and vagina, such as Lactobacillus, Corynebacterium, diphtheroids, and Staphylococcus
epidermidis. In contrast, many Gram-negative organisms
thrive in urine. As a result, most urinary tract infections are
caused by facultative Gram-negative rods from the GI tract.
The most common etiological agents of UTIs are:
■

Certain serotypes of E. coli that comprise the uropathogenic E. coli (75% of all UTIs)

■

Klebsiella, Proteus, Pseudomonas, Enterobacter (20%)

■

Staphylococcus aureus, Enterococcus, Chlamydia, fungi,
Staphylococcus saprophiticus, other (5%)

Case History: Classic
Urinary Tract Infection

Lashandra was 24 years old and had been experiencing back
pain, increased frequency of urination, and dysuria (painful
or burning urination) over the previous 3 days. This was the
first time Lashandra had ever suffered from persisting dysuria. She consulted her general practitioner, who requested
a midstream specimen of urine. Upon microscopic examination, the urine was found to contain more than 50 leukocytes
per microliter (normal is fewer than 5) and 35 red blood cells
per microliter (normal is 3–20). No epithelial squamous cells
(skin cells) were seen, indicating a well-collected midstream
catch. The urine culture plated on agar medium yielded
more than 105 colonies per milliliter (meaning more than 105
organisms per milliliter in the urine) of a facultative anaerobic Gram-negative bacillus capable of fermenting lactose.
The first question to ask in this case is whether the patient
had a significant UTI. The purpose of the midstream urine

CHAPTER 26

MICROBIAL DISEASES

■

1063

A.
Uropathogenic
E. coli

2 µm

B.

PAI I
75.8 kb
hlyI

COURTESY OF HILDE MERKERT, UNIVERSITY OF WUERZBURG

collection is to provide laboratory data to make this determination. Even though urine in the bladder is normally
considered sterile (see above), urine becomes contaminated
with normal skin or GI microbiota that may adhere to the
urethral wall. In a midstream collection, the patient urinates briefly, stops to position a collection jar, and resumes
urinating to collect a midstream sample. This procedure
minimizes the number of organisms in the sample by washing away organisms clinging to the urethra before actually
collecting the sample. Nevertheless, the collected sample
will still contain low numbers of organisms representing
normal microbiota of the urethra.
A diagnosis of cystitis can be made in a symptomatic
patient when the number of bacteria (single colony type)
in a sample is at least 1,000/ml. The number of bacteria
per milliliter of urine does not have to reach 105 to diagnose cystitis. In fact, some people (especially the elderly)
are asymptomatic yet have bacterial counts of 105/ml.
These patients have asymptomatic bacteriuria and are not
usually treated with antibiotics, unless they are pregnant
women. The patient in the case history is symptomatic
and has sufficient numbers of bacteria in her urine to indicate a UTI.
The laboratory found the organism to be a Gramnegative bacillus that ferments lactose, suggesting E. coli as
the likely culprit. Given that the normal habitat of E. coli is
the gastrointestinal tract and this is the first UTI suffered
by the patient, the infection is likely the result of an inadvertent introduction of the microbe into the urethra. The
organism makes its way up the urethra and into the bladder. Another way the bladder can become infected is via a
descending route from the kidney. Organisms from a kidney that was infected as a result of sepsis can descend along
a ureter to cause a bladder infection.
Gram-negative rods not only thrive in urine but may
be adapted to cause urinary tract infections through specialized pili. These pili have terminal receptors for glycolipids and glycoproteins present on urinary tract epithelial
cells (Fig. 26.13A). Uropathogenic strains of E. coli, for
example, typically have P-type pili, with a terminal receptor
for the P antigen (a rather appropriate name for a bladderspecific virulence factor). The P antigen is a blood group
marker found on the surface of cells lining the perineum
and urinary tract; it is expressed by approximately 75% of
the population. These individuals are particularly susceptible to UTIs.
Some patients, usually women, are also susceptible
to recurrent bladder infections. These are thought to be
caused by uropathogenic E. coli that invade urinary tract
epithelial cells and form compact intracellular biofilms (discussed in eTopic 26.4).
Urinary tract infections are among those most frequently
acquired during a hospital stay (so-called nosocomial, or

■

PAI II
102 kb
hlyII/prf

0/100 min

PAI III
76.8 kb
sfa/iro

leuX
selC 97 thrW
5.6
82
E. coli 536
chromosome
pheV
asnT
64
44

PAI V
>40 kb
kps

PAI IV
31 kb
ybt

FIGURE 26.13

■ Uropathogenic E. coli. A. Bladder cell with
adherent uropathogenic E. coli (SEM). B. Distribution of pathogenicity islands (PAIs) in uropathogenic E. coli. The location of each insert
is given in map units within the circle representing the genome. The
0–100 map units are called centisomes. Each centisome is approx.
44 kb of DNA. Zero is arbitrarily placed at the thr (threonine) gene.
The origin of replication on this map is near 82 centisomes. A chromosomal gene flanking the insert is also provided. The size of each island
is shown above the insert. A key virulence gene for each island is listed.

hospital-acquired, infections). In these cases, the causal
organism is less likely to be E. coli and more likely to be
another Gram-negative bacterium or Staphylococcus. Many
UTIs resolve spontaneously, but others can progress to
destroy the kidney or, via Gram-negative septicemia, the
host. As a result, antibiotic therapy is recommended. In older
patients, UTIs frequently show atypical symptoms, including delirium, which disappears when the UTI is treated.

1064

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

TABLE 26.4-Common Sexually Transmitted Diseases
Disease

Symptoms

Etiological agenta

Virulence factors

Treatment

Reported
cases

Gonorrhea

Purulent discharge, burning
urination; can lead to sterility

Neisseria
gonorrhoeae (G–)

Type IV pili, phase
variation

Ceftriaxone

333,004b

Syphilis

1°: chancre; 2°: joint pain, rash; Treponema pallidum
3°: gummata, aneurism, central (spirochete)
nervous system damage

Motility

Penicillin

56,471b

Nongonococcal
urethritis

Watery or mucoid urethral
discharge, burning urination

Chlamydia
trachomatis

Intracellular growth;
Azithromycin
prevents phagolysosome
fusion

1.4 millionb

Trichomoniasis

Vaginal itching, painful
urination, strawberry cervix

Trichomonas
vaginalis (protozoan)

Cytotoxin

Metronidazole

225,000b

Chancroid

Painful genital lesion

Haemophilus
ducreyi (G–)

?

Erythromycin

10b

HIV diagnoses
ranging from
asymptomatic to
AIDS

For AIDS, fever, diarrhea,
cough, night sweats, fatigue,
opportunistic infections

HIV

gp120, Rev, Nef, and Tat
proteins

Azidothymidine
(AZT), protease
inhibitors,
zidovudine

34,969b

Genital herpes

Painful ulcer on external
genitals, painful urination

Herpes simplex 2

Cell fusion protein,
complement-binding
protein, latency

Acyclovir,
306,000b
iododeoxyuridine (50 millionc)

Genital warts

Warts on external genitals

Human papillomavirus E6, E7 proteins

Vaccine now
available

404,000b
(50 millionc)

a

G+ = Gram-positive; G– = Gram-negative.

b

CDC reported cases for 2013.

c

Total estimated current cases.

Thought Question

26.5 Urine samples collected from six hospital patients
were placed on a table at the nurses’ station awaiting pickup
from the microbiology lab. Several hours later, a courier
retrieved the samples and transported them to the lab. The
next day, the lab reported that four of the six patients had
UTIs. Would you consider these results reliable? Would you
start treatment based on these results?

What makes uropathogenic E. coli different from other
strains of E. coli? This is a question still under investigation,
but genomic analysis has exposed five pathogenicity islands
unique to these strains (Fig. 26.13B). The functions of
these pathogenicity islands are still under investigation.

Sexually Transmitted Diseases

Sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) are defined as infections transmitted primarily through sexual contact, which
may include genital, oral-genital, or anal-genital contact.
The organisms or viruses involved are generally very susceptible to drying and require direct physical contact with
mucous membranes for transmission. Because sex can take

many forms in addition to intercourse, these microbes
can initiate disease in the urogenital tract, rectum, or oral
cavities. Condoms can prevent transmission but do so, of
course, only when used. Examples of common sexually
transmitted diseases are listed in Table 26.4.

Case History: Secondary Syphilis

A pregnant 18-year-old woman came to the county urgentcare clinic with a low-grade fever, malaise, and headache.
She was sent home with a diagnosis of influenza. She again
sought treatment 7 days later, after she discovered a macular rash (flat, red) developing on her trunk, arms, palms of
her hands, and soles of her feet. Further questioning of the
patient revealed that 1 year earlier, she had had a painless
ulcer on her vagina that healed spontaneously. She was diagnosed with secondary syphilis—a diagnosis confirmed by a
serological test. She was given a single intramuscular injection of penicillin and told that her sexual partners had to be
treated as well.
The vaginal ulcer, the long latent period, and secondary
development of rash on the hands and feet described in the

CHAPTER 26

FIGURE 26.14

■

MICROBIAL DISEASES

■

1065

CDC/M. REIN, VD

© COLLECTION CNRI/PHOTOTAKE

C.

B.

CDC SUSAN LINDSAY

A.

■

Syphilis. A. Treponema pallidum (dark-field microscopy). Organisms are 10–25 µm long. B. Chancre of primary syphilis.

C. Rash of secondary syphilis.

case history are classic symptoms of syphilis. Syphilis was
recognized as a disease as early as the sixteenth century,
but the organism responsible, the spirochete Treponema
pallidum, was not discovered until 1905 (Fig. 26.14A).
(Chapter 18 describes spirochete structure.) The illness
has several stages. The disease has often been called the
great imitator because its symptoms in the second stage,
as exhibited in the case history, can mimic many other diseases. The incubation stage can last from 2 to 6 weeks after
transmission, during which time the organism multiplies
and spreads throughout the body.
Primary syphilis is an inflammatory reaction at the site
of infection called a chancre (Fig. 26.14B). About a centimeter in diameter, the chancre is painless and hard, and it
contains spirochetes. Patients are usually too embarrassed
to seek medical attention and, because it is painless, hope
it will just go away. It does go away after several weeks,
and without scarring. The disease has now entered the primary latent stage. Over the next 5 years, symptoms may be
absent, but at any time, as described in the case history, the
infected person can develop the rash typical of secondary
syphilis (Fig. 26.14C). The rash can be similar to rashes
produced by many different diseases, which contributes
to the “great imitator” label. The patient remains contagious in this stage. The symptoms eventually resolve, and
the patient reenters a latent phase of syphilis. Some patients
eventually progress over years to tertiary syphilis and
develop many of the cardiovascular and nervous system–
associated symptoms. Neurological symptoms resulting
from syphilis at any stage of the disease are referred to as
neurosyphilis. The patient can develop dementia and eventually dies from the disease.
The presence of T. pallidum in tissues can be detected
with fluorescent antibody, but the initial screen is usually
serological (that is, patient serum is tested for antibodies).
Antibiotics are useful for eradicating the organism, but
there is no vaccine, and cure does not confer immunity.

The disease is particularly dangerous in pregnant women.
The treponeme can cross the placental barrier and infect
the fetus to cause congenital syphilis. At birth, infected
newborns will have notched teeth (visible on X-rays), perforated palates, and other congenital defects. Women should
be screened for syphilis as part of their prenatal testing to
prevent these congenital infections.
Columbus and the New World theory of syphilis. An out-

break of syphilis that spread throughout Europe soon after
Christopher Columbus and his crew returned from the
Americas (1493) led to the theory that Columbus brought
the treponeme to Europe from the New World. However,
the theory that Columbus brought syphilis to Europe has
been difficult to prove.
Kristin Harper and colleagues used a phylogenetic
approach to address the 500-year-old question. The group
sequenced 26 geographically disparate strains of pathogenic Treponema. Of all the strains examined, the sexually transmitted syphilis-causing strains originated most
recently and were more closely related to the nonsexually
transmitted yaws-causing strains from South America, supporting the New World theory of syphilis. Thus, it seems
the crew of the Columbus voyages brought smallpox and
measles to America and did, in fact, return to Europe with
syphilis.
The Tuskegee experiment. Unfortunately, much of what
we know about syphilis is the result of the infamous
Tuskegee experiment conducted in the 1930s in Alabama.
The study was entitled “Untreated Syphilis in the Negro
Male.” Through dubious means and deception, a group of
African-American males was enlisted in a study that promised treatment but whose real purpose was to observe how
the disease progressed without treatment. Today, such
experiments are barred, thanks to strict oversight by institutional review boards (IRBs) that require human subjects

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

to sign informed consent forms. An interesting treatise on
the Tuskegee experiment can be found on the Internet at
the National Center for Case Study Teaching in Science
(search the site for “Bad Blood”).

Chlamydial Infections Are Often Silent

EBs

1. Elementary bodies (EBs)
bind and enter eukaryotic
cell by endocytosis.

2. Elementary body
differentiates into
reticulate body (RB).

Chlamydia is the most frequently reported sexually transmitted infectious disease in the United States, accordRBs
3. Reticulate bodies
ing to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
replicate.
but many people are unaware that they are infected.
Three-fourths of infected women, for instance,
4. Reticulate bodies
have no symptoms.
differentiate to
The chlamydias are unusual Gram-negative
elementary bodies
and form inclusions.
organisms with a unique developmental cycle.
(Chapter 18 describes chlamydial morphology.) They are obligate intracellular pathogens that start as a small, nonreplicating,
5. Elementary
infectious elementary body that enters target
bodies are
eukaryotic cells. Once inside vacuoles, they
released.
begin to enlarge into replicating reticulate
bodies (Fig. 26.15). As the vacuole fills, the
reticulate bodies divide to become new nonAttachment
replicating elementary bodies. Chlamydia trachomatis and Chlamydophila pneumoniae can
both cause STDs, as well as other diseases,
Intermediate form
such as trachoma of the eye or pneumonia.
People most at risk of developing genitourinary tract infections with chlamydias are young,
Reticulate body
sexually active men and women; anybody who hass
Elementary body
recently changed sexual partners; and anybody who
ase. The
has recently had another sexually transmitted disease.
covered,
covered
astute clinician knows that when one STD is discovered,
others may also be present.
th probrob
bbLeft untreated, chlamydia can cause serious health
lems. In women, the organism can produce pelvic infl
inflam1,000 nm
matory disease, a damaging infection of the uterus and
Chlamydia trachomatis
fallopian tubes that can be caused by several different
C. trachomatis–containing vacuole in an
microbial species. The damage produced can lead to inferinfected cell, showing an elementary body,
a reticulate body, and an intermediate form.
tility, tubal pregnancies, and chronic pelvic pain. Men left
untreated can suffer urethral and testicular infections and a
serious form of arthritis.
FIGURE 26.15 ■ Replication cycle of Chlamydia. Inset: EM

Case History: Gonorrhea

A 22-year-old mechanic saw his family doctor for treatment
of painful urination and urethral discharge. The patient was
sexually active, with three regular and several “one time–
good time” partners. Physical examination was unremarkable except for prevalent urethral discharge. The discharge
was Gram-stained and sent for culture. The Gram stain
revealed many pus cells, some of which contained numerous

DR. FRED HOSSLER/VISUALS UNLIMITED/GETTY IMAGES

1066

of a C. trachomatis–containing vacuole in an infected cell, showing
a reticulate body, infectious elementary bodies, and intermediate
forms.

phagocytosed Gram-negative diplococci (Fig. 26.16A). Blood
was drawn for syphilis serology, which proved negative. The
patient was given an intramuscular injection of ceftriaxone
(250 mg), and oral doxycycline (100 mg, twice a day) was
prescribed for 7 days. The bacteriology lab was able to recover
the bacteria seen in the Gram-stained smear of the urethral

CHAPTER 26
B.

5 µm

COURTESY OF JOHN W. FOSTER

DR. A. M. SIEGELMAN/VISUALS UNLIMITED

N. gonorrhoeae

MICROBIAL DISEASES

■

1067

C.
NAUTRE IMMUNOLOGY, COVER (MARCH 2002) VOL.3, NO.3.
PHOTO: DR. IAN C. BOULTON AND DR GRAY-OWEN

A.

■

N. gonorrhoeae

CD4+ T cell

FIGURE 26.16

■ Neisseria gonorrhoeae. A. Within pus-filled exudates, the Gram-negative diplococci are found intracellularly inside PMNs.
The intracellular bacteria in this case are no longer viable, having been killed by the antimicrobial mechanisms of the white cell.
B. Colonies of N. gonorrhoeae growing on chocolate agar (agar plates containing heat-lysed red blood cells that turn the medium chocolate
brown). C. N. gonorrhoeae binding to CD4+ T cells, inhibiting T-cell activation and proliferation, which may explain the ease of reinfection
(colorized SEM).

discharge. The organism produced characteristic colonies on
chocolate agar (agar plates containing heat-lysed red blood
cells that turn the medium chocolate brown) (Fig. 26.16B).
The case was subsequently reported to the state public health
department. When the patient came back for his return visit,
his symptoms had resolved, and a repeat culture was negative.
The disease here is classic gonorrhea caused by Neisseria
gonorrhoeae. A characteristic that distinguishes Neisseria
infections from Chlamydia infections is that bacterial cells
are seen in gonorrheal discharges but not in chlamydial discharges. Gonorrhea has been a problem for centuries and
remains epidemic in this country today. Symptoms generally occur 2–7 days after infection, but they can take as long
as 30 days to develop. Most infected men exhibit symptoms; only about 10%–15% do not. Symptoms include painful urination, yellowish white discharge from the penis,
and in some cases, swelling of the testicles and penis. The
Greek physician Galen (AD 129–ca. 199) originally mistook the discharge for semen. This mistake led to the name
gonorrhea, which means “flow of seed.”
In contrast to men, most infected women (80%) do not
exhibit symptoms and constitute the major reservoir of the
organism. If they are asymptomatic, they have no reason
to seek treatment and thus can spread the disease. When
symptoms are present, they are usually mild. A symptomatic
woman will experience a painful burning sensation when
urinating and will notice vaginal discharge that is yellow
or occasionally bloody. She may also complain of cramps or
pain in her lower abdomen, sometimes with fever or nausea. As the infection spreads throughout the reproductive
organs (uterus and fallopian tubes), pelvic inflammatory
disease occurs (see earlier discussion of chlamydia). There
is no serological test or vaccine for gonorrhea, because the
organism frequently changes the structure of its surface

antigens (phase variation is discussed in Section 10.1 and
eTopic 10.1).
Although N. gonorrhoeae is generally serum sensitive,
owing to its sensitivity to complement, certain serum-resistant strains can make their way to the bloodstream and carry
infection throughout the body. As a result, both sexes can
develop purulent arthritis (joint fluid containing pus), endocarditis, or meningitis. An infected mother can also infect
her newborn during parturition (birth), leading to a serious
eye infection called ophthalmia neonatorum. Because of this
risk and because most infected women are asymptomatic, all
newborns receive antimicrobial eyedrops at birth.
Because adults engage in a variety of sexual practices,
N. gonorrhoeae can also infect the anus or the pharynx,
where it can develop into a mild sore throat. These infections generally remain unrecognized until a sex partner
presents with a more typical form of genitourinary gonorrhea. Because no lasting immunity is built up, reinfection with N. gonorrhoeae is possible. Reinfection occurs
in part because there is phase variation in various surface
antigens and because the organism can apparently bind to
CD4+ T cells, inhibiting their activation and proliferation
to become memory T cells (Fig. 26.16C).
Over the decades, N. gonorrhoeae has incrementally
developed resistance to many antibiotics used in its treatment, but there has always been a new, effective drug ready
to take the place of the old drug. Soon, this may no longer be the case. To prevent treatment failures, the CDC
recommends dual antibiotic therapy that includes an intramuscular injection of ceftriaxone and oral azithromycin or
tetracycline. However, the incidence of ceftriaxone-resistant
strains of N. gonorrhoeae overseas is increasing. The alarm
has been raised that new antibiotics must be developed if
we are to prevent an uncontrollable explosion of cases of
this already epidemic disease.

1 µm

1068

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

A.

B.

31.4

3.0

27.8

32.4

33.4

34.5

35.2

25

20.6

2.0

20

15.9

1.5

35
30

30.0

24.5

2.5

15

11.3

10

7.3

2012

2010

2008

2006

2004

2002

1996

2000

0

1998

0

1994

5
1992

0.5

C.

Uninfected T cell

40

HIV-infected T cell

Mitochondria

E.

D.

HIV

FIGURE 26.17

■ Acquired
immunodeficiency
syndrome. A. HIV infections

Thought Question

26.6 Aside from the CDC guidelines for treating gonorrhea,
why else do you suppose the patient in this case was treated
with doxycycline (a derivative of tetracycline)? And why can
one person be infected repeatedly with N. gonorrhoeae?

HIV Causes AIDS, a Sexually
Transmitted and Blood-Borne Disease

Though HIV (human immunodeficiency virus) is believed
to have originated around the year 1900, it was not discovered until 1981, when the virus caused the greatest pandemic of the late twentieth century. HIV remains a serious
problem today, especially in southern Africa, where it is estimated that 10%–30% of the population is infected (prevalence in the United States is less than 1%). HIV has claimed
the lives of almost 2 million people per year worldwide
(about 14,000 per year in the United States). You may be
surprised to learn that in the United States, women make
up about 19% of new AIDS cases per year, the majority

MDCHOICE.COM

DR. F. C. SKVARA / VISUALS UNLIMITED

DR. RAPHAEL OJOH/THATCHERS.ORG

and AIDS deaths worldwide.
The number of people living
with HIV continues to increase,
yet the number of people newly infected with HIV and the
number of deaths due to AIDS
have decreased. B. HIV (green)
can directly transfer from an
8 µm
infected to an uninfected
T cell by virological synapse.
C. Oral candidiasis (thrush). The white patches are caused by secondary infection by the yeast Candida albicans. D. Pneumocystis jirovecii
infection of the lung. Note the cuplike appearance of the fungus, almost like crushed Ping-Pong balls. Organisms range from 2 to 6 µm in
diameter. E. Kaposi’s sarcoma (oval spots) and periorbital cellulitis infection.

resulting from heterosexual sex. The molecular biology and
virulence of HIV are discussed in Chapters 11 and 25, and
pathogenesis is covered in eTopic 26.5. This section focuses
on the disease that HIV causes—namely, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS).
HIV, a lentivirus in the retroviral family, is a prominent
example of viruses that can be transmitted either sexually
(vaginally, orally, anally—homosexually or heterosexually)
or through direct contact with body fluids, such as occurs
with blood transfusion or the sharing of hypodermic needles by intravenous drug users. HIV is not transmitted by
kissing, tears, or mosquito bites. It can, however, be transferred from mother to fetus through the placenta (transplacental transfer). We discuss HIV infections in this section
because sexual contact remains the major route of transmission. Figure 26.17A shows the worldwide decrease
in the number of newly infected HIV patients and deaths
due to AIDS. The number of people living with HIV has
increased, however, because of the development of more
effective antiviral treatments. The pathogenesis of HIV
and the proportion of AIDS cases by sex and ethnicity are
described in eTopic 26.5.

GROPPELLI ET AL. 2015 JOURNAL OF VIROLOGY 89: COVER

3.5

1990

People newly infected with HIV
and deaths due to AIDS (millions)

4.0

1.0

45

Number of people living with HIV
Number of people newly infected with HIV
Number of deaths due to AIDS

People living with HIV (millions)

4.5

CHAPTER 26

Once it has entered the bloodstream, HIV infects CD4+
T cells and macrophages (which also have CD4 on their
surface). The virus replicates very rapidly, producing a billion particles per day. The virus can also spread directly
from cell to cell via virological synapses (Fig. 26.17B).
When infected and uninfected T cells make contact, HIV
virions and mitochondria (to supply energy) line up at the
contact interface where transmission occurs. Viral replication starts to kill the CD4+ T cells, which progressively
decrease in number.
HIV infection has four stages.
1. A primary stage beginning with seroconversion (finding antibodies to the virus)
2. Clinical latency (slow steady loss of T cells without
symptoms, or sometimes swollen lymph nodes)
3. Early symptomatic disease (formerly called AIDSrelated complex)
4. Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)
Symptoms in the early symptomatic stage can include fever,
headache, macular rash, and weight loss. The symptoms can
manifest within a few months of infection, resolve within a
few weeks, and then recur. As T-cell numbers decline, the
debilitated immune system leaves the victim susceptible to
secondary infections such as thrush, caused by the yeast Candida albicans (candidiasis) and related species (Fig. 26.17C).
The CDC defines AIDS as a CD4+ cell count of less
than 200 cells/μl or the presence of an AIDS indicator
disease. For example, once the CD4+ T-cell population
falls below 500 cells/μl, opportunistic infections start to
arise and disease processes begin. Opportunistic infections
include pneumonia by Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare
or Pneumocystis jirovecii (Fig. 26.17D), cryptococcal meningitis, Histoplasma capsulatum infection, and tuberculosis. The presence of these diseases indicates that the patient
has AIDS, regardless of the CD4+ count.
Various cancers are also on the list of AIDS indicator diseases. AIDS patients are more susceptible to cancers because
their depressed immune systems cannot detect and destroy
cancer cells generated by secondary agents. Kaposi’s sarcoma
(Fig. 26.17E), for instance, is a common cancer seen in
AIDS patients that is caused by human herpes virus type
8 (HHV8). Kaposi’s sarcoma originates in endothelial or
lymphatic cells, but the resulting tumors can develop anywhere—gastrointestinal tract, mouth, lungs, skin, or brain.
Diagnosis of AIDS involves detecting anti-HIV antibodies and determining the CD4+ T-cell count in a patient.
An assay for HIV to determine viral load is done via quantitative PCR to detect HIV-specific genes such as gag, nef, or
pol. Remember, a person who is HIV-positive does not necessarily have AIDS; the disease may take years to develop.
A vaccine is not yet available to prevent AIDS, in part

■

MICROBIAL DISEASES

■

1069

because the envelope proteins of the virus (see Fig. 11.24)
typically change their antigenic shape. However, progression of the disease can be controlled by antiretroviral drugs
that inhibit two HIV enzymes critical to the replication of
the virus: reverse transcriptase and protease. Antiretroviral
drugs are discussed further in Chapter 27.
New treatment regimens (HAART; see Chapter 27) have
made HIV an increasingly survivable infection. Consider this:
In the past, nearly all HIV-infected individuals eventually
became ill and died from AIDS-related diseases, but in the
United States at least half of, if not most, HIV-positive people
now die from diseases unrelated to HIV (for example, heart
attack). Because HIV infection is now considered a treatable
disease, the CDC recommends routine screening for HIV.
Can HIV infection be cure d? Because HIV DNA integrates into the genome of an infected cell, it has been
impossible to cure anyone of the infection. However, a new
study by Kamel Khalili has proved that the CRISPR-cas9
system described in Chapters 9 and 12 can be engineered
to “surgically” remove proviral HIV DNA from infected
T cells. Whether this strategy can be used in a patient
remains to be seen.
Thought Question

26.7 Like the cause of plague, HIV is a blood-borne disease.
Why, then, do fleas and mosquitoes fail to transmit HIV?

The Protozoan Trichomonas vaginalis
Produces a Common Vaginal Infection

Trichomonas vaginalis is a flagellated protozoan
(Fig. 26.18) that causes an unpleasant sexually transmitted vaginal disease called trichomoniasis. Approximately
2–3 million infections occur each year in the United States.
Both men and women can be infected; however, men
are usually asymptomatic. Even among infected women,
25%–50% are considered asymptomatic carriers.
There is no cyst in the life cycle of T. vaginalis, so
transmission is via the trophozoite stage only (the form
of a protozoan in the feeding stage). The female patient
with trichomoniasis may complain of vaginal itching and/
or burning and a musty vaginal odor. An abnormal vaginal discharge also may be present. Males will complain of
painful urination (dysuria), urethral or testicular pain, and
lower abdominal pain.
Owing to colonization by lactobacilli (which produce
large amounts of acidic lactic acid), the normal, healthy
vagina has a pH of less than 4.5. However, since T. vaginalis feeds on bacteria, the pH of the vagina rises as the numbers of lactobacilli decrease. Definitive diagnosis requires
demonstrating by microscopy that the flagellated protozoan is in secretions. PMNs, which are the primary host

1070

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

■

Trichomonas vaginalis is a flagellated protozoan that
causes a sexually transmitted vaginal disease. The reservoirs
for this organism are the male urethra and female vagina.

1 µm

DAVID M. PHILLIPS/VISUALS UNLIMITED, INC.

26.6

FIGURE 26.18

■ Trichomonas vaginalis. T. vaginalis is a protozoan that causes a common sexually transmitted disease (SEM).

defense against the organism, are also usually present. Like
giardiasis, this disease is treated with metronidazole.

To Summarize
■

■

■

■

■

■

■

Urinary tract infections (UTIs) include cystitis (bladder) and pyelonephritis (kidney). E. coli is the most common cause of UTIs.
Cystitis can develop from bacteria ascending up the
urethra (most common route) or descending down a
ureter from an infected kidney.
Pyelonephritis can develop from bacteria ascending
along a ureter from an infected bladder or from bacteria in the bloodstream disseminating from an infection
elsewhere in the body.
Syphilis, chlamydia, and gonorrhea are the most common sexually transmitted diseases.
A patient with one sexually transmitted disease often
has another sexually transmitted disease too.
Complement prevents bloodstream dissemination of
Neisseria gonorrhoeae, which lacks a carbohydrate capsule. Because the organism frequently changes the structure of its surface antigens, no vaccine is available for N.
gonorrhoeae.
HIV depletion of CD4+ T cells results in lethal secondary infections and cancers.

Cardiovascular and
Systemic Infections

The cardiovascular system, which is composed of the heart,
arteries, veins, and capillaries, delivers oxygen, nutrients,
and immune system components to all tissues of the body.
There are pathogens that can directly infect the heart or
the endothelial cells lining blood vessels. However, the
blood itself can also become infected or serve as a mass
transit system to spread pathogens throughout the body.
Pathogens disseminated in this way can cause infections in
many different organ systems. We will examine both types
of infections in this section.
Infections of the cardiovascular system include septicemia, endocarditis (inflammation of the heart’s inner
lining), pericarditis (inflammation of the heart’s outer lining), myocarditis (inflammation of heart muscle), and, possibly, atherosclerosis (deposition of fatty substances along
the inner lining of arteries; eTopic 26.6). These are all lifethreatening diseases.
Septicemia is, by strict definition, the presence of bacteria
or viruses in the blood. The presence of viruses is a condition
more specifically called viremia, while bacteria in the circulation is more specifically called bacteremia. In practice,
however, the terms “septicemia” and “bacteremia” are often
used interchangeably. Septicemia can develop from a local
tissue infection situated anywhere in the body, although
blood factors such as complement can nonspecifically kill
many types of bacteria that enter the blood. Nevertheless,
Gram-positives, Gram-negatives, aerobes, and anaerobes can
all produce septicemia under the right conditions.
Endocarditis can be either viral or bacterial in origin.
It can be a consequence of many bacterial diseases, such
as brucellosis, gonorrhea, psittacosis, staphylococcal and
streptococcal infections, candidiasis, and Q fever (Coxiella).
Among the many viral causes are coxsackievirus, echovirus,
Epstein-Barr virus, and HIV. Bacterial infections of the
heart are always serious. Viral infections, although common, are rarely life-threatening in healthy individuals and
are usually asymptomatic.

Case History: Bacterial Endocarditis

Elizabeth was 38 years old and had a history of mitral valve
prolapse (a common congenital condition in which a heart
valve does not close properly). She was also on immunosuppressive
therapy following a kidney transplant. Recently, Elizabeth was
admitted to the hospital complaining of fatigue, intermittent

fevers for 5 weeks, and headaches for 3 weeks—symptoms the physician recognized as possible indications of endocarditis. Elizabeth reported having a dental procedure a few weeks prior to the
onset of symptoms. A sample of her blood placed in a liquid bacteriological medium grew Gram-positive cocci, which turned out
to be Streptococcus mutans, a member of the viridans streptococci. With the finding of bacteria in the bloodstream, the diagnosis of bacterial endocarditis was confirmed. Elizabeth began
a 1-month course of intravenous penicillin G and gentamicin
therapy and eventually recovered to normal health.
Endocarditis (inflammation of the heart) is traditionally
classified as acute or subacute, depending on the pathogenic organism involved and the speed of clinical presentation. Subacute bacterial endocarditis (SBE) has a slow
onset with vague symptoms. It is usually caused by bacterial infection of a heart valve (Fig. 26.19). SBE infections
are usually (but not always) caused by a viridans streptococcus from the oral microbiota (for example, Streptococcus mutans, a common cause of dental caries). “Viridans
streptococci” is a general term used for commensal streptococci whose colonies produce green alpha hemolysis on
blood agar (“viridans” is from the Greek viridis, “to be
green”). Most patients who develop infective endocarditis
have mitral valve prolapse (90%), although this is frequently
not the case when patients are intravenous drug abusers or
have hospital-acquired (nosocomial) infections.
Subacute bacterial endocarditis can begin at the dentist’s
office, as it did in the case history presented here, although
it very rarely does. Following a dental procedure (such as
tooth restoration) or even while brushing your teeth, oral
bacteria can transiently enter the bloodstream and circulate. S. mutans, which is not normally a serious health
problem, can become lodged onto damaged heart valves,
grow as a biofilm, and secrete a thick glycocalyx coating
that encases the microbes and forms a vegetation on the
valve, damaging it further. If untreated, the condition can
be fatal within 6 weeks to a year.
A rapidly progressive (acute) and highly destructive
infection can develop when more virulent organisms, such
as Staphylococcus aureus, gain access to cardiac tissue. Symptoms of acute endocarditis include fever, pronounced valvular regurgitation (backflow of blood through the valve),
and abscess formation.
Most patients with subacute bacterial endocarditis present with a fever that lasts several weeks. They also complain of nonspecific symptoms, such as cough, shortness of
breath, joint pain, diarrhea, and abdominal or flank pain.
Endocarditis is suspected in any patient who has a heart
murmur and an unexplained fever for at least a week. It
should also be considered in an intravenous drug abuser
with a fever, even in the absence of a murmur. In either
case, definitive diagnosis requires blood cultures that
grow bacteria. Blood cultures involve taking samples of a

■

MICROBIAL DISEASES

■

1071

Vegetation

FIGURE 26.19

■

DEPARTMENT OF PATHOLOGY, THE UNIVERSITY OF NEW SOUTH WALES.

CHAPTER 26

View of bacterial endocarditis. Close-up of

mitral valve endocarditis, showing vegetation.

patient’s blood from two different locations (such as two
different arms). Once collected, the blood is added to liquid culture medium and incubated at 37°C. Incubation
should be done aerobically and anaerobically. Growth of
the same organism in cultures taken from two body sites
rules out inadvertent contamination with skin microbes,
which would likely yield growth in only one culture.
Curing endocarditis is difficult because the microbes
are usually ensconced in a nearly impenetrable glycocalyx.
Consequently, eradicating microorganisms from the vegetations almost always requires hospitalization, where high
doses of intravenous antibiotic therapy can be administered
and monitored. Antibiotic therapy usually continues for at
least a month, and in extreme cases, surgery may be necessary to repair or replace the damaged heart valve.
Patients with heart valve prolapse should not shy away
from the dentist, however. As long as a healthy immune
system is in place, the risk of infection is low. In fact, maintaining good oral hygiene can keep their risk of developing infectious endocarditis low. Immunocompromised
patients, on the other hand, are at increased risk and should
be treated prophylactically with oral penicillin or erythromycin 1 hour before a procedure, to kill oral bacteria that
enter the bloodstream. This prophylactic treatment can
prevent the development of endocarditis in these patients.
Viruses such as adenovirus and some enteroviruses can
also cause endocarditis, as well as a condition known as
myocarditis, an inflammation of the heart muscle.

Thought Question

26.8 A patient presenting with high fever and in an extremely
weakened state is suspected of having a septicemia. Two sets
of blood cultures are taken from different arms. One bottle
from each set grows Staphylococcus aureus, yet the laboratory
report states that the results are inconclusive. New blood cultures are ordered. What would make these results inconclusive?

1072

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

Malarial Parasites Feed on Blood

Malaria is the most devastating infectious disease known.
Each year, 300–500 million people develop malaria worldwide, and 1–3 million of these people, mostly children,
die. In the United States the disease is relatively rare;
only about 1,000 cases occur annually, and almost all are
acquired as a result of international travel to endemic areas
(Fig. 26.20A). Once again, this correlation illustrates the
diagnostic importance of knowing a patient’s travel history.
The disease is caused by four species of Plasmodium:
P. falciparum (the most deadly), P. malariae, P. vivax, and
P. ovale. The life cycle of Plasmodium, discussed in detail in
Chapter 20, is complex and involves two cycles: an asexual
erythrocytic cycle in the human, and a sexual cycle in the
mosquito (see Fig. 20.39).
In the erythrocytic cycle, the organisms enter the
bloodstream through the bite of an infected female Anopheles mosquito (the mosquito injects a small amount of saliva
containing Plasmodium). The haploid sporozoites travel
immediately to the liver, where they undergo asexual fission to produce merozoites. Released from the liver, the
merozoites attach to and penetrate red blood cells, where
Plasmodium consumes hemoglobin and enlarges into a trophozoite. The protist nucleus divides, so that the cell, now
called a schizont, contains up to 20 or so nuclei. The schizont then divides to make the smaller, haploid merozoites
(Fig. 26.20B). The glutted red blood cell eventually lyses,
releasing merozoites that can infect new red blood cells (see
Fig. 20.39).
Sudden, synchronized release of the merozoites and red
blood cell debris triggers the telltale symptoms of malaria:
violent, shaking chills followed by high fever and sweating.

The erythrocytic cycle, and thus the symptoms, repeats
every 48–72 hours. After several cycles, the patient goes
into remission lasting several weeks to months, after which
there is a relapse.
Much of today’s research focuses on why malarial relapse
happens. Why does the immune system fail to eliminate
the parasite after the first episode? When Plasmodium
invades the red blood cells, it lines the blood cells with a
protein, PfEMP1, which causes the parasite to stick to the
sides of blood vessels. The parasite is thereby removed from
circulation, but the protein cannot protect the parasite
from patrolling macrophages, which eventually detect the
invader and recruit other immune cells to fight it. So, during a malarial infection, a small percentage of each generation of parasites switches to a different version of PfEMP1
that the body has never seen before. In its new disguise,
Plasmodium can invade more red blood cells and cause
another wave of fever, headaches, nausea, and chills.
The antigenic shift happens when the parasite alters
the PfEMP1 gene that is expressed. The body now has to
repeat the recognition and attack responses all over again.
The parasite has 60 cloaking genes, called var, that can be
turned on and off individually, changing the organisms’
antigenic structure, like a criminal repeatedly changing his
disguise to elude police.
The var genes are regulated by chromosome packaging,
which unwraps one gene for expression and packs away the
inactive genes. DNA can be encased so securely by some
proteins that other proteins cannot access the nucleic acid
for transcription—a process known as epigenetic silencing. Becoming immune to all the types of malaria can
take upwards of 5 years and requires constant exposure;

A.

B.

Areas where
malaria is
prevalent

Residual
body

FIGURE 26.20

■ Malaria is a major disease worldwide. A. Endemic areas of
the world where malaria is prevalent. B. Plasmodium falciparum (colorized TEM).
Schizont after completion of division. A residual body of the organism (yellow-green)
is left over after division. The erythrocyte has lysed and only a ghost cell remains; no
cytoplasm is seen surrounding the merozoites just being released. Free merozoites
are seen outside the membrane.

10 µm

DR. DENNIS KUNKEL/VISUALS UNLIMITED

Merozoite

CHAPTER 26

otherwise the immunity is lost. Many children do not live
long enough to gain immunity to malaria in all its forms.
Diagnosis of malaria involves microscopic demonstration of the protist within erythrocytes (Wright stain) or
serology to identify antimalarial antibodies. Treatment
regimens include artemisinin, whose mechanism of action
is unknown; chloroquine or mefloquine, which kill the
organisms in their erythrocytic asexual stages; and primaquine, effective in the exoerythrocytic stages by disrupting
Plasmodium mitochondria.
The chloroquine family of drugs acts by interfering
with the detoxification of heme generated from hemoglobin digestion. Malaria parasites accumulate the hemoglobin released from red blood cells in plasmodial lysosomes,
where digestion occurs. The parasites use the amino acids
from hemoglobin to grow but find free heme toxic. To prevent eating itself to death (from accumulating too much
heme), the organism detoxifies heme via polymerization,
which produces a black pigment. Many antimalarial drugs,
such as chloroquine, prevent polymerization by binding to
the heme. As a result, the increased iron level (from heme)
kills the parasite. Unfortunately, Plasmodium has been
developing resistance to these drugs, forcing the development of new ones.
A.

MICROBIAL DISEASES

■

1073

An effective vaccine has so far proved elusive because of
the antigenic shape-shifting carried out by this parasite. To
prevent infection, antimalarial drugs are given prophylactically to persons traveling to endemic areas. Which drug is
given depends on the destination.
Bear in mind that we have described only selected organisms that cause cardiovascular infections; there are many
more (for example, Rickettsia typhi). There is even evidence
that Chlamydophila pneumoniae may have a role in coronary artery disease (see eTopic 26.6).

Note:

Babesiosis is an emerging disease caused by a protozoan (Babesia microti) that, like Plasmodium, infects red blood
cells. B. microti is transmitted by the deer tick, the same insect that
transmits the agent for Lyme disease. Typically, babesiosis is a mild,
flu-like disease, but in its severe form it can present with symptoms
similar to those of malaria.

Systemic Infections

Many pathogenic bacteria can produce septicemia as a
way to disseminate throughout the body and infect other
organs. These organisms cause what are considered systemic infections.

Case History: The Plague

B.

CDC

4 +m

CDC

Notice the
bipolar staining

C.

■

A 25-year-old New Mexico rancher
was admitted to an El Paso hospital because of a 2-day history of
headache, chills, and fever (40°C;
104°F). The day before admission, he
began vomiting. The day of admission, an orange-sized, painful swelling in the right groin area was noted
(Fig. 26.21A). A lymph node aspirate and a smear of peripheral blood
were reported to contain Gram-negative rods that exhibited bipolar

D.

FIGURE 26.21

■ The
plague. A. Classic bubo

SCIENCE SOURCE/SCIENCE SOURCE

CRAIG K. LORENZ/SCIENCE SOURCE

Infection in
lung

(swollen lymph node) of
bubonic plague. B. Yersinia pestis, bipolar staining
(length 1–3 µm). C. Prairie
dogs are often hosts to fleas
that carry plague bacilli. D.
X-ray of pneumonic plague,
showing bilateral pulmonary
infection.

1074

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

even prairie dogs (Fig. 26.21C), by the bite of infected
fleas. Figure 26.22 illustrates the various infective cycles
of the plague bacillus. Humans are not typically part of the
natural infection cycle. However, in the absence of an animal host, the flea can take a blood meal from humans and
thereby transmit the disease to them. During the Middle
Ages, urban rats venturing back and forth to the countryside became infected by the fleas of wild rodents that
served as a reservoir. Upon returning to the city, the rat flea
passed the organism on to other rats, which then died in
droves. The rat fleas, deprived of their normal meal, were
forced to feed on city dwellers, passing the disease on to
them.
Individuals bitten by an infected flea or accidentally
infected through a cut while skinning an infected animal
first exhibit the symptoms of bubonic plague. Bubonic
plague emerges as the organism moves from the site of
infection to the lymph nodes, producing characteristically
enlarged nodes called buboes (see Fig. 26.21A). From the
lymph nodes, the pathogen can enter the bloodstream,
causing septicemic plague. In this phase the patient can
go into shock from the massive amount of endotoxin in
the bloodstream. Neither bubonic nor septicemic plague

staining (Fig. 26.21B). The patient’s white blood cell count
was 24,700/μl (normal is 5,000–10,000/μl), and his platelet count was 72,000/μl (normal is 130,000–400,000/μl). In
the 2 weeks prior to becoming ill, the patient had trapped,
killed, and skinned two prairie dogs, four coyotes, and one
bobcat. The patient had cut his left hand shortly before skinning a prairie dog. PCR and typical biochemical testing of
a Gram-negative rod isolated from blood cultures identified the organism as Yersinia pestis, the organism that causes
plague. The patient received an antibiotic cocktail of gentamicin and tetracycline. He eventually recovered, after
6 weeks in intensive care.
Plague is caused by the bacterium Yersinia pestis, which can
infect both humans and animals. During the Middle Ages,
the disease, known as the Black Death, decimated over a
third of the population of Europe. Such was the horror it
evoked that invading armies would actually catapult dead
plague victims into embattled fortresses. This was probably
the first reported case of biowarfare.
Y. pestis is present in the United States and is endemic
in 17 western states. The microbe is normally transmitted from animal to animal, typically rodents like rats and
FIGURE 26.22

■ The cycles of plague. The sylvatic cycle occurs
in the wild, where fleas transmit the organism between rodents. An
accidental interaction with urban rats can trigger a similar urban cycle.
Humans can be infected through contact with infected fleas coming from
either cycle. Flea bite transmission initiates bubonic plague symptoms
that can progress to pneumonic plague. Pneumonic plague is highly
infectious, which can cause epidemic spread of the disease.

PERSON-TO-PERSON

Direct

MAY PROGRESS TO

Secondary
plague
pneumonia

Bubonic
plague

DI R

DIRECT CONTACT

human-to-human
transmission.

DI R ECT CONTACT

TACT
CON
ECT

Wild rodent

Pneumonic plague epidemic

Domestic rodent
DIREC

T CO

CT
N TA

Infective flea

Infective flea

Infective flea

Infective flea
DIRECT CONTACT

PATHWAYS
Wild rodent

Sylvatic cycle

between fleas and rodents.

Usual
Occasional

Domestic rodent

Urban cycle

between fleas and rodents.

CHAPTER 26

is passed from person to person. As the organism courses
through the bloodstream, however, it will invade the lungs
and produce pneumonic plague (Fig. 26.21D), which can
be easily transmitted from person to person through aerosol droplets generated by coughing.
Pneumonic plague is the most dangerous form of
the disease because it can kill quickly and spread rapidly
through a population. Pneumonic plague is so virulent
that an untreated patient can die within 24–48 hours.
The organism is usually identified postmortem. It is now
thought that the rapid spread of plague during the Middle Ages was the result of person-to-person transmission
through respiratory aerosols.
Y. pestis has numerous virulence factors. For instance,
YadA is a surface adhesin that binds collagen. Another
factor, the F1 protein capsule surface antigen, plays a
part in blocking phagocytosis in mammalian hosts. Certain biofilms formed by Y. pestis are also important. An
extracellular matrix synthesized by Y. pestis produces an
adherent biofilm in the flea midgut that contributes to
flea-to-mammal transmission. The biofilm blocks flea
digestion, making the flea feel “starved” even after a
blood meal. Therefore, the flea jumps from host to host
in a futile effort to feel full. As the flea tries to take a
blood meal, the blockage causes the insect to regurgitate
bacteria into the wound. This curious effect of Y. pestis on the insect vector is another unique aspect of how
plague spreads so quickly.
Y. pestis also uses type III secretion systems to inject virulence proteins (YopB and YopD) into host cell membranes.
Unlike Salmonella, which uses type III–secreted proteins
to gain entrance into host cells, Y. pestis is not primarily
an intracellular pathogen, although it can survive in macrophages. Injection of the Yop proteins disrupts the actin
cytoskeleton and so helps the organism evade phagocytosis. By evading phagocytosis, the organism avoids triggering an inflammatory response and produces massive tissue
colonization.
Plague has disappeared from Europe; the last major
outbreak occurred in 1772. The reason for its disappearance is not known, but it was probably the result of multiple factors, not the least of which was human intervention.
Although it wasn’t until the nineteenth century that doctors understood how germs could cause disease, Europeans recognized by the sixteenth century that plague was
contagious and could be carried from one area to another.
Beginning in the late seventeenth century, governments
created a medical boundary, or cordon sanitaire, between
Europe and the areas to the east from which epidemics
came. Ships traveling west from the Ottoman Empire were
forced to wait in quarantine before passengers and cargo
could be unloaded. Those who attempted to evade medical
quarantine were shot.

■

MICROBIAL DISEASES

■

1075

Sepsis and Toxic Shock

Many bacterial pathogens can, under the right circumstances, infect the bloodstream to cause septicemia and
ultimately sepsis; a life-threatening condition involving
high fever, high white blood cell counts, rapid heart rate,
and/or rapid breathing. The offending bacteria are typically found in the blood (see Chapter 28). Organisms that
can cause sepsis include Neisseria meningitidis, Escherichia
coli, Enterococcus species, and many others including Yersinia pestis from the preceding case. In severe cases sepsis
can progress to septic shock in which the patient’s blood
pressure drops to dangerous levels.

Case History: Toxic Shock

In May 2013, a visibly ill 16-year-old girl was taken to her
pediatrician, where she complained of diarrhea, high fever
(39.9°C; 103.8°F), and vomiting. She told the physician she had
been healthy until 2 days prior. Upon physical exam, the doctor
noticed that the girl had a much lower than normal blood pressure (76/48 mm Hg; normal range 90–130/60–90), a rapid
heart rate (120 beats per minute; normal range 60–100), and
an erythematous (red) rash on her trunk. These are all signs of
septic shock. Because of her deteriorating condition, the patient
was admitted to the pediatric intensive care unit at the local
hospital. However, blood cultures revealed no bacteria. She was
immediately given intravenous fluids and IV antibiotics. The
girl rallied and left the hospital one week later. Patient history taken upon admission revealed that the girl had started
her menstrual period 4 days before becoming ill, providing an
important clue as to the cause of the disease.
This potential tragedy reflects a larger story that emerged
in the late 1970s and early 1980s, when women started
dying from this dangerous, new (emerging) disease, now
known as toxic shock syndrome. Scientists and physicians
learned that it is caused by certain strains of Staphylococcus aureus that produce a superantigen type of toxin (toxic
shock syndrome toxin, or TSST; see Section 24.3). Why
had the disease not been recognized in previous decades?
The answer turned out to be the use of one brand of
superabsorbent tampons (since removed from the market).
The tampons produced a rich growth environment for S.
aureus. So, if the patient was colonized by a TSST-producing strain, huge amounts of toxin were released to circulate
in the bloodstream.
Even though the superabsorbent tampons are no longer
available, toxic shock syndrome is still sometimes associated with menstruation, as in the case history. Today, however, we recognize that toxic shock syndrome is a possible
consequence of any S. aureus infection and can occur in
both men and women. TSST-producing S. aureus can cause

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

A.

B.

CDC

5 µm

COURTESY JEFFREY NELSON

1076

D.

DAVID M. PHILLIPS/SCIENCE SOURCE

C.

FIGURE 26.23

■

Adult

Maintenance hosts

Lyme disease.

A. Erythema migrans rash. B. Borrelia
burgdorferi, the agent of Lyme disease
(cell length 5–30 µm; dark-field microscopy). C. Ixodes vector (SEM). D. Host
associations of Ixodes scapularis.

an infection anywhere in the body. The organisms secrete
the toxin, which disseminates rapidly through the circulation to cause generalized, potentially lethal symptoms.
Knowledge that a protein toxin was responsible for the
disease led to a recommendation that treatment of toxic
shock syndrome include the antibiotic clindamycin. As
you will learn in Chapter 27, clindamycin is an inhibitor
of bacterial protein synthesis. By blocking protein synthesis, clindamycin decreased the amount of TSST made, while
other antibiotics (vancomycin, for instance) killed the pathogen. The combination saved the girl’s life. In Chapter 25 we
discuss the weapons that microbes use to cause disease.

Case History: Lyme Disease

Brad, a 9-year-old from Connecticut, developed a fever and
a large (8-cm) reddish rash with a clear center (erythema
migrans) on his trunk (Fig. 26.23A). He also had some

Incidental hosts
Nymph

Larva

Egg

Tick stages are drawn actual size.
Ticks engorged with blood will
be larger.

left-facial-nerve palsy. Brad had returned a week previously
from a Boy Scout camping trip to the local woods, where he had
done a lot of hiking. When asked by his physician, Brad admitted finding a tick on his stomach while in the woods but thinking little of it. The doctor ordered serological tests for Borrelia
burgdorferi (the organism that causes Lyme disease), Rickettsia
rickettsii (which produces Rocky Mountain spotted fever), and
Ehrlichia equi (which causes ehrlichiosis). The ELISA test for B.
burgdorferi came back positive, confirming a diagnosis of Lyme
disease. The boy was given a 3-week regimen of doxycycline (a
tetracycline derivative), which resolved the rash and palsy.
Lyme arthritis was first reported in Lyme, Connecticut, in
the 1970s, but the causative organism, Borrelia burgdorferi,

CHAPTER 26

was not identified until 1982. Since then, Lyme disease (a
form of borreliosis) has become the most common vector-borne illness in the United States and is considered an
emerging infectious disease. The main endemic areas are
the northeastern coastal area from Massachusetts to Maryland, Wisconsin and Minnesota, and northern California and Oregon. Lyme disease is also common in parts of
Europe.
B. burgdorferi is a spirochete (Fig. 26.23B) transmitted to humans by ixodid ticks (hard ticks) (Fig. 26.23C
and D). In the northeastern and central United States,
where most cases occur, the deer tick Ixodes scapularis
transmits the spirochete, usually during the summer
months. In the western United States, I. pacificus is the
tick vector.
During its nymphal stage (the stage after taking its first
blood meal), I. scapularis is the size of a poppy seed. Its
bite is painless, so it is easily overlooked. Infection takes
place when the tick feeds, because the spirochete is regurgitated into the host. However, the organism grows in the
tick’s digestive tract and takes about 2 days to make its way
to the tick’s salivary gland, so if the tick is removed before
that time, the patient will not be infected. Once it is transferred to the human, the microbe can travel rapidly via the
bloodstream to any area in the body, but it prefers to grow
in skin, nerve tissue, synovium (joint lining), and the conduction system of the heart.
Lyme disease has three stages. Similar to syphilis caused

by the spirochete Treponema palidum, there are three general stages of Lyme disease. Stage 1 involves the localized
spread of Borrelia burgdorferi between 3 and 30 days after
the initial exposure. Approximately 75% of patients experience an erythema migrans rash, usually at the site of the
tick bite. The appearance of the rash varies but is classically
erythematous with central clearing (“bull’s-eye” rash). This
stage is often associated with constitutional symptoms such
as fever, myalgia (muscle pain), arthralgia (joint pain), and
headache.
Stage 2 occurs weeks to months after the initial infection as B. burgdorferi spreads from blood to other organs.
In this stage, the patient can be quite ill with malaise,
myalgia, and arthralgia, as well as neurological or cardiac
involvement. Common neurological manifestations include
Bell’s palsy (facial paralysis), inflammation of spinal nerve
roots, and chronic meningitis. The most common cardiac
manifestation is an irregular heart rhythm.
Stage 3 borreliosis occurs months to years later and can
involve the synovium, nervous system, and skin, though
skin involvement is more common in Europe than in
North America. Arthritis occurs in the majority of previously untreated patients; it is usually intermittent, involves
the large joints, particularly the knee, and lasts from weeks

■

MICROBIAL DISEASES

■

1077

to months in any given joint. Joint-fluid analysis typically
shows a WBC count of 10,000–30,000/μl. Late neurological involvement may include peripheral neuropathy and
encephalopathy, manifested as memory, mood, and sleep
disturbances.
Treatment with antibiotics is recommended for all stages
of Lyme disease but is most effective in the early stages.
Treatment for early Lyme disease (stage 1) is a course of
doxycycline for 14–28 days. Lyme arthritis is typically slow
to respond to antibiotic therapy. Despite antimicrobial
drug treatment, patients with persistent active arthritis and
persistently positive PCR tests may have incomplete microbial eradication and may be the most likely to benefit from
repeated treatment with injected antibiotics. However, the
disease in some people does not resolve at all; why is not
known.
Curiously, 25% of people infected with B. burgdorferi
never experience erythema migrans, and many infected
individuals are also unsure of tick bites. Hence, patients
with Lyme disease may present with arthritis as their first
complaint. Although this makes diagnosis extremely difficult, knowing that the patient lives in or recently traveled
to an endemic area can provide a critical clue.
A startling example of how sinister Lyme disease can
be is the case of Kris Kristofferson, a prolific singer, songwriter, and actor, now in his eighties. Kristofferson suffered
for years with severe memory loss presumed to be a manifestation of Alzheimer’s disease—until someone decided
to test him for Lyme disease. To his doctor’s surprise, and
relief, the singer tested positive. Kristofferson immediately
began antibiotic treatments and has since recovered much
of his memory.
Many other bacteria can cause septicemia and systemic illness (Table 26.5). Gram-negative organisms like
E. coli, Salmonella Typhi, and Francisella, and Gram-positive microbes like Staphylococcus aureus, Enterococcus, and
Bacillus anthracis, can grow in the bloodstream if they can
gain entrance. Even anaerobes that are normal inhabitants
of the intestine (for example, Bacteroides fragilis) can be
lethal if they escape the intestine and enter the blood, as
might happen following surgery. This is one reason surgical
patients are given massive doses of antibiotics immediately
before and after surgery.

Hepatitis Viruses Target the Liver

Hepatitis is a general term meaning “inflammation of
the liver.” Hepatitis is caused by several viruses, including
hepatitis A, B, C, and E viruses. Although these viruses
are members of very different families, they all target the
liver. We include them in this section on systemic infections because their infectious routes take them to the

1078

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

TABLE 26.5-Selected Systemic Infectious Diseases
Etiological
agenta

Virulence
properties

Lyme disease Stage 1: rash; stage 2:
chills, headache,
malaise, systemic
involvement; stage 3:
neurological changes

Borrelia
burgdorferi
(spirochete)

Brucellosis

Disease

Symptoms

Source

Treatment

Vaccine

Antigenic variation,
OspE (binds
complement)

Deer tick

Penicillin,
tetracycline

No longer
available

Brucella abortis
(G– rod)

Intracellular, growth
in monocytes

Animal
Doxycycline
products,
unpasteurized
milk

Yes, for
animals

Leptospirosis Fever, photophobia,
headache, abdominal
pain, skin rash, liver
involvement, jaundice

Leptospira
interrogans
(spirochete)

Burrowing motility

Urine of
infected
animals

Yes, for
animals

Epidemic
typhus

Chills, fever, headache,
muscle pain,
splenomegaly, coma

Rickettsia
prowazekii
(G– rod)

Obligate intracellular
growth, escapes
phagosome

Human louse, Tetracycline,
flying-squirrel chloramphenicol
flea

Tularemia

Fever, chills, headache,
muscle pain, rash,
bacteremia

Francisella
tularensis
(G– rod)

Intracellular

Rabbits,
Gentamicin,
rodents,
streptomycin
insect vectors

Yes, but not
currently in
the U.S.

Type III secretion,
intracellular growth,
PhoPQ regulators,
Vi antigen capsule

Gallbladder of Ciprofloxacin,
human carrier ceftriaxone

Vi antigen

Septicemia, chills, fever, Salmonella
hypotension
choleraesuis
(G– rod)

Intracellular
growth, invasin

Animals,
poultry

Vibriosis

Serious with
immunocompromised
patients; fever, chills,
multi-organ damage,
death

Vibrio vulnificus
(G– curved rod)

Cytolysin, capsule

Seawater, raw Tetracycline plus
oysters
aminoglycoside

Bubonic
plague

Buboes (swollen lymph
glands), high fever,
chills, headache, cough,
pneumonia, septicemia

Yersinia pestis
(G– rod)

Intracellular growth,
type III secretion
of YOPs (Yersinia
outer proteins),
phospholipase D, toxin

Rodents,
rodent fleas,
human
respiratory
aerosol,
potential
bioterrorism
agent

Fever, weakness,
sweats, splenomegaly,
osteomyelitis,
endocarditis, others

Typhoid fever Septicemia, chills, fever, Salmonella Typhi
hypotension, rash (rose (G– rod)
spots)

Erythromycin,
penicillin

Ceftriaxone

Streptomycin or
tetracycline

Yes, but not
available in
the U.S.

a

G+ = Gram-positive; G– = Gram-negative.

bloodstream before delivering them to the liver. The disease symptoms of fever, vomiting, dark urine, clay-colored
stools, and often jaundice can be seen in all patients suffering from hepatitis, regardless of viral cause.
Hepatitis A virus (HAV) is a single-stranded RNA
picornavirus (Fig. 26.24A) that causes an acute infection spread person-to-person by the fecal-oral route, but
hepatitis A can also result from eating undercooked shellfish collected from contaminated waters. The virus replicates in the intestinal endothelium and is disseminated via
the bloodstream to the liver. After replicating in hepatocytes, the progeny enter the bile and are released into the

small intestine, explaining why stools are so infectious.
Though the virus has an early viremic stage after leaving
the intestine, it is rarely transmitted by transfusion, because
the viremic stage is transient, ending after liver symptoms
develop. In contrast, hepatitis B and C viruses produce persistent viremia and are readily transmitted by transfusion.
Many people who are infected with HAV are asymptomatic or exhibit very mild symptoms that include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, low-grade fever, and fatigue. As
the virus attacks the liver, patients may become jaundiced
(from the accumulation of bilirubin in the skin), and their
urine will turn dark brown. There is no specific treatment,

CHAPTER 26

120 nm

80 nm

FIGURE 26.24

■ Structures of hepatitis A and hepatitis B
viruses. Both viruses are icosahedral in shape. A. Hepatitis A, spread

by the fecal-oral route, is a single-stranded RNA virus in the Picornaviridae family (TEM). B. Hepatitis B is an enveloped, double-stranded
DNA virus in the Hepadnaviridae family (TEM). The image also shows
the tubular structures made from HepB surface antigen (HBsAg).

but the disease usually lasts for only a few months and
then resolves without establishing a carrier state. Disease
can be prevented, however, if immunoglobulin is given to
someone who has had contact with an infected individual.
A hepatitis A vaccine containing inactivated virus (called
HepA vaccine) is administered after 1 year of age. For those
not vaccinated, frequent hand washing is important for preventing the spread of the disease because it interrupts the
fecal-oral cycle.
In contrast to HAV, hepatitis B virus (HBV) is a partially double-stranded circular DNA virus (family Hepadnaviridae) that causes diseases of varying severity. These
include acute and chronic hepatitis, cirrhosis, and hepatocarcinoma. The virus also wears a membrane envelope
donned when progeny viruses are released from infected
cells. The virion coat protein, a surface antigen, is called
HBsAg. The virus makes an excess amount of HBsAg, so
it is sometimes extended as a tubular tail on one side of the
virus particle and is often found in the blood of infected
individuals in the form of noninfectious filamentous and
spherical particles (Fig. 26.24B). The presence of HBsAg
in blood is an indicator of HBV infection.
HBV is transferred primarily via blood transfusions,
contaminated needles shared by IV drug users, and any
human body fluid (saliva, semen, sweat, breast milk, tears,
urine, or feces). It can even be transferred transplacentally
to a fetus and can be sexually transmitted. Infection by
HBV has two stages: a short-term acute phase and a longterm chronic phase that, if it extends beyond 6 months,
may never resolve (chronic infection). Symptoms resemble
those of the flu, but with jaundice and brown urine. Liver
damage caused by HBV infection is due in large part to
an efficient cell-mediated immune response. Cytotoxic T
cells and natural killer cells cause immune lysis of infected
liver cells. Over the long term, chronic hepatitis will lead to

EYE OF SCIENCE/SCIENCE SOURCE

B.

COURTESY OF THE CITY OF ALBUQUERQUE.

A.

■

MICROBIAL DISEASES

■

1079

a scarred and hardened liver (cirrhosis), the only recourse
being a liver transplant. Fortunately, about 90% of those
infected are able to fight off infection and never proceed
to the chronic stage. A HepB vaccine (made from recombinant HBsAg) is available. Its administration is recommended after birth, followed by booster shots administered
by 2 months and 18 months of age.
Hepatitis C virus (HCV) causes another form of hepatitis. HCV is a single-stranded positive-sense, linear RNA virus
with a lipid coat; it is a member of the Flaviviridae family. It
is transmitted by blood transfusions and causes 90% of transfusion-related cases of hepatitis. It can also be transmitted
by needle sticks, razor blades, tattooing, and, less frequently,
by sex. Over 100 million people worldwide are infected with
HCV. Screening for HCV (serology or PCR) is recommended
for anyone who exhibits signs of hepatitis or practices the risky
behaviors noted here. In addition, the CDC recommends
that anyone born between 1945 and 1965 (baby boomers) be
tested because, for unknown reasons, baby boomers are five
times more likely to be infected than other adults.
Most HCV-infected individuals (80%) do not exhibit
symptoms, and in those who do, symptoms may not appear
for 10–20 years. At least 75% of patients who exhibit symptoms ultimately progress to chronic hepatitis requiring
a liver transplant or possibly to liver cancer. Fortunately,
infection can be detected using ELISA. Liver biopsies of
HCV patients are used to determine the extent of liver
damage, which in turn helps establish the stage of disease.
Prevention of HBV or HCV infection for health care
personnel includes avoiding inadvertent needle sticks. If
such a stick should occur with HBV, anti-HBV immunoglobulin should be administered within 7 days. Currently
no effective post-exposure prophylaxis is recognized for
HCV. Chronic hepatitis can be treated with interferon, but
more effective treatment now includes antiviral protease
inhibitors that prevent the processing (by proteolysis) of an
important HCV polyprotein. Though vaccines have been
developed for HAV and HBV (see Section 24.6), no vaccine is yet available for HCV.

Note:

Since hepatitis viruses can be spread via contaminated
blood products, all blood donations collected by the Red Cross and
other agencies are tested for the presence of these viruses, as well
as for HIV. Thus, the blood supply is safe.

Ebola—The Perfect Pathogen or
Too Deadly for Its Own Good?

How would you define the perfect pathogen? Would it
be an organism that can kill its host with terrifying ease
and quickness? If so, Ebola virus would fit the description. Ebola virus, a lipid-enveloped, threadlike RNA virus

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

(Filoviridae) (see Fig. 25.4), was first associated with an
outbreak of 318 cases of a hemorrhagic disease in Zaire in
1976. Of the 318 people who contracted the disease, 280
died within days. The disease was characterized by acute
(rapid) onset of fever, severe muscle pains, horrible bleeding
from multiple orifices (nose, mouth, anus, and vagina), and
ultimately death. Also in 1976, 284 people in Sudan were
infected with the virus, and 156 of them died.
The Ebola virus has a frightening reputation. It spreads
like wildfire through the body after infection, causing
severe hemorrhagic fever, and typically kills 90% of its victims. Internal bleeding results in shock and acute respiratory distress, leading to death. The recent 2014–15
epidemic of Ebola in West Africa involved 28,683 cases,
40% of whom died (see Chapter 28).
The symptoms of Ebola (and of a related disease caused
by the Marburg virus) reflect subversion of the innate
immune system, coupled with uncontrolled viral replication, particularly in macrophages and dendritic cells. Ebola
virus infection of these cells enhances production of proinflammatory cytokines, such as TNF-alpha, and inhibits
stimulation of T-cell maturation by dendritic cells. Thus,
Ebola infections stimulate inflammatory processes leading to tissue damage, but they shut down early immune
responses and prevent activation of adaptive immune
responses, thereby allowing unfettered viral replication.
Ebola viral proteins and their locations in the virion are
shown in Figure 26.25A. Ebola VP35 protein is a component of the viral RNA polymerase complex, but it is also a
potent inhibitor of host interferon (IFN) production. The
cellular response to whichever IFN is made is inhibited by
VP24, which blocks the nuclear accumulation of a regulatory protein called STAT1. STAT1 is critical to IFN-stimulated gene expression. These and other strategies allow
rapid replication of the virus.
After replicating, Ebola offspring sprout from the cell surface in a mass of tangled threads (Fig. 26.25B). These new
virions go on to attack new cells, riddling blood vessels and
organs with damage as they go. Rapid release of new virions involves subverting another host mechanism, tetherin,
designed to slow viral spread. Paul Bates and his colleagues
at the University of Pennsylvania discovered that the cellular protein tetherin essentially tethers mature virus particles
inside a cell so that they are unable to spread. Tetherin is IFN
induced and can restrict the spread of structurally diverse
enveloped viruses, including HIV (thus, it is part of the
innate response). Ebola glycoprotein, however, counteracts
tetherin, so that nothing slows down viral spread. The result
is rapid release of massive numbers of virus particles that can
then quickly spread infection to other organs and tissues.
The outlook for a patient infected with Ebola is
dire. The incubation period is 4–16 days, and death
occurs within 7–16 days. With good supportive care,

A.

NP,
VP30,
VP45

Secreted
glycoprotein
(sGP dimer)

RNA
VP40/24 (complex)

L proteins
(includes VP35)

GP1,2 (heterotrimer)

B.

10 µm

FIGURE 26.25

■ Ebola virion. A. Composition of the virus. The
ribonucleoprotein complex consists of the nucleoprotein (NP), the
structural proteins VP30 and VP35, and the virion-associated RNAdependent RNA polymerase (L proteins). The glycoprotein (GP-sGP)
is an integral membrane protein that can be secreted. B. Threadlike
Ebola virions budding from a cell (center).

including the replacement of coagulation factors, the mortality rate appears near 20%. Lacking such care, mortality can reach over 80%. There are no effective drugs or
vaccines, although a recombinant monoclonal antibody
directed against the envelope glycoprotein has neutralizing

KALETSKY ET AL. PNAS FEBRUARY 24, 2009 VOL. 106 NO.8 2886–2891

1080

CHAPTER 26

activity. Administering blood plasma from people who have
recovered, anticoagulation agents to reduce hemorrhaging,
and interferon has had limited success.
Chemical inhibitors of the host cathepsin proteases,
which are required for viral replication, have been suggested as one possible antiviral therapy. Ebola enters a cell
when the virus membrane glycoprotein attaches to host
membranes. The virus is then taken up in an endosome.
Cathepsins in the endosome cleave the viral glycoprotein
and allow the virus membrane to fuse with the endosome
membrane, releasing the uncoated virus into the cytoplasm.
Cathepsin inhibitors prevent release and, thus, replication.
There is also some hope that an attenuated, replicationdeficient Ebola virus may serve as a vaccine.
Ebola epidemics result from person-to-person contact or
from inadvertent laboratory exposures. Fortunately, Ebola
outbreaks are self-contained because the viruses kill their victims quickly. Death comes before the virus can be transmitted
to a new host. Some scientists therefore argue that efficient
and quick killing is not the mark of a perfect pathogen. The
better pathogen lets its host linger to ensure a home for itself
and more opportunity to disseminate. So where does Ebola
go when it is not infecting humans? The natural ecology of
these viruses is largely unknown, although an association with
monkeys and/or bats as possible reservoirs is suggested.

To Summarize
■

■

■

■

■

Blood cultures are useful in diagnosing septicemia and
endocarditis.
Septicemia is caused by many Gram-positive and Gramnegative bacterial pathogens. It can start with the bite
of an infected insect, introduction via a wound, escape
from an abscess, or penetration of the mucosal epithelium by the pathogen (as through the intestine or
vagina); it can lead to disseminated, systemic disease.
Endocarditis can have acute or subacute onsets. Subacute bacterial endocarditis is usually an endogenous
infection of a heart valve caused by Streptococcus mutans.
Malaria, caused by Plasmodium species, manifests as
repeated episodes of chills, fever, and sweating, owing to
the organism’s ability to alter the antigenic appearance
of its surface proteins and evade the immune response.
Plague, caused by Yersinia pestis, has sylvatic and
urban infection cycles involving transmission between
fleas. The bite of an infected flea leads to bubonic plague.
Bubonic plague can progress to septicemic and pneumonic stages. Pneumonic plague can be spread directly
from person to person (no insect vector) by aerosolized
respiratory secretions.

■

■

■

■

MICROBIAL DISEASES

■

1081

Lyme disease is caused by the spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi, which is transmitted from animal reservoirs to
humans by the bite of Ixodes ticks. The three stages
of Lyme disease are characterized by a bull’s-eye rash,
called erythema migrans (stage 1); joint, muscle, and
nerve pain (stage 2); and arthritis with WBCs in the
joint fluid (stage 3).
Hepatitis is caused by several unrelated viruses; among
them, HAV, HBV, and HCV account for most disease.
HAV is transmitted by the fecal-oral route, does not
establish chronic infection, and can be prevented by a
vaccine. HBV and HCV can be transmitted by blood
products (such as transfusions) and shared hypodermic
needles and can lead to chronic hepatitis. Vaccine for
HBV, but not HCV, is available.
Ebola virus spreads from human to human and kills its
victims quickly. Its viral proteins alter cytokine production and facilitate virus release from infected cells.

26.7

Central Nervous
System Infections

The brain and spinal cord are especially well protected against
infection. Microbes cannot gain easy access to the brain in
large measure because of the blood-brain barrier, a filter
mechanism that allows only selected substances into the brain.
The blood-brain barrier works to our advantage when harmful substances, such as bacteria, are prohibited from entering.
However, it works to our disadvantage when substances that
we want to enter the brain, such as antibiotics, are kept out.
The barrier is not a single structure but a function of the way
blood vessels, especially capillaries, are organized in the brain.
Furthermore, the endothelial cells in those vessels have tight
junctions that do not allow most compounds or microbes to
cross. And yet, brain infections do occur.

Case History: Meningitis

In April 2001, Laila, a 4-month-old infant from Saudi
Arabia, was hospitalized with fever, tender neck, and purplish spots (purpuric spots) on her trunk (Fig. 26.26A). Suspecting meningitis, the clinician took a cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF) sample and examined it by Gram stain. The smear
revealed Gram-negative diplococci inside PMNs. The CSF
was turbid with 900 leukocytes per microliter, and Neisseria
meningitidis was confirmed by culture. The child was treated
with cefotaxime (a cephalosporin antibiotic; see Chapter 27)
and made a full recovery. Her father, Abdul, the person who
brought her in, was clinically well. However, the meningococcus was isolated from his oropharynx, as well as from the
throat of the patient’s 2-year-old brother. Isolates from the

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY
B.

Purpuric spot

JOHN RADCLIFF HOSPITAL/SCIENCE SOURCE

A.

C.

N. meningitidis

2 µm

D.

FIGURE 26.26 ■ Bacterial meningitis. A. Purpuric spots produced by local intravascular coagulation due to Neisseria meningitidis endotoxin.
The rash in meningitis typically has petechial (small) and purpuric (large) components. B. N. meningitidis (diameter approx. 1 µm; SEM). C. Normal
brain. D. Autopsy specimen of meningitis due to Streptococcus pneumoniae. Note the greening of the brain, compared with the pink normal brain.

patient, her father, and her brother were positive by agglutination with meningococcal A/C/Y/W135 polyvalent reagent.
Records showed that the father previously received a quadrivalent meningococcal vaccine. All three isolates were confirmed to be meningococcus serogroup W135. DNA analysis
found the three isolates to be indistinguishable, meaning that
the father and his children were infected with the same strain
of N. meningitidis. Why did Laila’s brother not have meningitis? And why was Laila’s vaccinated father colonized?
Meningitis is an inflammation of the meninges, the membranes that surround the brain and spinal cord. Meningitis can be either bacterial or viral in origin. Sinus and ear
infections can extend directly to the meninges, whereas
septicemic spread requires passage through the blood-brain
barrier. Viral meningitis is serious but rarely fatal in people with a normal immune system. The symptoms generally
persist for 7–10 days and then completely resolve. Bacterial
meningitis is usually caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae,
Neisseria meningitidis, or Haemophilus influenzae. Symptoms of bacterial meningitis can include sudden onset of
fever, headache, neck pain or stiffness, painful sensitivity
to strong light (photophobia), vomiting (often without
abdominal complaints), and irritability. Prompt medical
attention is extremely important because the disease can
quickly progress to convulsions and death.
The meningococcus N. meningitidis (Fig. 26.26B) can
colonize the human oropharynx, where it causes mild, if
any, disease. At any given time, 10%–20% of the healthy
population can be colonized and asymptomatic. The
organism spreads directly by person-to-person contact or
indirectly via droplet nuclei from sneezing or fomites. The
problem arises when this organism enters the bloodstream.
Unlike N. gonorrhoeae, the cause of gonorrhea, N. meningitidis is very resistant to complement, owing to its production of a polysaccharide capsule. The capsule allows the
microbe to produce a transient blood infection (bacteremia) and reach the blood-brain barrier.
How does N. meningitidis enter the bloodstream from
the nasopharynx and then cross the blood-brain barrier?

The organism initially uses type IV pili to adhere to and
enter nasopharyngeal endothelial cells (type IV pili are
discussed in Section 25.3). The bacteria then cross the
endothelial cell layer by transcytosis, a process by which
an internalized pathogen passes through a host cell along
microtubules to the opposite side. Ultimately, the pathogen passes into the capillary lumen and is swept away to
the brain. Once in the brain, type IV pili again adhere to
endothelial cells, but this time they trigger the recruitment
of host proteins that destabilize intercellular junctions.
The bacteria then slip between the loosened junctions and
enter the cerebrospinal fluid. Once in the CSF, microbes
can multiply almost at will. Figure 26.26C and D show
the remarkable damage (greening) that N. meningitidis and
other microbes, such as S. pneumoniae, cause in the brain.
Several antigenic types of capsules, called type-specific
capsules, are produced by different strains of pathogenic N.
meningitidis: types A, B, C, W135, and Y. Types A, C, Y,
and W135 are usually associated with epidemic infections
seen among people kept in close proximity, such as college students or military personnel. Type B meningococcus is typically involved in sporadic infections. However,
large outbreaks of type B in the United States occurred
at Princeton University and UC Santa Barbara in 2013.
Antibodies to these capsular antigens are used to classify
the capsular types of the organisms causing an outbreak.
Knowing the capsular type of organism involved in each
case helps determine whether the disease cases are related
and where the infection may have started. In Abdul’s case,
a polyvalent reagent containing antibodies to the four main
capsular types was used to confirm N. meningitidis.
Meningococcal meningitis is highly communicable. As a
result, close contacts, such as the parents or siblings of any
patient with meningococcal disease, should receive antimicrobial prophylaxis within 24 hours of diagnosis; a single
dose of ciprofloxacin (a quinolone antibiotic, discussed in
Section 27.4) can be given to adults, and 2 days of rifampicin given to children. Highly susceptible populations can
be immunized with a vaccine containing four of the five
capsular structures (type B capsule is not immunogenic; see

CDC

PART 5

UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN-MADISON BRAIN COLLECTION.

■

MANFRED KAGE

1082

CHAPTER 26

Section 24.6). However, a vaccine containing outer membrane vesicles and proteins from N. meningitidis type B
(but not its capsule) was recently approved by the FDA.
Thought Question

26.9 Normal cerebrospinal fluid is usually low in protein and
high in glucose. The protein and glucose content does not
change much during a viral meningitis, but bacterial infection
leads to greatly elevated protein and lowered glucose levels.
What could account for this?

Case History: Botulism—
It Is What You Eat

In June, a 47-year-old resident of Oklahoma was admitted to
the hospital with rapid onset of progressive dizziness, blurred
vision, slurred speech, difficulty swallowing, and nausea. Findings on examination included drooping eyelids, facial paralysis,
and impaired gag reflex. He developed breathing difficulties
and required mechanical ventilation. The patient reported
that during the 24 hours before onset of symptoms, he had eaten
home-canned green beans and a stew containing roast beef
and potatoes. Analysis of the patient’s stool detected botulinum
type A toxin, but no Clostridium botulinum organisms were
found. The patient was hospitalized for 49 days, including
42 days on mechanical ventilation, before being discharged.
A. Clostridium tetani

■

MICROBIAL DISEASES

■

1083

Imagine a disease that causes complete loss of muscle function. Using secreted exotoxins (neurotoxins), two microbes
cause lethal paralytic diseases. In one instance, the victim suffers a flaccid paralysis in which the muscles go limp, as in the
case history just given, causing paralysis and respiratory difficulty. Voluntary muscles fail to respond to the mind’s will
because botulinum toxin interferes with neural transmission.
The disease (called botulism) is typically food-borne and is
caused by an anaerobic, Gram-positive, spore-forming bacillus named Clostridium botulinum (see Chapter 18).
In striking contrast to botulism is tetanus, a very painful
disease in which muscles continually and involuntarily contract (called tetany or spastic paralysis). Tetanus is caused
by tetanospasmin, a potent exotoxin made by another
anaerobic, Gram-positive spore-forming bacillus, called
Clostridium tetani (Fig. 26.27A). Tetanospasmin interferes with neural transmission, but in contrast to botulism
toxin, it causes excessive nerve signaling to muscles, forcing the victim’s back to arch grotesquely while the arms
flex and legs extend. The patient remains locked this way
until death. Spasms can be strong enough to fracture the
patient’s vertebrae. Figure 26.27B shows the result of
injecting a mouse’s hind leg with just a tiny amount of tetanus toxin. In both botulism and tetanus, death can result
from asphyxiation.
Botulism is typically caused by ingesting preformed
toxin, although infected wounds or germination of

B. Spastic paralysis due to tetanus toxin

8 µm

DR. A. M. SIEGELMAN/VISUALS UNLIMITED

Spores

C. Basic structure of tetanus and botulism toxins
1. The binding domain
binds to receptor
molecules (gangliosides)
of the nerve cell.

COO–
Ganglioside-binding domain
Heavy chain
Translocation domain
Proteolytic S
cleavage S
Zn

Light chain
Catalytic domain

3. The protease toxin disrupts
release of neurotransmitter.

Tetany

COURTESY AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR MICROBIOLOGY

FIGURE 26.27

crograph of Clostridium
tetani (cell length 4–8
µm). B. Mouse injected
with tetanus toxin in left
hind leg. C. Schematic
diagram of tetanus and
botulism toxins. D. 3D
representation of the
tetanus neurotoxin with
the domains marked.
(PDB code: 3BTA)

D. Tetanus toxin structure
Binding domain

■

Tetanus and botulism
toxins. A. Photomi-

Catalytic domain

2. The translocation
domain makes a
pore for passage of
the toxin.

NH2
Translocation domain

1084
084

■

PART 5

MED
MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

■

A.
Motor neuron

Signal

Acetylcholine
Signal

Muscle

Synapse
Neuromuscular junction

B.

environment must be present. Home-canning processes
are designed to remove oxygen in the canned food, as
well as sterilize the food, but if the sterilization process is
incomplete, then surviving spores germinate and produce
toxin. The toxin is susceptible to heat but will remain
active in improperly cooked food. After ingestion, the
toxin is absorbed from the intestine. As in the case history given here, the organism is often absent from stool
samples. This is why serological identification of the toxin
is important.
A rare form of botulism, called infant botulism or
“floppy head syndrome,” can occur when infants (not older
children) are fed honey. Honey can harbor C. botulinum
spores that can germinate in the gastrointestinal tract, after
which the growing vegetative cells will secrete toxin.

Neuron cell
VAMP
(synaptobrevin)

Thought Question

26.10 Knowing the symptoms of tetanus, what kind of

Synaptic
vesicle

Syntaxin

therapy would you use to treat the disease?

Ca2+

SNAP-25

Proteins that mediate
fusion of vesicle membrane
to cell membrane

Toxin structure. Botulism and tetanus toxins share 30%–

40% identity and have similar structures and nearly identical
modes of action. Botulism and tetanus toxins are each comSynapse
posed of two peptides—a large, or heavy, fragment analogous
Muscle cell
to a B subunit of AB toxins and a small, or light, fragment
analogous to an A subunit. Both toxins are initially made as
C.
D.
single peptides (about 150 kDa) that are cleaved after secreToxin
1. Toxin enters
tion to form two fragments (heavy and light chains) that
binding
cell by
endocytosis.
remain tethered by a disulfide bond (Fig. 26.27C). Each
heavy chain includes the binding domain for
receptor molecules (gangliosides) on the nerve
4. Light chain
cell membrane, and a translocation domain
cleaves proteins,
that makes a pore in the nerve cell through
blocks exocytosis.
which the toxin passes. The light chains (cat2. Disulfide bond is
alytic domains) are proteases that disrupt
3. Light chain
reduced; heavy chain
enters cytoplasm.
the
movement of exocytic vesicles containbinds to membrane.
ing neurotransmitters needed for contraction or
relaxation. Figure 26.27D shows a 3D rendition of
FIGURE 26.28 ■ Mechanism of action of botulism toxin.
A. The neuromuscular junction. The blowup shows vesicles filled
tetanus toxin with the three domains marked.
Plasma
membrane

with neurotransmitters. B. A series of proteins within the nerve
is needed to allow synaptic vesicles to bind to the nerve endings.
Fusion of the membranes releases acetylcholine into the neuromuscular junction. Botulism toxin types A and E cleave SNAP-25.
Botulism toxins B, D, F, and G cleave VAMP. Botulism toxin C1 cleaves
syntaxin and SNAP-25. C, D. Toxin binds via the heavy chain and is
endocytosed into the nerve terminal. Once the toxin cleaves its target, the nerve terminal is no longer able to release acetylcholine.

ingested spores can also occasionally produce disease. The microbe germinates in the food and produces
toxin. Because the organism is an anaerobe, an anaerobic

Mechanism of botulism neurotoxin. Figure 26.28A illus-

trates normal neurotransmission at a neuromuscular junction, the target of botulism toxin. A signal sent from a
motor neuron to the neuromuscular junction causes the
release of the neurotransmitter molecule acetylcholine
from vesicles in the axon terminal. Once released, acetylcholine traverses the synapse and causes muscle contraction. Figure 26.28B shows the proteins within the vesicle
and plasma membranes that allow the synaptic vesicle to
fuse with the plasma membrane.

CHAPTER 26

Once botulism toxin enters a peripheral nerve by endocytosis (Fig. 26.28C), the low pH that forms in the
endosome reduces the disulfide bonds holding the two
halves of the toxin together. The heavy chain assembles
as a channel in the membrane through which the proteolytic light chain moves into the cytoplasm. The light
chain then cleaves key host proteins, such as synaptobrevin (a vesicle-associated membrane protein, or VAMP),
syntaxin, or synaptosomal-associated protein (SNAP-25)
involved in the exocytosis of vesicles containing acetylcholine (Fig. 26.28D). Without acetylcholine to activate nerve transmission, muscles will not contract and the
patient is paralyzed.
Although botulism disease is now rare, the toxin is
considered a select biological agent of potential use to
bioterrorists. As such, its use in laboratories is under
strict governmental control. But botulism toxin also has
important medical uses. Because the toxin can safely
relax muscles in a localized area if injected in small doses,
botulism toxin, or Botox, is used cosmetically by plastic surgeons to reduce facial wrinkles in some patients,
and therapeutically by neurologists to treat migraine
headaches.

MICROBIAL DISEASES

■

1085

Spinal
cord

Inhibitory
neuron

Excitatory
neuron

GABA

ACh

Tetanus toxin
blocks inhibitory
neurotransmitters.

Nerve
signal
Axon

Clostridium
tetani

Mechanism of tetanus neurotoxin. Earlier we mentioned

that botulism and tetanus toxins are nearly identical
in structure and mechanism. With such a high degree
of mechanistic similarity, why do tetanus and botulism toxins have such drastically different effects? The
answer is based on where each toxin acts in the nervous
system.
Tetanus, in contrast to botulism, is not a food-borne
disease. Clostridium tetani spores are introduced into the
body by trauma (such as by stepping on the wrong end of a
nail). Necrotic tissue then provides the anaerobic environment required for germination. Growing, vegetative cells
release tetanospasmin, which enters the peripheral nerve
cells at the site of injury. But rather than cleaving targets
here, the toxin travels up axons in the direction opposite to
nerve signal transmission until it reaches the spinal column,
where it becomes fixed at the presynaptic inhibitory motor
neuron. There the toxin also cleaves proteins like VAMP,
but the function of vesicles in these nerves is to release
inhibitory neurotransmitters that dampen nerve impulses.
Tetanus toxin blocks release of the inhibitory neurotransmitters GABA and glycine into the synaptic cleft, leaving nerve impulses unchecked. As a result, impulses come
too frequently and produce the generalized muscle spasms
characteristic of tetanus. Figure 26.29
illustrates the
mechanism of tetanus toxin action. A tetanus toxoid vaccine is available and is administered to children as part of
the DTaP (diphtheria, tetanus, and acellular pertussis) vaccine (see Section 24.6).

■

Necrosis

Tetanospasmin
(tetanus toxin)
Periphery

Neuromuscular
junction

FIGURE 26.29

■ Retrograde movement of tetanus toxin
to an inhibitory neuron. Tetanus toxin enters the nervous

system at the neuromuscular junction and travels retrogradely up
the axons until reaching an inhibitory neuron located in the central
nervous system. There it cleaves VAMP protein (Fig. 26.28B)
associated with the exocytosis of vesicles containing inhibitory
neurotransmitters. ACh = acetylcholine; GABA = gammaaminobutyric acid.

Thought Questions

26.11 Figure 26.29 demonstrates that tetanus toxin has a
mode of action (spastic paralysis) opposite to that of botulism
toxin (flaccid paralysis). Since they have opposing modes of action, can botulism toxin be used to save a patient with tetanus?
26.12 How do the actions of tetanus toxin and botulinum
toxin actually help the bacteria colonize or obtain nutrients?
26.13 If Clostridium botulinum is an anaerobe, how might
botulism toxin get into foods?

CHAPTER 26

Case History: Eastern Equine Encephalitis
In August, Mr. C brought his 21-year-old son, Rich, to a New
Jersey emergency department. Rich appeared dazed and had
trouble responding to simple commands. When questioned
about his son’s activities over the previous few months, Mr. C
told the physician that Rich spent the month of July relaxing
and sunning himself on New Jersey beaches and visiting a
pond in a wooded area near a horse farm. On the afternoon
prior to admission, Rich had become lethargic and tired. He
returned home and went to bed. That evening, his father woke
him for supper, but Rich was confused and had no appetite.
By 11 p.m., Rich had a fever of 40.7°C (103.5°F) and could
not respond to questions. A few hours later, when his father
had trouble rousing him, he brought Rich to the ED. Over the
next week, Rich’s condition worsened to the point where his
limbs were paralyzed. Two weeks later he died. Serum samples taken upon entering the hospital and a few days before he
died showed a sixfold rise in antibody titer to eastern equine
encephalitis (EEE) virus. Brain autopsy showed many small
foci of necrosis in both the gray and white matter.
The EEE virus, a member of the family Togaviridae, is transmitted from bird to bird by mosquitoes. Horses contract
the disease in the same way. Rich contracted it inadvertently
while visiting the pond. The disease, an encephalitis, is often
fatal (35% mortality) but fortunately rare. One reason human
disease is rare is that the species of mosquito that usually
transmits the virus between marsh birds does not prey on
humans. But sometimes a human-specific mosquito bites
an infected bird and then transmits EEE virus to humans.
Another reason human disease is rare is that the virus generally does not fare well in the body. Many persons infected
with EEE virus have no apparent illness, because the immune
system thwarts viral replication. However, as already noted,
mortality is high in individuals that do develop disease.
An interesting point in the case history is that diagnosis relied on detecting an increase in antibody titer to
the virus. Typically, at the point that disease symptoms
first appear, the body has not had time to generate large
amounts of specific antibodies. After a week or so, often

■

MICROBIAL DISEASES

■

1087

when the patient is nearing recovery (convalescence), antibody titers have risen manyfold. The rule of thumb is that
a greater-than-fourfold rise in antibody titer between acute
disease and convalescence (or in this case death) indicates
that the patient has had the disease. While this knowledge
could not help the patient in the case described here, it was
valuable in terms of public health and prevention strategies.
Several bacterial, fungal, and viral causes of encephalitis
and meningitis are listed in Table 26.6.

Prions Are Infectious Proteins

Imagine slowly losing your mind and knowing there is nothing you can do about it. An unusual infectious agent called
the prion has been implicated as the cause of a series of relatively rare but invariably fatal brain diseases (Table 26.7).
Prions are infectious agents that do not have a nucleic acid
genome. The protein alone can mediate an infection. The
prion is now recognized as an infectious, misfolded protein
that resists inactivation by procedures that destroy proteins.
The discovery that proteins alone can transmit an infectious
disease came as a surprise to the scientific community. Diseases caused by prions are especially worrying, since prions
resist destruction by many chemical agents and remain active
after heating at extremely high temperatures. There have
even been documented cases in which sterilized neurosurgical instruments, originally used on a prion-infected person,
still held infectious agent and transmitted the disease to a
subsequent surgery patient. Extremely rigorous decontamination procedures, such as autoclaving surgical instruments
immersed in 1-M sodium hydroxide, will destroy prions.
How can a nonliving entity without nucleic acid be an
infectious agent? Prions associated with human brain disease are thought to be aberrantly folded forms of a normal
brain protein (PrPC). The theory is that when a prion, designated PrPSc, is introduced into the body and manages to
enter the brain, it will cause normally folded forms of the
protein to refold incorrectly (Fig. 26.30A). The improperly folded proteins fit together like Lego blocks to produce
damaging aggregated structures within brain cells.

TABLE 26.7-Prion Diseases
Disease

Susceptible animal

Incubation period

Disease characteristics

Creutzfeldt-Jakob (sporadic, familial, new
variant [vCJD])

Human

Months (vCJD) to years

Spongiform encephalopathy
(degenerative brain disease)

Kuru

Human

Months to years

Spongiform encephalopathy

Gerstmann-Straussler-Scheinker syndrome

Human

Months to years

Genetic neurodegenerative disease

Fatal familial insomnia

Human

Months to years

Genetic neurodegenerative disease
with untreatable insomnia

Mad cow disease

Cattle

5 years

Spongiform encephalopathy

Wasting disease

Deer

Months to years

Spongiform encephalopathy

PART 5

A.
PrP

C

Conversion
prevented
by energy
barrier

PrPSc

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY
A prion enters the brain following
ingestion or other means and
causes the slow refolding of
normal PrPC proteins to PrPSc.

Heterodimer

B.

C.

Homodimer

PrPSc aggregates called
amyloid form and damage
the brain.

Amyloid

FIGURE 26.30

■ Spongiform encephalopathies. A. Refolding model of prion diseases. PrP is a brain protein that can take two forms:
the normal form (PrPC), which is a natural brain protein; and the prion form (PrPSc). B. Normal brain section. C. Section of brain taken from a
CJD victim. Note the Swiss-cheese appearance, indicating brain damage.

Prion diseases are often called spongiform encephalopathies because the postmortem appearance of the brain
includes large, spongy vacuoles in the cortex and cerebellum. These are visible in a brain sample from a victim of one
of these diseases, called Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD)
(Fig. 26.30B and C). Most mammalian species appear to
develop these diseases.
Since 1996, mounting evidence has pointed to a causal
relationship between outbreaks in Europe of a disease in cattle called bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE, or “mad
cow disease”) caused by prions and a disease in humans
called variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (vCJD). Both disorders are invariably fatal. For humans to contract disease, prions from contaminated meat are ingested and penetrate the
intestinal mucosa via the antigen-sampling M cells in Peyer’s
patches. The circulation then traffics the agent to the brain.
As of this writing, only four cases of BSE in cattle have
been detected in the United States since 1993. Because
of aggressive surveillance efforts in the United States and
Canada (where 20 cases have been found), it is unlikely,
but not impossible, that BSE will be a food-borne hazard
to humans in this country. The CDC monitors the trends
and current incidence of typical CJD (approximately 300
cases per year) and variant CJD (3 cases total) in the United
States (see eTopic 26.7). The worldwide incidence of CJD is
one per 1 million population.
There is no cure for CJD or vCJD. A test to detect
PrPSc in asymptomatic primates has been developed but
is not yet ready for human screening. The test is called
protein-mediated cyclic amplification (PMCA). PMCA has
successfully identified the presence of very tiny amounts of
PrPSc in blood or urine. The process involves adding large
amounts of normal PrP (PrPC) to samples containing tiny
amounts of PrPSc prions. The prions, if present in the sample, will seed the misfolding of PrPC to PrPSc molecules
that aggregate. Sonication is then used to partially break
up the newly formed PrPSc aggregates into pieces that can
further seed the misfolding and aggregation of normal PrP.
Repeated cycles of sonication-incubation will exponentially

amplify the amount of PrPSc present in a sample. The PrPSc
is then identified by western blot (see Section 12.2).

To Summarize
■

■

Neisseria meningitidis is resistant to serum complement
because it produces a type-specific capsule. This allows the
organism to reach and then cross the blood-brain barrier.
In contrast to Neisseria gonorrhoeae, a vaccine for
N. meningitidis is available.

■

Botulism toxin causes flaccid paralysis.

■

Tetanospasmin causes spastic paralysis.

■

■

Serological diagnosis of an infectious disease is possible if specific pathogen antibody titer rises fourfold
between the acute and convalescent stages.
Spongiform encephalopathies are believed to be caused
by nonliving proteins called prions.

Concluding Thoughts
In this chapter we have described key concepts of infectious
disease using just a small sample of disease-causing pathogens. Other diseases are considered elsewhere in the book
or on the accompanying website. These include anthrax,
cholera, the common cold (caused by rhinovirus), dengue
fever, diphtheria, gastric ulcers (Helicobacter pylori), herpes,
AIDS, warts (human papillomavirus), influenza, salmonellosis, Streptococcus agalactiae infections, West Nile disease,
and Whipple’s disease (Tropheryma whipplei). The principal
goal in this and the previous chapter was to illustrate how
microbial metabolism can undermine the physiology of a
human host. The next chapter will describe how humans
fight back using pharmacology to sabotage the physiology
of the infecting microbes.

ISM/PHOTOTAKE

■

CAROLINA BIOLOGICAL SUPPLY COMPANY/PHOTOTAKE

1088

CHAPTER 27

■

ANTIMICROBIAL THERAPY

■

1091

CHAPTER 27
Antimicrobial Therapy

A

27.1 Fundamentals of Antimicrobial Therapy

ntibiotics have played a major role in increasing life expectancy throughout the world. But
antibiotics may soon become useless. Indiscriminant use of antibiotics to treat patients and boost
animal growth has led to widespread antibiotic resistance in many pathogens. As a result, we are becoming vulnerable to infectious diseases once thought
conquered. In Chapter 27 we discuss how antimicrobial agents work, how clinicians determine which
antibiotics should be used, how microbes resist antibiotics, and how new antibiotics are being discovered.

27.2 Antibiotic Mechanisms of Action
27.3 Challenges of Drug Resistance and Discovery
27.4 Antiviral Agents
27.5 Antifungal Agents

highlight

A N I N T E RV I E W W I T H

Antarctic antibiotic. Lindsey Shaw at the University of South
Florida (USF) has been searching for novel antimicrobials that
can kill antibiotic-resistant bacterial pathogens. A recent find
is a diterpene chemical called darwinolide, which was extracted from the Antarctic sponge Dendrilla membranosa by USF
colleague Bill Baker. Shaw’s students showed that darwinolide has the novel ability to kill biofilms of methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) fourfold better than it can kill
planktonically growing MRSA. The scientists predict that the
darwinolide structure could provide a unique scaffold upon
which more potent anti-MRSA therapeutics can be built.
Source: J. L. von Salm et al. 2016. Org. Lett. 18:2596–2599. doi:10.1021/acs
.orglett.6b00979.

O
21

H

© BILL BAKER

Dendrilla
membranosa

10
5

18

19

H

8
6

7

22

O

15
14

H

9

3

16

12 13
11

20
1

O H

17

H
O

O

Darwinolide

LINDSEY SHAW, MOLECULAR MICROBIOLOGIST, UNIVERSITY
OF SOUTH FLORIDA

AIMEE BLODGETT/UNIVERSITY OF
SOUTH FLORIDA

C U R R E N T R E S E A RC H

Why look for novel antibiotics in
Antarctica?

Nature provided many antibiotics
currently used in the clinic. Products
from nature have excellent therapeutic properties and still represent viable sources of chemistry. Cures for
many human diseases likely exist in
nature, if only we can find them. But
the potential of most easy-to-explore environments, like
soil, has already been exhausted. We must now travel to
exotic, hard-to-reach environments looking for new compounds. Antarctica is a perfect example. It possesses a rich
biology we can explore for the next blockbuster antibiotic.
Darwinolide preferentially targets established MRSA
biofilms. How?
We don’t know, although we are working on it! Biofilms are
resistant to antibiotics for many reasons (chemical microenvironments, stress responses, persister cells, and so on).
Clearly, something about darwinolide is different from most
drugs. Perhaps it targets something in biofilm persister
cells missing in planktonic cells. It may be that darwinolide
has a novel chemical structure that facilitates penetration
of the biofilm. Or maybe biofilm bacteria undergoing stress
response–type behavior engage a darwinolide-sensitive
pathway, or target, that is lacking in active, free-growing cells.
1091

1092

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

Antibiotics undeniably have been a benefit to modern
society. We live longer than in the past in large measure
because of antibiotics. Infections we consider minor today
often killed their victims just 50 or 60 years ago. But there
has been a downside too: the development of genetically
adapted, antibiotic-resistant pathogens that threaten to
make current antibiotics obsolete. The Current Research
Highlight illustrates the enormous efforts taking place in
laboratories and at extreme locales throughout the world to
discover replacement antibiotics.
How serious is the antibiotic resistance problem? Consider the case of a 56-year-old man with diabetes who
entered the hospital for a heart transplant. The operation went well, but 1 week after the surgery, he developed a severe chest wound infection notable for exuded
pus. Treatment with oxacillin, a penicillin derivative commonly used to combat infections, failed, and the patient
became comatose. The diagnostic microbiology laboratory
ultimately identified the agent as a methicillin (oxacillin)resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), prompting the
surgeon to immediately place the patient on intravenous
vancomycin for 6 weeks. Vancomycin is an antibiotic, structurally different from methicillin and oxacillin, that can
usually kill methicillin-resistant bacteria. Fortunately, this
patient recovered; too often, they do not.
Where did the infection come from? Surprising as it
may seem, this drug-resistant pathogen was a resident of
the hospital itself. Nasal swabs taken of all hospital personnel revealed that several members of the surgical team harbored S. aureus as part of their resident microbiota. But
which individual was the actual source of the patient’s
infection? In what could be described as “forensic microbiology,” each strain was subjected to pulsed-field gel electrophoresis, and the resulting genomic restriction patterns
were compared with that of the isolate from the infected
patient. A match pointed to the source. The unwitting culprit turned out to be the perfusionist who manipulated the
tubing used for cardiopulmonary bypass.
Hospital-acquired, or nosocomial, infections are not
unusual. As many as 5%–10% of all patients admitted
to acute-care hospitals acquire nosocomial infections,
resulting in over 80,000 deaths each year. The deaths
are due, in part, to the poor health of the patient and
in part to the antibiotic-resistant nature of bacteria lurking in hospitals. In fact, as many as 60%–70% of staph
infections that develop in a hospital setting are the result
of methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA). A foreboding
report from the United Kingdom finds that one in four
nursing-home residents is colonized by MRSA. A recent
study in the United States found that the noses of nearly
one in five nonhospitalized people are also colonized by
MRSA. Antibiotic resistance is a problem that will only
get worse.

We begin Chapter 27 with a discussion of the golden
age of antibiotic discovery (1940–60) and move on to
describe the basic concepts of antibiotics and their use
and misuse. We will delve into the ways genomic and proteomic approaches broaden our ability to search for new
antibiotics and targets—all part of our attempt to stay one
step ahead of evolving, antibiotic-resistant pathogens. The
urgency of this task cannot be overstated. In May 2016, an
E. coli uropathogen resistant to a drug of last resort, colistin, arrived in the United States.

27.1

Fundamentals of
Antimicrobial Therapy

Antibiotics (from the Greek meaning “against life”) are
compounds produced by one species of microbe that can
kill or inhibit the growth of other microbes. However, the
term “antibiotics” is also used for synthetic chemotherapeutic agents, such as sulfonamides, that are clinically useful but chemically synthesized.
We think of antibiotics as being a recent biotechnological
development, but they have actually been used for centuries. Ancient remedies called for cloths soaked with organic
material to be placed on wounds to allow them to heal faster.
This organic material likely contained “natural antibiotics”
that killed bacteria and prevented further infection. The
medicinal properties of molds were also recognized for centuries. The ancient Chinese successfully treated boils with
warm soil and molds scraped from cheeses, and in England
a paste of moldy bread was a home remedy for wound infections up until the beginning of the twentieth century.

The Golden Age of Antibiotic Discovery

The modern antibiotic revolution began with the
discovery of penicillin in 1928 by Sir Alexander Fleming
(1881–1955). This discovery was actually a rediscovery, and
was arguably one of the greatest examples of serendipity
in science. Although Fleming generally receives the credit
for discovering penicillin, a French medical student, Ernest
Duchesne (1874–1912), originally discovered the antibiotic
properties of Penicillium in 1896.
Duchesne observed that Arab stable boys at the nearby
army hospital kept their saddles in a dark and damp room
to encourage mold to grow on them. When asked why, they
told him the mold helped heal saddle sores on the horses.
Intrigued, Duchesne prepared a solution from the mold
and injected it into diseased guinea pigs. All recovered.
Penicillium was forgotten in the scientific community
until Fleming rediscovered it one day in the late 1920s.
Petri dishes were glass in those days and could be rewashed

CHAPTER 27
A.

B.

ANTIMICROBIAL THERAPY

■

1093

E.
H
N
O

ST. MARY'S HOSPITAL MEDICAL SCHOOL/
SCIENCE SOURCE.

■

O

S
N

1

2

3

4

5

6

CH3
CH3

COO–

Penicillin G
D.

FIGURE 27.1

■ The dawn of antibiotics. A. Alexander Fleming’s photo of the dish with bacteria and penicillin mold. The ring
highlights the area of decreased growth of Staphylococcus aureus
colonies. B. The chemical structure of penicillin G. C. Alexander
Fleming at work in his laboratory. D. Howard Florey. E. Pictures
taken in 1942, shortly after the introduction of penicillin, show
the improvement in a child suffering from an infection 4 days
(panel 2) and 9 days (panel 4) after treatment. Panels 5 and 6
show her fully recovered.

and sterilized. Fleming was preparing to wash a pile of old
petri dishes he had used to grow the pathogen Staphylococcus aureus. He opened and examined each dish before tossing it into a cleaning solution. He noticed that one dish had
grown contaminating mold, which in and of itself was not
unusual in old plates, but all around the mold the staph
bacteria had failed to grow (Fig. 27.1A).
Fleming took a sample of the mold and found that it
was from the penicillium family, later identified as Penicillium notatum. The mold appeared to have synthesized
a chemical, now known as penicillin (Fig. 27.1B), which
diffused through the agar, killing cells of S. aureus
before they could form colonies. Fleming (Fig. 27.1C)
presented his findings in 1929, but they raised little
interest, since penicillin appeared to be unstable and
would not remain active in the body long enough to kill
pathogens.
As World War II began, Oxford professor Howard
Florey (Fig. 27.1D) and his colleague Ernst Chain, rediscovered Fleming’s work, thought it held promise, and
set about purifying penicillin. To their amazement, the

1998 AUSTRALIAN BROADCASTING CORPORATION

J. A. HAMPTON/GETTY IMAGES

SCIENCE SOURCE/SCIENCE SOURCE.

C.

purified penicillin cured the mice infected with staphylococci or streptococci. Subsequent human trials proved successful (Fig. 27.1E), and penicillin gained wide use, saving
countless lives during the war. Fleming, Florey, and Chain
received the 1945 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine
for their work.
The next landmark discovery in antibiotics was made
by Gerhard Domagk (1895–1964), a German physician at
the Bayer Institute of Experimental Pathology and Bacteriology, who investigated antimicrobial compounds in the
1930s (Fig. 27.2A). In 1935, Domagk’s 6-year-old child
developed a serious streptococcal infection induced by an
innocent pinprick to the finger. The infection spread to her
axillary (armpit) lymph nodes and became so severe that
lancing and draining the pus 14 times did little to help.
The only remaining alternative was to amputate the arm.
Unfortunately, even this option would probably not save
her life.
Frustrated, Domagk took what would appear to be drastic measures. He administered a dose of a red dye (Prontosil) he was investigating. On agar plates (the usual medium

1094

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

A.

B.
NH2
O

S O

GEORGE RINHART/GETTY IMAGES

NH2
Sulfanilamide

HO

O
C

NH2
PABA

BETTMANN/GETTY IMAGES

C.

D.

NH

H3C

O
CHO

NH
H2N
O HO

OH O
HO
HO

O
OH

H
OH N
OH

NH
NH2

Streptomycin

NHCH3

FIGURE 27.2

■ The discoverers of sulfanilamide and streptomycin. A. Gerhard Domagk discovered sulfanilamide. B. Chemi-

cal structure of sulfanilamide, an analog of para-aminobenzoic acid
(PABA), a precursor of the vitamin folic acid, which is necessary for
growth. Sulfanilamide inhibits one of the enzymes that converts
PABA into folic acid. C. Selman Waksman discovered streptomycin
in 1944. D. Chemical structure of streptomycin.

for testing antibiotics), Prontosil had shown absolutely no
ability to inhibit the growth of streptococcus. Domagk,
however, had tested the drug in animals, not agar plates,
where he found it could cure animals of infection. Remarkably, Domagk’s daughter recovered completely.
Domagk discovered that Prontosil was metabolized by
the body into another compound, sulfanilamide, clearly
lethal to the streptococcus. This finding led to an entire
class of drugs, the sulfa drugs, that saved hundreds of
thousands of lives. The take-home message of this story is
that an antibiotic’s activity on a plate, or lack thereof, does
not necessarily correlate with the drug’s activity in a patient.

Sulfanilamide is an analog of para-aminobenzoic acid
(PABA), a precursor of folic acid, a vitamin necessary for
nucleic acid synthesis (Fig. 27.2B). Sulfanilamide and
other sulfa drugs bind to and inhibit the enzyme that converts PABA to folic acid. Without folic acid to make nucleic
acid precursors, the pathogen stops growing. Sulfa drugs
inhibit bacterial growth without affecting human cells
because folic acid is not synthesized by humans (it is a
dietary supplement instead), and because bacteria do not
transport folic acid (they must make it themselves).
In a dark turn, Domagk’s possible participation in
human experimentation with concentration camp prisoners during World War II (ordered by his German employer)
was a source of controversy that haunted him long after the
war ended. Yet his contributions to medicine continued; he
also developed the first effective chemotherapy for tuberculosis, the thiosemicarbazones and isoniazid, which are still
used today.
During the same period of history, Selman Waksman
(1888–1973) at Rutgers University began screening 10,000
strains of soil bacteria and fungi for their ability to inhibit
growth or kill bacteria (Fig. 27.2C). In 1944, this herculean effort paid off with the discovery of streptomycin, an
antibiotic produced by the actinomycete Streptomyces griseus (Fig. 27.2D). Waksman’s discovery of streptomycin
triggered the antibiotic gold rush that is still under way and
earned him the 1952 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine.

Antibiotics Exhibit Selective Toxicity

As early as 1904, the German physician Paul Ehrlich
(1854–1915) realized that a successful antimicrobial compound would be a “magic bullet” that selectively kills or
inhibits the pathogen but not the host. This seemingly
obvious premise was innovative at the time. Ehrlich made
several discoveries based on this concept, the most celebrated of which was the arsenical compound known as Salvarsan. Salvarsan proved to be quite effective in killing the
syphilis agent Treponema pallidum (this was long before
penicillin was discovered). Syphilis, a sexually transmitted
disease, had been untreatable and the source of considerable long-term suffering. Ehrlich’s “magic bullet” concept
is now known as selective toxicity. Although Ehrlich’s
selective toxicity concept was right, Salvarsan itself was
not as selectively toxic as he thought. This arsenical compound harmed the host, but fortunately usually killed off
the treponemes before killing the patient.
Selective toxicity is possible because key aspects of a
microbe’s physiology are different from those of eukaryotes. For example, suitable bacterial antibiotic targets
include peptidoglycan, which eukaryotic cells lack, and
ribosomes, which are structurally distinct between Bacteria and Eukarya. Thus, chemicals like penicillin, which

CHAPTER 27

prevents peptidoglycan synthesis, and tetracycline, which
binds to bacterial 30S ribosomal subunits, inhibit bacterial
growth but are essentially invisible to host cells, since they
do not interact with them at low doses.
Although their intended targets are bacterial cells, some
antibiotics, particularly at high doses, can interact with elements of eukaryotic cells and cause side effects that harm
the patient. For example, chloramphenicol, a drug that targets bacterial 50S ribosomal subunits, can interfere with
the development of blood cells in bone marrow—a phenomenon that may result in aplastic anemia (failure to
produce red blood cells). The toxicity of an antibiotic can
also depend on the age of the patient. Ciprofloxacin, for
instance, can cause defects in human bone growth plates
and should not be administered to children. Problems can
even arise if the drug does not directly impact mammalian
physiology. For example, many people develop an extreme
allergic sensitivity to penicillin, in which case the treatment
of an infection may end up being worse than the infection
itself. Physicians must be aware of these allergies and use
alternative antibiotics to avoid harming their patients.
As a student of microbiology, you must be able to
properly distinguish between the terms “drug susceptibility” and “drug sensitivity.” A microbe is susceptible to
the drug’s action, but a human can develop an allergic
sensitivity to the drug.

Spectrum of Activity

No single antimicrobial drug affects all microbes. As a
result, antimicrobial drugs are classified by the types of
organisms they affect. Thus, we have antifungal, antibacterial, antiprotozoan, and antiviral agents. The term “antibiotic” is usually reserved for compounds that affect bacteria.
Even within a group, one agent might have a very narrow
spectrum of activity, meaning it affects only a few species, while another antibiotic inhibits many species. For
instance, penicillin has a relatively narrow spectrum of
activity, killing primarily Gram-positive bacteria. However,
ampicillin is penicillin with an added amino group that
allows the drug to more easily penetrate the Gram-negative
outer membrane. As a result of this chemically engineered
modification, ampicillin kills Gram-positive and Gramnegative organisms, giving it a broader spectrum of activity than penicillin has. There are antimicrobials as well that
exhibit extremely narrow activities. One example is isoniazid, which is clinically useful only against Mycobacterium
tuberculosis, the agent of tuberculosis. The spectrum of
activity of select antibiotics is explored in eTopic 27.1.
Patients typically believe that all antibiotics kill their
intended targets. This is a misconception. Many drugs
simply prevent growth of the organism and let the body’s
immune system dispatch the intruding microbe. Thus,

■

ANTIMICROBIAL THERAPY

■

1095

antimicrobials are also classified on the basis of whether or
not they kill the microbe. An antibiotic is bactericidal if
it kills the target microbe, whereas it is bacteriostatic if it
merely prevents bacterial growth.
Antibiotics are good for treating infectious diseases, but
do our microbiomes pay the price? As discussed in several
prior chapters, we are increasingly aware that our natural
microbiota contribute in important ways to human health
and development. Many studies are now exploring the
impact of antibiotic use on host-microbiota interactions (discussed in Chapters 23 and 24). We have known for decades
that antibiotics—especially broad-spectrum antibiotics—
can destroy the ecological balance of bacterial species in the
gut (as well as at other body sites) and lead to gastrointestinal disease. Pathology can result when one species resistant to the antibiotic gains a growth advantage over various
drug-susceptible species that ordinarily keep the pathogen in check (see the discussion of Clostridioides difficile,
formerly Clostridium difficile, in Section 26.4). But what
other effects might there be when the microbial balance of
power in the intestine is disturbed? We may ultimately find
that directing the toxicity of an antibiotic to a single bacterial species (while leaving all others alone) has benefits to
human health that we do not currently understand.

Measuring Drug Susceptibility

One critical decision a clinician must make when treating
an infection is which antibiotic to prescribe for the patient.
There are several factors to consider, including:
■

The relative effectiveness of different antibiotics on
the organism causing the infection. This determination will reveal whether the organism developed resistance to a drug.

■

The average attainable tissue levels of each drug. An
antibiotic may work on an agar plate, but the concentration at which it affects bacterial growth may be too high
to be safe in the patient. In fact, an important aspect
of designing new antibiotics is to enhance the pharmacological activity of an existing drug—for example,
modifying it so that the body does not break it down or
quickly excrete it in urine.

Minimal inhibitory concentration. The in vitro effective-

ness of an antimicrobial agent is determined by measuring how little of it is needed to stop growth. This amount
is classically measured in terms of an antibiotic’s minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC), defi ned as the lowest concentration of the drug that will prevent the growth
of an organism. But the MIC for any one drug will differ
among different bacterial species. For example, the MIC
of ampicillin needed to stop the growth of Staphylococcus

1096

8.0

■

PART 5

4.0

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

2.0

µg/ml
1.0
0.5

0.25

0.125

0.06
Numbers reflect the relative
concentrations of antibiotic
that are present at various
points within the zone of
inhibition. The concentrations
along the periphery of the
clear zone are equal and
reflect the MIC, which in this
case is 0.047 µg/ml.

FIGURE 27.3

■ Determining minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC). In this series of tubes, tetracycline was diluted serially

starting at 8 μg/ml. Each tube was then inoculated with an equal
number of bacteria. Turbidity indicates that the antibiotic concentration was insufficient to inhibit growth. The MIC in this example is
1.0 μg/ml.

aureus will be different from that needed to inhibit Shigella
dysenteriae. The reasons that a drug may be more effective
against one organism than another include the ease with
which the drug penetrates the cell and the affi nity of the
drug for its molecular target.
So how do we measure MIC? As shown in Figure 27.3,
an antibiotic is serially diluted along a row of test tubes containing nutrient broth. After dilution, the organism to be
tested is inoculated at low, constant density into each tube,
and the tubes are usually incubated overnight. Growth of
the organism is seen as turbidity. In Figure 27.3, the tubes
with the highest concentration of drug are clear, indicating
no growth. The tube containing the MIC is the tube with
the lowest concentration of drug that shows no growth.
Note, however, that the MIC does not indicate whether a
drug is bacteriostatic or bactericidal.
Thought Questions

27.1 Figure 27.3 illustrates how MICs are determined. Test

your understanding of how MICs are measured in the following example. The drug tobramycin is added to a concentration
of 1,000 μg/ml in a tube of broth from which serial twofold
dilutions are made. Including the initial tube (tube 1), there are
a total of ten tubes. Twenty-four hours after all the tubes are
inoculated with Listeria monocytogenes, turbidity is observed
in tubes 6–10. What is the MIC?

27.2 What additional test performed on an MIC series of tubes
will tell you whether a drug is bacteriostatic or bactericidal?

COURTESY OF DR. JOHN W. FOSTER

COURTESY OF DR. JOHN W. FOSTER

Tetracycline serially diluted

FIGURE 27.4

An MIC strip test. The Etest (AB Biodisk) is a
commercially prepared strip that produces a gradient of antibiotic
concentration (in μg/ml) when placed on an agar plate. The MIC corresponds to the point where bacterial growth crosses the numbered
strip.
■

MIC determinations are very useful for estimating a
single drug’s effectiveness against a single bacterial pathogen isolated from a patient, but they are not very practical
when trying to screen 20 or more different drugs. Dilutions take time—time that the technician, not to mention
the patient, may not have. The time required to evaluate
antibiotic effectiveness can be reduced by using a strip test
(like the Etest shown in Fig. 27.4) that avoids the need
for dilutions. The strip, containing a gradient of antibiotic, is placed on an agar plate freshly seeded with a dilute
lawn of bacteria. While the bacteria are trying to grow,
the drug diffuses out of the strip and into the media.
Drug emanating from the more concentrated areas of the
strip will travel faster and farther through the agar than
will drug from the less concentrated areas of the strip.
Thus, the drug’s effect (killing or inhibiting the growth
of cells) will extend farther away from the strip at locations of high concentration than at locations of lower concentration. The result is a zone of inhibition where the
antibiotic has stopped bacterial growth. The MIC is the
point at which the elliptical zone of inhibition intersects
with the strip.
Kirby-Bauer Disk Susceptibility Test. Although the strip

test eliminates the time and effort needed to make dilutions, it would take 20 or more plates to test an equal number of antibiotics for just one bacterial isolate. Clinical
labs can receive up to 100 or more isolates in one day, so

CHAPTER 27

■

ANTIMICROBIAL THERAPY

■

1097

A.

FIGURE 27.5

■

The Kirby-Bauer disk susceptibility test.

MSSA

D.

MRSA

individual MIC determinations are impractical. A simplified agar diffusion test, however, which can test 12 antibiotics on one plate, makes evaluating antibiotic susceptibility
a manageable task.
Named for its inventors, the Kirby-Bauer assay uses
a series of round filter paper disks impregnated with different antibiotics. A dispenser (Fig. 27.5A) delivers up to
12 disks simultaneously to the surface of an agar plate covered by a bacterial lawn. Each disk is marked to indicate the
drug used. During incubation, the drugs diffuse away from
the disks into the surrounding agar and inhibit growth of
the lawn to different distances (Fig. 27.5B–D). The zones
of inhibition vary in width, depending on the antibiotic
used, the concentration of drug in the disk, and the susceptibility of the organism to the drug. The diameter of
the zone correlates to the MIC of the antibiotic against the
organism tested. Figure 27.5B and C show the results for
methicillin-sensitive and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MSSA and MRSA, respectively). Note the lack
of inhibition by the oxacillin disk (arrow in Fig. 27.5C).
This strain is resistant to both methicillin and oxacillin
because they are structurally similar.
Correlations between MIC values and Kirby-Bauer
zone sizes are made empirically. Every disk containing a

COURTESY OF DR. JOHN W. FOSTER

C.

COURTESY OF DR. JOHN W. FOSTER

B.

Streptococcus pneumoniae

COURTESY OF DR. JOHN W. FOSTER

COURTESY OF DR. JOHN W. FOSTER

A. Device used to deliver up to 12 disks to the surface of a MuellerHinton plate. B. Disks impregnated with different antibiotics are
placed on a freshly laid lawn of methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus
aureus (MSSA) and incubated overnight. The clear zones around
certain disks indicate growth inhibition. C. Results for methicillinresistant S. aureus (MRSA). D. Results for Streptococcus pneumoniae. The brownish tint of the blood agar plates outside the zones of
bacterial inhibition is caused by a hemolysin secreted by the lawn
of pneumococci. C, chloramphenicol; CC, clindamycin; CZ, cefazolin; E, erythromycin; NOR, norfloxacin; OX, oxacillin; P, penicillin; RA,
rifampin; SAM, sulbactam-ampicillin; SXT, sulfa-trimethoprim; TE,
tetracycline; VA, vancomycin.

given antibiotic is impregnated with a standard concentration of drug, and every antibiotic has a quantifiable MIC
that will differ when tested against different bacterial species and strains. The outermost ring of the no-growth
zone in a Kirby-Bauer disk test must, by definition, contain the minimal concentration of drug needed to prevent
growth on agar. Thus, if species A and B have MIC values for penicillin of 4 μg/ml and 40 μg/ml, respectively,
then species A will exhibit a proportionally larger zone of
inhibition than species B in the disk test. A graph plotting
MIC on one axis and zone diameter on the other provides
the correlation.
After incubating agar plates in the Kirby-Bauer test, the
diameters of the zones of inhibition around each disk are
measured, and the results are compared with a table listing
whether a zone is wide enough (meaning the MIC is low
enough) to be clinically useful. Table 27.1 shows susceptibility data for S. aureus. The concentration of antibiotic
used and the zone size that is considered clinically significant are correlated with the average attainable tissue level
for each antibiotic (discussed later). For the antibiotic to
remain effective in vivo, it is important that the tissue concentration of the drug remain above the MIC; otherwise,
invading bacteria will not be affected.

1098

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

TABLE 27.1-Susceptibility Results for Staphylococcus Aureus
Zone of inhibition diameter (mm)
Antibiotic

Quantity in disk ( g)

Ampicillin

10

Chloramphenicol

■

■

■

<12

Intermediate

Susceptible

12–13

>13

30

<13

13–17

>17

Erythromycin

15

<14

14–17

>17

Gentamicin

10

≤12.5

Streptomycin

10

<12

12–14

>14

Tetracycline

30

<15

15–18

>18

To ensure reproducibility, the Kirby-Bauer test was standardized over a half century ago. Reproducibility means
that results from a laboratory in California will match those
in Alabama, Ohio, or any other state. The following are
standardizations used to make the test reproducible and
easier.
■

Resistant

Size of the agar plate. The plates used (150 mm) are
larger than standard agar plates (100 mm) to accommodate more disks and to maintain sufficient distance
between disks so that zones of inhibition do not overlap.
Depth of the media. Antibiotics diffuse out of impregnated disks in three dimensions. Because diffusion cannot occur very far downward in a thinly poured agar, the
drug is forced to move more laterally. Thus, the zone of
inhibition measured from a thinly poured agar plate will
be larger than the zone from a thick agar plate.
Media composition. Media used for testing antibiotic susceptibility should lack para-aminobenzoic acid
(PABA), a compound used by cells to make the vitamin folic acid. Sulfonamide antibiotics are analogs of
PABA that inhibit folic acid synthesis. However, standard laboratory media, such as nutrient agar, contain
PABA. Grown on such a medium, the bacterial cell will
be flooded with PABA, which will limit the ability of
the sulfa drugs to inhibit growth. Thus, even though
the drug might be effective in vivo, on nutrient agar
there would be no zone of inhibition. The standardized
medium used for the Kirby-Bauer test, called MuellerHinton agar, contains no PABA.
The number of organisms spread on the agar plate.
The more organisms that are placed on a plate, the faster
visible growth will form. The faster visible growth forms,
the less time there is for an antibiotic to diffuse from a
disk to prevent growth. The result is that the diameter
of the zone of inhibition for an antibiotic is inversely

>12.5

proportional to the number of organisms used to seed
the agar plate. Thus, a standard optical density solution
of each organism is prepared, and a cotton swab is used
to spread organisms evenly over the entire agar surface.
■

Size of the disks. A standard diameter of 6 mm means
that all antibiotics start diffusing into the agar at the
same point.

■

Concentrations of antibiotics in the disks. The zone
of inhibition for an antibiotic is proportional to the concentration of antibiotic in the disk. The higher the concentration of antibiotic in a disk, the faster that drug can
diffuse through the plate and inhibit growth. To avoid
differences between labs, the concentration of each drug
impregnating a disk has been standardized.

■

Incubation temperature. Incubation temperature will
not affect growth and diffusion equally. To avoid differences, a temperature of 37°C is standard.

Automated MIC determinations. The

methods just
described to determine MIC are effective but take at least
24 hours to complete (the amount of time needed to see
visible turbidity in broth or growth on agar). Modern clinical laboratories are equipped with automated machines
(described in Chapter 28) that can determine an MIC
within 6 hours. This speed is critical to a clinician wanting
to quickly treat a serious infection with the most effective
drug. The instruments work by monitoring growth of the
infectious agent in microtiter plate wells and extrapolating
MIC from growth curves recorded at different antibiotic
concentrations.

Correlating antibiotic MIC with tissue level. The average

attainable tissue level for a drug depends on how quickly
the antibiotic is cleared from the body via secretion by
the kidney or destruction in the liver. It also depends on

CHAPTER 27

ANTIMICROBIAL THERAPY

■

1099

To Summarize

20
Tissue or serum concentration (µg/ml)

■

18

Peak
■

16
14

■

12
10

■

8
6

MIC tested in vitro

4

■

2
■

0
0

5

Time above MIC

FIGURE 27.6

10

15
Hours

20

25

30

Correlation between MIC and serum or
tissue level of an antibiotic. This graph illustrates the serum

■

■

level of ampicillin over time. The important consideration here is
how long the serum level of the antibiotic remains higher than the
MIC. Once the concentration falls below the MIC, owing to destruction in the liver or clearance through the kidneys and secretion, the
infectious agent fails to be controlled by the drug—in this case,
7–8 hours after the initial dose. To maintain a serum level higher
than the MIC, a second dose would be taken. The shaded area of the
curve represents time above MIC.

when side effects of the drug start to appear. The graph
in Figure 27.6 shows that as long as the concentration
of the drug in tissue or blood remains higher than the
MIC, the drug will be effective. The concentration can
be kept at sufficient levels either by administering a higher
dose, which runs the risk of side effects, or by giving a
second dose at a time when the levels from the fi rst dose
have declined. This is why patients are told to take doses
of some antibiotics four times a day and other antibiotics
only once a day.

■

■

■

■

■

antibiotic represented in Figure 27.6 and was told to take
one pill twice a day. The pathogen is susceptible to this drug.
Will the prescribed treatment be effective? Explain your
answer.

27.4 You are testing whether a new antibiotic will be a

good treatment choice for a patient with a staph infection. The Kirby-Bauer test using the organism from the
patient shows a zone of inhibition of 15 mm around the disk
containing this drug. Clearly, the organism is susceptible.
But you conclude from other studies that the drug would be
ineffective in the patient. What would make you draw this
conclusion?

Some antimicrobial agents are initially inactive, until
converted by the body to an active agent.
Florey and Chain purified penicillin and capitalized
on Fleming’s discovery of penicillin.
Antimicrobial agents may be produced naturally or
artificially.
Selective toxicity refers to the ability of an antibiotic to
attack a unique component of microbial physiology that is
missing or distinctly different from eukaryotic physiology.
Antibiotic side effects on mammalian physiology can
limit the clinical usefulness of an antimicrobial agent.
Antibiotic spectrum of activity is the range of microbes
that a given drug affects.
Bactericidal antibiotics kill microbes; bacteriostatic
antibiotics inhibit microbial growth.
The spectrum of an antibiotic and the susceptibility
of the infectious agent are critical points of information
required before prescribing antibiotic therapy.
Minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) of a drug,
when correlated with average attainable tissue levels of
the antibiotic, can predict the effectiveness of an antibiotic in treating disease.
MIC is measured using tube dilution techniques, but it
can be approximated using the Kirby-Bauer disk diffusion technique.

27.2

Thought Questions

27.3 A patient with a bacterial lung infection was given the

The importance of antibiotics in treating disease was
recognized in the early 1940s.

Antibiotic Mechanisms
of Action

As noted in Section 27.1, selective toxicity of an antibiotic
depends on enzymes or structures unique to the bacterial
target cell. The following aspects of a microbe’s physiology
are classic targets:
■

Cell wall synthesis

■

Cell membrane integrity

■

DNA synthesis

■

RNA synthesis

■

Protein synthesis

■

Metabolism

1100

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

Table 27.2 summarizes the general targets of common antibiotics. Chapters 3, 7, and 8 describe these cellular components and provide the basis for understanding
how antibiotics work. The mechanisms of action for antibiotics affecting DNA, RNA, and protein synthesis are
described in Chapters 7 and 8; they receive only brief
mention here.

Cell Wall Antibiotics

Bacterial cell walls are the basis of
selective toxicity for some antibiotics
because peptidoglycan does not exist
in mammalian cells; thus, antibiotics that target the synthesis of these
structures should selectively kill bacteria. The following case history
illustrates the use of two cell wall–
targeting antibiotics and also reveals
how bacteria can evolve to escape
destruction.

Cycloserine
inhibits formation
of the dipeptide.

Case History: Meningitis

A 3-year-old child was brought to the emergency room crying, with a stiff neck and high fever. Gram stain of cerebrospinal fluid revealed Gram-positive cocci, generally in pairs.
The diagnosis was meningitis. The physician immediately
prescribed intravenous ampicillin. Unfortunately, the child’s
condition worsened, so antibiotic treatment was changed to a
third-generation cephalosporin (which more easily crosses the

TABLE 27.2-Targets of Antimicrobial Agents

L-Ala

Target

Antibiotic examples

Cell wall synthesis

Penicillins, cephalosporins, bacitracin, vancomycin

Protein synthesis

Chloramphenicol, tetracyclines, aminoglycosides,
macrolides, lincosamides

Cell membrane integrity

Polymyxin, daptomycin, amphotericin, imidazoles (vs. fungi)

Nucleic acid function

Nitroimidazoles, nitrofurans, quinolones, rifampin; some
antiviral compounds, especially antimetabolites

Intermediary metabolism

Sulfonamides, trimethoprim

Cytoplasm

1. Amino acids add sequentially
to N-acetylmuramic acid (NAM).

UDP –NAM
L-Alanine
D-Glutamic

D-Ala

Cycloserine
Membrane

L-Lysine

2. D-Alanine peptide attaches.

(Diaminopimelic acid
(D
in Gram-negative bacteria)

D-Al
-Alala-D-Al
-Ala
Alla

P

UDP

8. One phosphate on liberated
bactoprenol is removed, and
lipid moves back to cytoplasmic
side of membrane.

acid

Ala
Glu
Lys
D-Ala
D-Ala

3. NAM pentapeptide transfers
to bactoprenol.

UMP

P
P
Bacitracin
Bacitracin inhibits
incorporation of
disaccharide
di
h id units.
i

P

P

C55
55C
(bactoprenol)

55C
C55
(bactoprenol)

FIGURE 27.7 ■ Peptidoglycan synthesis in a Gram-positive bacterium (Staphylococcus aureus), and targets of antibiotics. Several small-molecular-weight compounds are sequentially joined to form a disaccharide unit that will be added to preexisting extracel-

lular chains of this unit. Red lines indicate inhibition. Cycloserine inhibits ligation of the two D-alanines (step 2); bacitracin inhibits linking of
the disaccharide units; vancomycin and the beta-lactams, such as penicillin, inhibit the peptide cross-linking of peptidoglycan side chains.

CHAPTER 27

ANTIMICROBIAL THERAPY

■

1101

is made. Synthesis of peptidoglycan starts in the cytoplasm with a uridine diphosphate (UDP)–NAM molecule.
The amino acids L-alanine, D -glutamic acid, and L-lysine
[or diaminopimelic acid (DAP) in Gram-negative organisms] are individually and sequentially added to NAM
(Fig. 27.7, step 1); and then a dipeptide of D -alanine is
attached (step 2). Next, the NAM-pentapeptide is transferred to a membrane-situated, 55-carbon lipid molecule
called bactoprenol (step 3), releasing uridine monophosphate (UMP). This structure is also called lipid I. Another
sugar molecule, NAG, is then linked to NAM—once again
through a UDP intermediate (step 4)—to make the bactoprenol structure called lipid II. All of this takes place on the
cytoplasmic side of the membrane.
Bactoprenol then “flips,” moving NAM-NAG to the
outer side of the cytoplasmic membrane (Fig. 27.7,
step 5), where transpeptidases and transglycosylases (two
penicillin-binding proteins, or PBPs) bind to the D-AlaD -Ala part of the pentapeptide. Transglycosylase attaches
the new disaccharide unit to an existing peptidoglycan
chain (step 6). Transpeptidase then links two peptide

blood-brain barrier). The patient began to improve within
hours and was released after 2 days. A report from the clinical microbiology laboratory identified the organism as Streptococcus pneumoniae.
Both of the antibiotics used in this case kill bacteria by
targeting cell wall synthesis (introduced in Chapter 3). To
synthesize peptidoglycan, sugar molecules called N-acetylglucosamine (NAG) and N-acetylmuramic acid (NAM)
are made by the cell and linked together by a transglycosylase enzyme into long chains assembled at the cell
wall (Fig. 27.7). N-acetylmuramic acid contains a short
side chain of amino acids that is assembled enzymatically,
not by a ribosome. The side chains from adjacent strands
are cross-linked to make the structure rigid. The enzyme
transpeptidase (D-alanyl-D-alanine carboxypeptidase/
transpeptidase) catalyzes the cross-link. Several antibiotics
target various stages of this assembly process.
Peptidoglycan synthesis. Before we can explain how cell

wall antibiotics work, you need to know how the cell wall

5. Bactoprenol “flips,” moving
NAM-NAG to outer side of
cytoplasmic membrane.

4. N-acetylglucosamine (NAG)
links to NAM.

U DP
U DP

P

■

P

NAG

P

NAM

NAG

NAG

P

C55
(bactoprenol)

P

P

t

e

sylas

lyco
ransg

6. Transglycosylase
attaches new
disaccharide unit to
existing chain.

transpeptidase
Pentaglycine

7. A pentaglycine connects L-Lys on one side
chain and the penultimate D-Ala on the other.

NAM

P

P

PBPs (transpeptidases)
(transglycosylases)
Penicillin
Vancomycin
Vancomycin, penicillin,
and cephalosporins
inhibit peptide
cross-linking.

1102

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

side chains of adjacent peptidoglycan molecules with a pentaglycine cross-link (in Staphylococcus
aureus). The pentaglycine connects L-Lys on one side chain and
the penultimate D-Ala on the other
side chain (step 7). The terminal
D -Ala is removed in the process.
Other bacteria do not use a pentaglycine cross-link, but directly
form a peptide bond between
L-Lys (DAP) and the penultimate
D -Ala.
Cross-linking strengthens the cell wall. In the last part
of the cycle, one of the phosphates
on the now liberated bactoprenol
is removed and the lipid moves
back to the cytoplasmic side of the
membrane, ready to pick up and
taxi another unit of peptidoglycan
to the growing chain (step 8).
Beta-lactam antibiotics. Penicil-

A.
H
R

β-Lactam ring

N
O

S
N

CH3
CH3

=

CH

CH2

COO

–

COO–

Basic structure

Cysteine

B. R groups
R=H
6-Aminopenicillanic acid
O
R=

H2N

CH

C

COO–

SH

CH

+
H2N

CH3
CH3

CH
COO–
Valine

H H
N

R
O

O

H
N
H

COOH

D-Alanine-D-alanine

FIGURE 27.8 ■ The structure of penicillins. A. Penicillanic
acid (R = H) is derived from cysteine and valine. Also shown is the
D-alanine-D-alanine structure of peptidoglycan, which is structurally similar to the beta-lactam ring of penicillins (green shading).
B. The R group highlighted in (A) can be any one of a number of
different groups, some of which are shown here. Modifying this
group changes the pharmacological properties and antimicrobial
spectrum of the drug.

Carbenicillin
O
R=

CH2

C

Penicillin G
O
R=

CH

C

NH2
Ampicillin

lin and other beta-lactam antiOCH3
biotics target penicillin-binding
O
proteins. Penicillin is an antibiotic
R=
CH2 C
derived from cysteine and valine,
OCH3
which combine to form the betaMethicillin
lactam ring structure shown in
Figure 27.8A. Different R groups
can be added to the basic ring structure to change the antimicrobial spectrum and stability of
the derivative penicillin (Fig. 27.8B). Note that the betalactam ring of penicillin chemically resembles the D -Ala-D Ala piece of peptidoglycan (Fig. 27.8A). This molecular
mimicry allows the drug to bind transpeptidase, transglycosylase, and several other proteins involved in cell wall
synthesis or remodeling (which is why the proteins are
called penicillin-binding proteins). Penicillins act by inhibiting transpeptidase-mediated cross linking between adjacent peptidoglycan chains. This activity makes the cell wall
very weak. In addition, penicillins can somehow activate
proteins in the cell wall that hydrolyze peptidoglycan. The
consequence is a disaster for bacteria that are trying to
grow larger and larger. Eventually, the growing cell bursts
for lack of cell wall restraint. Penicillin, then, is a bactericidal drug (unless the treated organism is suspended in an
isotonic solution). Note that in addition to cell lysis, there
is another explanation for why penicillin and other bactericidal drugs kill bacteria, which we will discuss at the end
of this section.
Penicillin is more effective against Gram-positive than
Gram-negative organisms because the drug has difficulty

passing through the Gram-negative outer membrane.
Ampicillin, which was used in the case history, is a modified version of penicillin that more easily penetrates this
membrane and is more effective than penicillin against
Gram-negative microbes. Thus, ampicillin has a broader
spectrum of activity than penicillin.
Bacterial resistance to beta-lactam antibiotics. As noted

earlier, antibiotic resistance is a growing problem throughout the world. Bacteria develop resistance to penicillin in
two basic ways. The fi rst is through inheritance of a gene
encoding one of the beta-lactamase enzymes, which cleave
the critical ring structure of this class of antibiotics. Betalactamase is transported out of the cell and into the surrounding medium (for Gram-positives) or the periplasm
(for Gram-negatives), where it can destroy penicillin before
the drug even gets to the cell. Bacteria that produce betalactamase are still susceptible to certain modified penicillins
and cephalosporins engineered to be poor substrates for
the enzyme. Methicillin, for example, works well against
beta-lactamase-producing microbes.
Unfortunately, a type of beta-lactamase called New
Delhi metallo-beta-lactamase-1 (NDM-1) has emerged
that confers resistance to almost all beta-lactam antibiotics.
Originating in India, NDM-1-containing plasmids are promiscuously transferred, being found in various enterobacterial species, such as Klebsiella pneumoniae and E. coli, as
well as the nonenteric pathogens Pseudomonas aeruginosa
and Acinetobacter baumannii.
Aside from beta-lactamases, the second way a microbe
can become resistant to beta-lactam antibiotics is by acquiring a gene encoding an altered penicillin binding protein that no longer binds penicillin. Methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) uses this strategy. Resistance to methicillin in S. aureus is mediated by the mecA
gene, which is part of a mobile genetic element called

CHAPTER 27

staphylococcal cassette chromosome mec (SCCmec). The
mecA gene encodes an altered penicillin-binding protein
(PBP2a or PBP2´) with low affinity for beta-lactam antibiotics. The low affinity provides resistance to all beta-lactam
antibiotics, rendering them useless. Hospitals take special
interest in MRSA because very few drugs can kill it.
One of the few remaining antibiotics effective against
MRSA is vancomycin. Unfortunately, resistance is developing to this drug too. Vancomycin-resistant S. aureus
strains are called VRSA. The penicillin-resistant Streptococcus pneumoniae in the preceding case history actually had
an altered penicillin-binding protein. No beta-lactamaseproducing S. pneumoniae has yet been found.

Note:

Archaeal pseudopeptidoglycan contains talosaminuronic acid instead of muramic acid and lacks the D-amino acids
found in bacterial peptidoglycan. Archaea are thus insensitive to
penicillins, which interfere with bacterial transpeptidases. This
natural resistance is not a problem, because no archaea are known
to be pathogens.

■

1103

A. First generation: cephalexin (Keflex)

S
O

O

N

H2N

N

OH

O

H

B. Second generation: cefoxitin

O

S

O

C

N

OCONH2

N
H

S

O H
CH3

Beta-lactamase-resistant antibiotics. Cephalosporins are

another type of beta-lactam antibiotic originally discovered
in nature but modified in the laboratory to fight microbes
that are naturally resistant to penicillins (especially Pseudomonas aeruginosa). Over the years, the structure of cephalosporin has undergone a series of modifications to improve
its effectiveness against penicillin-resistant pathogens. Each
modification adds complexity and produces what is called
a new “generation” of cephalosporins. There are currently
five generations of this semisynthetic antibiotic (Fig. 27.9).
Unfortunately, the microbial world continually adapts and
eventually becomes resistant to new antibiotics. In the case
of the cephalosporins, new beta-lactamases evolve that can
attack the sterically buried beta-lactam rings in these molecules. It is also important to note that because the core
feature of these drugs is the beta-lactam ring, persons who
are sensitive to penicillins may also suffer a hypersensitivity
reaction to cephalosporins.
Treatment note: In the preceding case history, the infecting strain of Streptococcus pneumoniae turned out to be
resistant to ampicillin. Had the patient been an adult, a fluoroquinolone (see Section 7.2) might have been the best
secondary drug of choice because its target, a type II topoisomerase, is unrelated to cell wall synthesis. Quinolones
are not recommended for children, as in this case, because
of potential side effects. Other beta-lactam antibiotics, such
as the third-generation cephalosporins, may still work on
penicillin-resistant S. pneumoniae, because the modified
antibiotic often can still bind the altered PBP. Nevertheless,
cephalosporin-resistant strains of S. pneumoniae are now
appearing, leaving vancomycin or an oxazolidinone as the
best last choice.

ANTIMICROBIAL THERAPY

■

C. Third generation: ceftriaxone
NH2

N

S

O

H

H

N
H3C

N

O

H 3C

S

N

O

N

S

HO

N

OH

N

O

O

D. Fourth generation: cefepime

S

H2N

C

N

N

O

H

C

N

S

OCH3 O

N
–

OOC

E. Fifth generation: ceftaroline
CH2

N
S
HO
HO

P

N

C
S

O

O

N

H3C

CO2
S

N

N

O H

+

CH2

H H

S

N
S

+

N

CH2

NH

OH

FIGURE 27.9

■ Cephalosporin generations. Representative
examples. With each successive generation, the side groups become
more complex. Highlighted areas indicate the core structure of each
of the cephalosporins, with beta-lactam rings.

Antibiotics that target other steps in peptidoglycan
synthesis. Another antibiotic that affects cell wall synthesis is

bacitracin, a large polypeptide molecule produced by Bacillus
subtilis and Bacillus licheniformis (Fig. 27.10A). The antibiotic inhibits cell wall synthesis by binding to the bactoprenol
lipid carrier molecule that normally transports monomeric
units of peptidoglycan across the cell membrane and to the

1104

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY
B. Cycloserine

A. Bacitracin

CH3

CH3
H3C

H3C

CH3 N

H3C
O

NH2

O

O

H
N
O
NH

O

H3C

S

N
H

OH
N
H

H
N

O

O

H 2N

NH

N
H

NH
O

H
N

HO H3C

O

NH2
CH3

HN
O

O
O

O
CH3

HO

CH3

O
O
HN
–
OOC
H

O
NH
O

OH
O O

O
Cl

HN

O
N

C. Vancomycin

HO

N
H H H

Cl
H
N

OH
OH

OH
OH

O
OH
O
N
OH H
O

H
N
H O
NH2

O
N
H

H
N

Me
Me

Me

OH

FIGURE 27.10

■ Other antibiotics that affect peptidoglycan synthesis. A. Bacitracin is produced by Bacillus subtilis. It is generally
used only topically to prevent infection. B. Cycloserine, an analog of D-alanine, is one of several drugs used to treat tuberculosis. C. Vancomycin is a cyclic polypeptide made by Amycolatopsis orientalis, previously classified as a streptomycete. These antibiotics, especially bacitracin
and vancomycin, are synthesized by exceedingly complex biochemical pathways in the producing organisms. Me = methyl.

growing chain (see Fig. 27.7). Bacitracin binds to and inhibits dephosphorylation of the carrier, thereby preventing the
carrier from accepting a new unit of UDP-NAM. Resistance
to bacitracin can develop if the organism can rapidly recycle
the phosphorylated lipid carrier molecule through dephosphorylation or if the organism possesses an efficient drug
export system (discussed in Section 27.3). Normally, bacitracin is used only topically because of serious side effects, such
as kidney damage, which can occur if bacitracin is ingested.
Cycloserine (made by Streptomyces garyphalus) is one of several antimicrobials used to treat tuberculosis (Fig. 27.10B).
Relative to bacitracin, it acts at an even earlier step in peptidoglycan synthesis. Cycloserine inhibits the two enzymes that
make the D -Ala-D -Ala dipeptide. As a result, the complete
pentapeptide side chain on N-acetylmuramic acid cannot be
made (see Fig. 27.7). Without these alanines, cross-linking
cannot occur and peptidoglycan integrity is compromised.
Vancomycin, a very large and complex glycopeptide
produced by the streptomycete Amycolatopsis orientalis
(Fig. 27.10C), binds to the D -Ala-D -Ala terminal end of
the disaccharide unit and prevents the action of transglycosylases and transpeptidases (see Fig. 27.7). The mechanism
of resistance is very different for vancomycin and penicillin, which makes vancomycin particularly useful against
penicillin-resistant bacteria. To prevent the development
and spread of vancomycin-resistant bacteria, this antibiotic
is typically used only as a drug of last resort.
Resistance to vancomycin can develop when products
from a cluster of van genes collaborate to make D -lactate and incorporate it into the ester D -Ala-D -lactate, to
which vancomycin cannot bind. Another enzyme in the

van gene cluster prevents the accumulation of D -Ala-D Ala; as a result, D -Ala-D -lactate replaces D -Ala-D -Ala in
peptidoglycan. Peptidoglycan containing D -Ala-D -lactate
functions just fine, but the organism is resistant to the
antibiotic because vancomycin cannot bind the D -lactate
form. However, the antibiotic teixobactin, discussed in
Special Topic 4.1, will bind to the D -Ala-D -lactate form
and stop growth of vancomycin-resistant Gram-positive
bacteria.
Note that antibiotics targeting cell wall biosynthesis
generally kill only growing cells. These drugs do not affect
static or stationary-phase cells, because in this state the cell
has no need for new peptidoglycan.

Thought Question

27.5 When treating a patient for an infection, why would

combining a drug such as erythromycin with a penicillin be
counterproductive? (Erythromycin is described in Section 8.3.)

Drugs That Affect Bacterial
Membrane Integrity

Poking holes in a bacterial cytoplasmic membrane is an
effective way to kill bacteria. There are a few compounds
useful in this regard, among them a group called the
peptide antibiotics, of which gramicidin is an example.
Produced by Bacillus brevis, gramicidin is a cyclic peptide composed of 15 alternating D- and L-amino acids. It
inserts into the membrane as a dimer, forming a cation

CHAPTER 27
Gramicidin channel

■

ANTIMICROBIAL THERAPY

■

1105

Case History: Pneumonia Due to
a Gram-Negative Anaerobe
Gramicidin

Lipid bilayer

A 23-year-old woman arrived at the emergency room by
ambulance with fever, chills, and severe muscle aches. She
developed a nonproductive cough, had difficulty breathing,
had pleuritic chest pain, and became hypotensive (had low
blood pressure). An X-ray showed lower-lobe infiltrate in the
lungs, and the clinical laboratory reported the presence of the
Gram-negative anaerobe Fusobacterium necrophorum in
blood cultures. The patient was diagnosed with pneumonia
and treated with metronidazole, a DNA-damaging agent
specific for anaerobes. She fully recovered.
There are several classes of drugs, including sulfa drugs,
quinolones, and metronidazole, that selectively affect the
synthesis or integrity of DNA in microorganisms.
Sulfa drugs. The sulfa drugs, originally discovered by Ger-

FIGURE 27.11

Gramicidin is a peptide antibiotic that
affects membrane integrity. As a dimer, gramicidin forms a
■

cation channel across cell membranes through which H+, Na+, or K+
can freely pass. (PDB code: 1GRM)

channel that disrupts membrane polarity (Fig. 27.11).
Polymyxin (from Bacillus polymyxa), another polypeptide
antibiotic, has a positively charged polypeptide ring that
binds to the outer (lipid A) and inner membranes of bacteria, both of which are negatively charged. Its major lethal
effect seems to be to destroy the inner membrane, much
like a detergent. These antibiotics are used only topically
to treat or prevent infection. Because they can also form
channels across human cell membranes, they should never
be ingested. Polymyxin has been fused to some bandage
materials used to treat burn patients, who are particularly
susceptible to Gram-negative infections (for example, Pseudomonas aeruginosa). Despite the drug’s toxicity, polymyxin or colistin can be injected as a drug of last resort
to treat certain multidrug-resistant bacterial infections (for
instance, Klebsiella pneumoniae).
Daptomycin is a lipopeptide made by Streptomyces
roseosporus using nonribosomal peptide synthetases. The
drug aggregates in the membranes of Gram-positive bacteria to form an ion channel that leaks potassium ions. The
resulting membrane depolarization leads to cell death. This
drug is very effective against MRSA.

Drugs That Affect DNA
Synthesis and Integrity

Bacteria generally make and maintain their DNA using
enzymes that closely resemble those of mammals. Thus,
you might think it impossible to selectively target bacterial
DNA synthesis, but it is possible, as you will see.

hard Domagk, belong to a group of drugs known as antimetabolites because they interfere with the synthesis of
metabolic intermediates. Ultimately, sulfa drugs inhibit the
synthesis of nucleic acids. Drugs such as sulfamethoxazole
or sulfanilamide work at the metabolic level to prevent the
synthesis of tetrahydrofolic acid (THF), an important cofactor in the synthesis of nucleic acid precursors (Fig. 27.12).
All organisms use THF to synthesize nucleic acids, so why
are the sulfa drugs selectively toxic to bacteria? The selectivity occurs because mammals do not synthesize folic acid, a
precursor of THF. Higher mammals generally rely on bacteria and green leafy vegetables as sources of folic acid. Bacteria make folic acid from the combination of PABA, glutamic
acid, and pteridine. Sulfanilamide (SFA), a structural analog
of PABA, competes for one of the enzymes in the bacterial
folic acid pathway and inhibits both folic acid and THF production (Fig. 27.12C). Because humans lack that pathway,
sulfa drugs are selectively toxic toward bacteria.
Quinolones. Another group of drugs inhibits DNA syn-

thesis by targeting microbial topoisomerases such as DNA
gyrase and topoisomerase IV (the mechanism is discussed
in Section 7.2). Because these enzymes are structurally distinct from their mammalian counterparts, drugs can be
designed to selectively interact with them while not interfering with mammalian DNA metabolism. One such drug,
nalidixic acid, was discovered in 1963. The drug targets
bacterial DNA gyrase but has a very narrow antimicrobial spectrum, covering only a few Gram-negative organisms. However, adding various chemical modifications
to nalidixic acid, such as fluorine and amine groups, has
increased its antimicrobial spectrum and its half-life in
the bloodstream. The result is the class of drugs known as
the quinolones. (The mode of action of quinolones and
fluoroquinolones was discussed in Section 7.2.)

1106

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

A.
COOH

H2N

H2N

SO2NH2

Para-aminobenzoic acid (PABA) Sulfanilamide (SFA)

C.
Normal folic acid formation

P

PAB
A

cid

a
Folic

G

B.

P PABA G
H
N

Pteridine
(P)

O H
C N

Glutamic acid
(G)

PABA
Folic acid

Synthesis

Enzyme
Folic acid formation blocked by sulfanilamide (SFA)

P

SFA

P

G

P

SFA G

SFA

G

No
synthesis

Enzyme

FIGURE 27.12

■ Mode of action of sulfanilamides. A. The structures of PABA and sulfanilamide are very similar. B. PABA, pteridine, and
glutamic acid combine to make the vitamin folic acid. C. Normal synthesis of folic acid requires that all three components engage the active
site of the biosynthetic enzyme. The sulfa drugs replace PABA at the active site. The sulfur group, however, will not form a peptide bond with
glutamic acid, and the size of sulfanilamide sterically hinders the binding of pteridine, so folic acid cannot be made.

Metronidazole. Also known as Flagyl, metronidazole is an

example of a prodrug—a drug that is harmless until activated. Metronidazole is activated after it receives an electron (is reduced) from the microbial protein cofactors
flavodoxin and ferredoxin, found in microaerophilic and
anaerobic bacteria such as Bacteroides (Fig. 27.13). Once
activated, the compound begins nicking DNA at random,
thus killing the cell. Because the etiological agent in our
case history was an anaerobe, metronidazole was an effective therapy. Metronidazole is also effective against protozoa such as Giardia, Trichomonas, and Entamoeba. Aerobic
microbes, although in possession of ferredoxin, are incapable of reducing metronidazole, presumably because oxygen
is reduced in preference to metronidazole.

Prodrug form of
metronidazole

N
O 2N

CH3

N

CH2CH2OH

Single e– transfers

Nitrous free-radical
form of metronidazole

N
–

ON

N

CH3

CH2CH2OH

FIGURE 27.13 Activation of metronidazole. Single-electron
transfers are made by ferredoxin and flavodoxin from anaerobes.
Ferredoxin and flavodoxin are reducing agents capable of reducing
oxidized molecules in cells such as thioredoxin. They can also reduce
the prodrug form of metronidazole.
■

Thought Question

27.6 The enzyme DNA gyrase, a target of the quinolone antibiotics, is an essential protein in DNA replication. The quinolones bind to and inactivate this protein. Research has proved
that quinolone-resistant mutants contain mutations in the
gene encoding DNA gyrase. If the resistant mutants contain a
mutant DNA gyrase and DNA gyrase is essential for growth,
then why are these mutations not lethal?

RNA Synthesis Inhibitors

The mode of action of antibiotics that inhibit transcription, such as rifampin and actinomycin D (Fig. 27.14),
was described in Chapter 8. These drugs are bactericidal
and are most active against growing bacteria. The tricyclic
ring of actinomycin D binds DNA from any source. As a
result, it is not selectively toxic and not used to treat infections. Rifampin (also called rifampicin), on the other hand,
does exhibit selective toxicity for bacterial RNA polymerase
and is often prescribed for the treatment of tuberculosis or
meningococcal meningitis. Curiously, because rifampin is
reddish orange, it turns bodily secretions, including breast
milk, orange. The astute physician will warn the patient of
this highly visible but harmless side effect to avoid unnecessary anxiety when the patient’s urine changes color.
Until recently, rifampin was the only clinically useful
antibiotic known to directly target bacterial RNA polymerase (RNAP). Rifampin binding to RNAP prevents transcription only after the enzyme has started polymerization
(it obstructs the exit tunnel for nascent RNA, as described
in Chapter 8). Unfortunately, rifampin resistance has developed. However, two new classes of antibiotics have been discovered. Pyronins, represented by myxopyronin (produced

CHAPTER 27

CELL, VOL 104, ISSUE 6, 3/23/2001, PP901-912, FIG. 3B

B. Rifampin and RNA polymerase

A. Rifampin
CH3 CH3
HO
H 3C
O
H3C
H3 C
O
H3C
H 3C
O

OH

O

CH3

OH OH

NH
N

O
O

O

CH3

N

N

CH3

OH

Rifampin
D. Actinomycin D and DNA

C. Actinomycin D
Pro
D-Val

Sar
Thr

Me-Val

Pro

O

Sar

DNA

Me-Val

O
D-Val
Thr
O

O
N

NH2
O

O
CH3

CH3
Actinomycin D

FIGURE 27.14

■

H2N
Cyclohexane ring
O
HO
Amino
sugar
O

O

by Myxococcus fulvis), prevent RNAP
from ever starting polymerization. The
pyronins bind to RNA polymerase at
a site called the hinge region, which is
needed to separate (melt) DNA strands—
a requirement to begin transcription.
The second drug, lipiarmycin, is an
unusual macrolide antibiotic made by Actinoplanes deccanensis. Lipiarmycin binds
to the same region as myxopyronin but
completely stops closed RNA polymerase–
DNA complexes from transitioning to the
open forms. Because the binding site for
rifampin is different from those of the other
two antibiotics, rifampin-resistant RNAP
molecules are still sensitive to the new antibiotics. This is exciting because pathogens
such as rifampin-resistant strains of Mycobacterium tuberculosis or Clostridioides difficile can now be treated with a new drug
that targets the same enzyme. Lipiarmycin
has been approved by the FDA to treat C.
difficile–associated diarrhea.

C. Erythromycin D

CONH2

HO
O
OH

H3C
Lactone ring
HO
H3C
H3C

NH2

O

O
CH3

HNCH3
E. Chloramphenicol

H H
N
O
HO

H Cl
O2N

CH3

H
OH
O

H

NH

C

C

C
H

OH CH2OH
SCH3

CH3

O

CH3
N
HO
O
CH3 CH3

O

OH
CH3

F. Linezolid
O

CH3

H

OH
CH3 O

H3CO

N

H3 C

CH3

OH
H3C
O

OH

D. Clindamycin

O
CHCl2

N
F

O
N

O
O

H

N
H

C

CH3

OH

FIGURE 27.15

1107

The differences between prokaryotic and eukaryotic ribosomes
account for the selective toxicity of antibiotics that specifically inhibit bacterial protein synthesis. How various antibiotics inhibit protein synthesis was discussed in Section 8.3.
Recall that protein synthesis inhibitors can be classified into
several groups based on structure and function (Fig. 27.15).

B. Doxycycline
CH3 OH N(CH3)2
H
H
OH

OH

O

HO
H3C

CH3
O
H
NH2 H2N

■

Protein Synthesis Inhibitors

Antibiotics that inhibit transcription.

A. Rifampin. B. Rifampin-binding site on the RNA polymerase beta
subunit. cyan = beta subunit; pink = beta-prime subunit; alpha subunits are behind the complex and not shown; the Mg2+ ion chelated
at the active site is shown as a magenta sphere. C. Actinomycin D.
D. Actinomycin D (yellow and red) interacting with DNA. Covalent
intercalation of actinomycin interferes with DNA synthesis and
transcription. (PDB code: 1DSC)

A. Gentamicin

ANTIMICROBIAL THERAPY

■

■ Protein synthesis inhibitors. A. The aminoglycoside gentamicin. B. The tetracycline doxycycline. C. The macrolide
erythromycin. D. The lincosamide clindamycin. E. Chloramphenicol. F. The oxazolidinone linezolid.

1108

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

Most of these antibiotics work by binding and interfering with
the function of bacterial rRNA, which differs from eukaryotic rRNA. Recall, too, that protein synthesis inhibitors are,
by and large, bacteriostatic (not bactericidal).

Case History: Erysipelas in a
Penicillin-Sensitive Patient

Sixteen-year-old Jamal arrived at the emergency room after
2 days of fever, malaise, chills, and neck stiffness. His most notable symptom was a painful, red, rapidly spreading rash covering
the right side of his face. The rash covered his entire cheek, which
was swollen, and extended into his scalp. About 7 days earlier,
Jamal had had a severe sore throat. Because it had subsided in
2 days, however, he was not clinically evaluated. Throat cultures taken on admission revealed group A Streptococcus pyogenes, suggesting that the rash was a case of erysipelas caused by
this organism. Although penicillin would be the drug of choice,
Jamal was known to be allergic to this antibiotic.
When a patient is known to be immunologically sensitive
to the usual drug of choice, a structurally distinct drug
is best. Often, that drug will be one that inhibits protein
synthesis; in this case, the drug chosen was the macrolide
azithromycin. Drugs that inhibit protein synthesis can be
subdivided into different groups based on their structures
and on which part of the translation machine is targeted.

specific mutations in mitochondrial rRNA are more susceptible to aminoglycoside toxicity.
Tetracyclines. Tetracycline antibiotics are characterized by a

structure with four fused cyclic rings—hence the name. Figure 27.15B shows one frequently used example, called doxycycline. Tetracyclines are bacteriostatic and work by binding
to and distorting the ribosomal A site that accepts incoming charged tRNA molecules. Doxycycline is used to treat
early stages of Lyme disease (caused by Borrelia burgdorferi),
acne (Propionibacterium acnes), and other infections. An
important adverse side effect of tetracyclines is that they can
interfere with bone development in a fetus or young child.
Tetracycline use by pregnant mothers will also cause yellow
discoloration of the infant’s teeth. As a result, this drug is
not recommended for pregnant women or nursing mothers.

Drugs That Affect the 50S Subunit

Five classes of drugs subvert translation by binding to the
50S ribosomal subunit. Most of these drugs were discussed
in Chapter 8 and are recapped here only briefly.
■

Macrolides, all of which contain a 14- to 16-member lactone ring (Fig. 27.15C), inhibit translocation of the growing peptide (bacteriostatic action). Commonly prescribed
examples are erythromycin and azithromycin. Azithromycin was the antibiotic used to treat the Streptococcus pyogenes infection in our case history, although other drugs
could have been used. Because it is structurally dissimilar
to any of the beta-lactam antibiotics, such as penicillin, it
can be used safely in patients who are penicillin sensitive.

■

Lincosamides (Fig. 27.15D), such as clindamycin, are
similar to macrolides in function but have a different
structure.

■

Chloramphenicol (Fig. 27.15E) inhibits peptidyltransferase activity (bacteriostatic). Bone marrow depression
leading to aplastic anemia is the most common serious
side effect and limits its clinical use.

■

Oxazolidinones (Fig. 27.15F) are a recently discovered class of synthetic antibiotics effective against many
antibiotic-resistant microbes. In fact, this was the first
new class of antibiotics discovered since the “golden age”
of antibiotic discovery over 35 years ago. Oxazolidinones
such as linezolid bind to the 23S rRNA in the 50S subunit of the prokaryotic ribosome and prevent formation
of the protein synthesis 70S initiation complex. This is a
novel mode of action; other protein synthesis inhibitors
either block polypeptide extension or cause misreading of
mRNA. Linezolid binds to the 50S subunit near where
chloramphenicol binds, but it does not inhibit peptidyltransferase. Resistance is limited because most bacterial

Drugs That Affect the 30S Subunit

The classification of antibiotics affecting protein synthesis is
initially based on the bacterial ribosomal subunit targeted.
Thus, one class of antibiotics interferes with 30S subunit
function, and the other scrambles 50S subunit activities.
Aminoglycosides. There is considerable variation in structure among different aminoglycosides, but all contain a
cyclohexane ring and amino sugars (Fig. 27.15A). The aminoglycosides are unusual among protein synthesis inhibitors
in that they are bactericidal rather than bacteriostatic. Most
of them bind 16S rRNA and cause translational misreading of mRNA, which is why these drugs are bactericidal (see
another explanation below). The resulting synthesis of jumbled peptides wreaks havoc with physiology and kills the cell.
Streptomycin and gentamicin (Fig. 27.15A) are two
widely used drugs in this class. Ototoxicity (hearing damage) is a major, but uncommon, side effect of these antibiotics (approximately 0.5%–3% of patients treated with
gentamicin suffer from this toxicity). Hearing is generally
affected at frequencies above 4,000 Hz. The toxicity of
aminoglycosides appears related to their ability to inhibit
the function of mitochondrial ribosomes, which are evolutionarily related to bacterial ribosomes. Individuals with

CHAPTER 27

O
H3C
H3 C

OH
O

O

CH O

H3C

O
N

N

O

CH3

OH
CO
NH
H 3C

CH

CH

Peptide
bond
CO

NH

CH3

CH2
H2 C
CH2

CH2
CH

CO

N

CH
CO

O
OC

N
CH NH CO

CH

N

H2C

CH2

OC

CH2

CO

CH3

CH
CH2

H3C

N

CH3

FIGURE 27.16 ■ The streptogramins. A. Streptogramin A is a
large nonpeptide ring structure. B. Streptogramin B is a cyclic peptide.

genomes have multiple operons encoding 23S rRNA.
Usually more than one of these genes must mutate to
confer high-level resistance. The more mutant 23S rRNA
genes there are relative to native 23S genes, the more
oxazolidinone-resistant ribosomes will be present. Oxazolidinones are useful primarily against Gram-positive
bacteria. Gram-negative bacteria are intrinsically resistant
because of multidrug efflux pumps (see Section 27.3)
and decreased permeability due to the outer membrane.
■

■

1109

To Kill or Not to Kill: What
Makes a Bactericidal Drug?

B. Streptogramin B

N

ANTIMICROBIAL THERAPY

because the A-type streptogramin alters the binding site
for the B-type drug, increasing its affinity. Bacteria can
develop resistance through ribosomal modification (the
modification in 23S rRNA is the same one that provides
resistance to macrolides), via the production of inactivating enzymes, or by active efflux of the antibiotic.

A. Streptogramin A
N
H

■

Streptogramins (Fig. 27.16), produced by some Streptomyces species, fall into two groups, designated A and
B. Streptogramins belonging to group A have a large
nonpeptide ring (Fig. 27.16A), whereas streptogramin
B members are cyclic peptides (Fig. 27.16B). The two
groups differ in their modes of action, although both
inhibit bacterial protein synthesis by binding to the peptidyltransferase site. Group A streptogramins bind to the
peptidyltransferase site and prevent binding of tRNA
to the ribosome A site. In contrast, group B streptogramins are thought to narrow the peptide exit channel, preventing exit of the peptide and thereby blocking
translocation. Natural streptogramins are produced
as a mixture of A and B, the combination of which is
more potent than either individual compound alone
(an example of synergy). In tribute to this synergistic
action, the drug combination is marketed under the
name Synercid. Synergy between the two drugs occurs

Bactericidal antibiotics include quinolones that bind to
DNA topoisomerases; aminoglycosides that bind to the
30S ribosome subunit; rifampin, which binds to RNA
polymerase; and penicillins that inhibit peptidoglycan synthesis. While these antimicrobials do halt critical cell processes, other antibiotics that inhibit some of these same
processes are not bactericidal. For example, aminoglycosides and macrolides inhibit protein synthesis, but macrolides do not typically kill bacteria.
A new theory attempts to explain why particular antibiotics are bactericidal. Put simply, a common consequence of the
modes of action for bactericidal antibiotics is the generation
of highly reactive hydroxyl radicals, which damage DNA, protein, and lipids, leading to cell death. Partial evidence for this
model came when James J. Collins and colleagues found that
they could make cells more sensitive to bactericidal antibiotics by preventing induction of the SOS response that limits
and repairs oxidative damage to DNA (see Section 9.4). The
antibiotics would still inhibit growth but not kill the cells. A
practical consequence of this finding is that determining how
to inhibit the SOS response by pathogens could make them
more susceptible to antibiotic therapy.
Thought Question

27.7 Why might a combination therapy of an aminoglycoside
antibiotic and cephalosporin be synergistic?

To Summarize
■

■

■

Antibiotic specificity for bacteria can be achieved by
targeting a process that occurs only in bacteria, not host
cells; by targeting small structural differences between
components of a process shared by bacteria and hosts; or
by exploiting a physiological condition such as anaerobiosis present only in certain bacteria.
Antibiotic targets include cell wall synthesis, cell membrane integrity, DNA synthesis, RNA synthesis, protein
synthesis, and metabolism.
Antibiotics targeting the cell wall bind to the
transglycosylases, transpeptidases, and lipid carrier

1110

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

proteins involved with peptidoglycan synthesis and
cross-linking.
■

■

■

■

Japan
Korea

Antibiotics interfering with DNA include the antimetabolite sulfa drugs that inhibit nucleotide synthesis; quinolones that inhibit DNA topoisomerases; and
a drug, metronidazole, that, when activated, randomly
nicks the phosphodiester backbone.

China
Taiwan
South Africa
Saudi Arabia
Kuwait
Vietnam
Sri Lanka
Ivory Coast
Brazil
USA
Croatia
Czech Republic
Slovenia
Poland
Hungary
Spain
Portugal
Crete
Greece
Italy
France
Belgium
Austria
Germany
The Netherlands
Luxembourg
Ireland
United Kingdom
Finland
Norway
Sweden
Iceland
Hungary
Spain

Inhibitors of RNA synthesis target RNA polymerase
(rifampin and pyronins) or bind DNA and inhibit polymerase movement (actinomycin D).
Aminoglycosides and tetracyclines prevent protein
synthesis by binding the 30S subunit of the prokaryotic
ribosome.

2000s

A variety of antibiotics bind the 50S ribosomal subunit and inhibit translocation (macrolides, lincosamides),
peptidyltransferase (chloramphenicol), formation of the
70S complex (oxazolidinones), or peptide exit through
the ribosome exit channel (streptogramins).

27.3

Challenges of Drug
Resistance and Discovery

Why do microbes make antibiotics, and how do they avoid
killing themselves in the process? The answers provide
insight into the origin of antibiotic-resistant pathogens and
our fight to halt their spread throughout the world.

1990s

Spain

1979

Risky Business: Why Do
Microbes Make Antibiotics?

Antibiotics are considered secondary metabolites because
they often have no apparent primary use in the producing
organism. This most likely means that a purpose, either current or ancestral, has yet to be identified. Certainly, antibiotic
production today can help one microbe compete favorably
with another in nature. Antibiotic production can also forge
a mutualistic relationship between a microbe and a colonized host by protecting the host from deadly pathogens (as
Streptomyces does for leaf-cutter ants; see Section 18.3 and
eTopic 17.4). Whatever their use today, growth inhibition by
antibiotics may not have been the original purpose of secondary metabolite production. The complexity of the biosynthetic
pathways involved in making antibiotics suggests a more
immediate purpose—for example, cell-cell signaling—that
evolved into cross-species inhibition. Features of antibiotic
biosynthetic pathways are discussed in eTopic 27.2 (penicillin
synthesis) and eTopic 15.4 (vancomycin biosynthesis).
Given that microbes continue to make antibiotics for
a reason, how does the producing microorganism avoid

First report of a
penicillin-resistant
strain

1967
Introduction
of penicillin
1940

0

20
40
60
80
100
% of S. pneumoniae strains showing
penicillin resistance

FIGURE 27.17 ■ The rise of penicillin-resistant Streptococcus
pneumoniae throughout the world. Numbers reflect the number

of penicillin-resistant strains among clinical isolates (strains of diseasecausing bacteria isolated from patients from different countries). No
resistance among clinical isolates was noted until after 1967.

committing suicide? Fungi that make penicillin face no
consequence for having done so because the organism does
not contain peptidoglycan. Actinomycetes that produce
compounds such as streptomycin or chloramphenicol, however, could be susceptible to their own secondary metabolite. Ribosomes isolated from Streptomyces griseus, for
example, are fully sensitive to the streptomycin produced
by this organism.

CHAPTER 27

S. griseus avoids killing itself in two ways. First, the
organism synthesizes an inactive precursor of streptomycin, 6-phosphorylstreptomycin, which is secreted from
the cell and, once outside the mycelium, becomes
activated by a specific phosphatase. In addition, this
streptomycete has an enzyme that inactivates anyy
streptomycin that may leak back into the mycelium. Other organisms protect themselves by
methylating key residues on their rRNA to prevent drug binding or by setting up permeability
barriers that thwart reentry of the antibiotic.
These and other strategies of self-preservation employed by antibiotic-producing microbes
are clever. Unfortunately, these mechanisms
have been shared via horizontal gene transfers, making many pathogens antibiotic resistant. Horizontal gene transfers are discussed in
Sections 9.6 and 25.2.

■

ANTIMICROBIAL THERAPY

■

1111

Plasmid

Antibiotic
resistance
gene

Chromosome

Mechanism 1:
Alter target.

Antibiotic

Ribosome

Mechanism 2:
Degrade antibiotic.

Case History: MultidrugResistant Pneumonia

A 14-year-old boy with fever (39°C; 102.2°F), chills,
and left-sided pleuritic chest pain was referred too
a hospital emergency department by his generall
practitioner. A chest X-ray showed left-lower-lobee
pneumonia. The boy reported that he was allergicc
to amoxicillin and cephalosporins (as a child he had
d
developed a rash in response to these agents) and had
d
been taking daily doxycycline (tetracycline) for the pre-vious 3 months to treat mild acne. He was admitted too
the hospital and treated with intravenous azithromycin
(a macrolide antibiotic) because of his reported beta-lactam
allergies, but he continued to feel sick. The day after admission, both sputum and blood cultures grew Streptococcus
pneumoniae. After 48 hours, antibiotic susceptibility results
indicated that the microbe was resistant to penicillin, azithromycin, and tetracycline. Armed with this information, the
clinician immediately changed antibiotic treatment to vancomycin. The boy’s fever resolved over the next 12 hours, and he
made a slow but full recovery over the next week.
Unfortunately, the scenario presented in this case is far
too common and has become an extremely serious concern. Figure 27.17 shows the rapid rise of penicillin resistance among Streptococcus pneumoniae strains in the world.
Another instance of emerging antibiotic resistance is unfolding in Europe and the Far East. The non-Enterobacteriaceae
Gram-negative rod Acinetobacter baumannii is increasingly
seen as a dangerous cause of nosocomial infections. It commonly colonizes hospitalized patients, particularly those
in intensive care units. Before 1998, there were almost no
cases of multidrug-resistant A. baumannii. The rate is now

CH2

Mechanism 3:
Modify antibiotic.

Mechanism 4:
Pump antibiotic
out of cell.
Efflux pump

FIGURE 27.18

■ Alternative mechanisms of antibiotic resistance. Antibiotic resistance genes can be plasmid-borne, or they

can be part of the chromosome. Each specific antibiotic resistance
gene product will use only one of the four mechanisms shown.

as high as 8%. The organism is resistant to drugs as diverse
as ciprofloxacin (a quinolone), amikacin (an aminoglycoside), penicillins, third-generation cephalosporins, tetracycline, and chloramphenicol. Imipenem, one of a relatively
new class of beta-lactam drugs, is currently useful, but resistance to it is also likely to develop.
There are four basic forms of antibiotic resistance
(Fig. 27.18). The resistant organism can:
■

Modify the target so that it no longer binds the antibiotic. Mutations in key penicillin-binding proteins and

1112

■

PART 5

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

■

A.

H

Enzyme-Ser

H

R

CONH

C

C

OH

+

C

N

O
a-Lactam

S
C
C

ribosomal proteins, for instance, can confer resistance to
methicillin and streptomycin, respectively. These mutations occur spontaneously and are not typically transferred between organisms.

CH3
CH3

COO–
■

Destroy the antibiotic before it enters the cell. For
example, the enzyme beta-lactamase (or penicillinase) is
made exclusively to destroy penicillins (see Section 27.3).
The sites of ring cleavage and the structure of the
enzyme are illustrated in Figure 27.19.

■

Add modifying groups that inactivate the antibiotic.
For instance, there are three classes of enzymes that
modify and inactivate aminoglycoside antibiotics. The
results of these types of enzyme modifications are illustrated for kanamycin in Figure 27.20.

■

Pump the antibiotic out of the cell using specific
transporters (for example, tetracycline export) and
transport complexes. This strategy works because the
pumps bail drugs out of the cell faster than the drugs
can enter. Some are single-component pumps present in
the cytoplasmic membrane of Gram-negative and Grampositive bacteria (for example, NorA in Staphylococcus

B.

Penicillin

FIGURE 27.19

■ Destroying penicillin. A. Beta-lactamase (or
penicillinase) cleaves the beta-lactam ring of penicillins and cephalosporins. There are two types of penicillinases, based on where the enzyme attacks the ring. In either type, a serine hydroxyl group launches
a nucleophilic attack on the ring. B. Structure of a beta-lactamase and
location of the penicillin-binding site. (PDB code: 1XX2)

A.

HO

6′

HO
H2N

NH2
O

O

NH2
HO

+

HO

NH3

O

O

HO
+

H3N

OH

O

HO

HO

O

O

HO
HO
+

H3N

O

OH

HO
O
+
NH3

Kanamycin

NH2

Aminoglycoside
phosphotransferase (APH)
catalyzes ATP-dependent
phosphorylation (yellow) of
a hydroxyl group.
O
APH

–

O

P

+

HO

O–

ANT

+

H3N

ATP

OH

O

HO
O
NH3

OH
+
NH3

+

Kanamycin 3′-phosphate

HO

+

HO

NH3

O

O

AMP
HO
+

P Pi

O

O

HO

O

Aminoglycoside
adenylyltransferase (ANT)
catalyzes ATP-dependent
adenylylation (yellow) of a
hydroxyl group.
OH
+
NH3

HO

NH3

ADP

ATP

+

NH3

NH2

HO

Kanamycin
C.

O

O

HO

OH
O
+
NH3

HO
O
+
NH3

HO

HO

enzymes can inactivate aminoglycoside
antibiotics.

H
N
O

6′

H 2N

CoA-SH
Ac-CoA

B.

HO

■ Aminoglycosideinactivating enzymes. Different

HO

AAC (6′)-Ii

NH2

HO

FIGURE 27.20

Aminoglycoside
acetyltransferase (AAC)
catalyzes acetyl-CoAdependent acetylation
of an amino group.

H3N

O

OH

HO
O
+
NH3

4′-Adenylylkanamycin

OH
+
NH3

CHAPTER 27

aureus, PmrA in Streptococcus pneumoniae, and the TetA
and B proteins in Gram-negatives). Other drug efflux
pumps are multicomponent systems present in Gramnegative bacteria only (discussed shortly). Efflux in
either case is usually energized by proton motive force.

A.

■

ANTIMICROBIAL THERAPY
B.

■

1113

Antibiotic out

Outer
membrane

TolC

Thought Questions

Detergent
shell

34 Å
317.4 Å

27.8 Fusaric acid is a cation chelator that normally does not
penetrate the E. coli membrane, which means E. coli is typically resistant to this compound. Curiously, cells that develop
resistance to tetracycline become sensitive to fusaric acid.
Resistance to tetracycline is usually the result of an integral
membrane efflux pump that pumps tetracycline out of the cell.
What might explain the development of fusaric acid sensitivity?

AcrA
16 Å

27.9 Mutations in the ribosomal protein S12 (encoded by

rpsL) confer resistance to streptomycin. Would a cell containing both rpsL+ and rpsLR genes be streptomycin resistant or
sensitive? (Recall that genes encoding ribosome proteins
for the small subunit are designated rps. “+” indicates the
wild-type allele, while “R” indicates a gene whose product is
resistant to a certain drug.)

28 Å

AcrB
Inner
membrane
AcrZ

A particularly dangerous type of drug resistance is mediated by what are called multidrug resistance (MDR)
efflux pumps (Fig. 27.21). A single pump in this class
can export many different kinds of antibiotics with little regard to structure. MDR pumps of Gram-negative
microbes are similar to the ABC export systems described
in Section 4.2. They include three proteins: an inner membrane pump protein (fueled by proton motive force—a distinction from true ABC exporters), an outer membrane

Multidrug exporter
Outer membrane
channel

Outer membrane
Accessory
protein

Periplasm

Transporter
Cytoplasmic
membrane

FIGURE 27.21

■ Basic structure of a multidrug resistance
efflux pump in Gram-negative bacteria. These efflux systems

have promiscuous binding sites that can bind and pump a wide
range of drugs out of the bacterial cell.

Antibiotic in Cytoplasm

FIGURE 27.22

Structure of the E. coli AcrAB multidrug
resistance efflux pump. A. TolC (blue ribbon) and AcrB and Z
■

(orange and green ribbons) are homotrimers linked by 6 protomers
of AcrA (yellow ribbons). Transport of antibiotics is driven by proton
motive force. B. A slice through the model shows the continuous
conduit that runs from AcrB through the TolC porin domain, spanning the inner and outer membranes. AcrZ is a small peptide that
affects substrate preference.

channel connected to the pump protein, and an accessory
protein that may link the other two proteins. For instance,
the AcrAB transporter (Fig. 27.22) almost indiscriminately binds antibiotics in a large central cavity within AcrB
(a promiscuous binding site) and uses proton motive force
to move those compounds through the AcrB pore and
out a funnel (AcrA) that connects to an outer membrane
channel, TolC.
Antibiotic efflux pumps contribute significantly to bacterial antibiotic resistance because of the very broad variety
of substrates they recognize and because of their expression in important pathogens. Strains of the pathogen
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, for instance, have developed
multidrug-resistant phenotypes in part because of MDR
pumps. Approximately 2 million people die from tuberculosis annually, mostly in developing nations. What is even
more alarming is that an increasing number of M. tuberculosis strains isolated from patients exhibit multidrug resistance. Although most of the antibiotic resistance in the
majority of M. tuberculosis multidrug-resistant strains is

1114

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

due to the accumulation of independent mutations in several genes, MDR pumps are thought to increase the level of
resistance. Chemists typically try to tweak the structure of
an antibiotic to overcome a specific type of resistance mechanism, but the MDR pumps act on an exceptionally wide
range of antibiotics, almost without regard to structure.

How Does Drug Resistance Develop?

As discussed in previous chapters, nature has engineered
a certain degree of flexibility in the way genomes are replicated and passed from one generation to the next. DNA
repair pathways involving lesion bypass polymerases (for
example, UmuDC; see Section 9.4) are thought to play a
large role in randomized adaptive and evolutionary processes. For instance, at some point during evolution, gene
duplication and mutational reshaping generated a gene
product able to cleave the beta-lactam ring, producing an
organism resistant to penicillin.
However, de novo antibiotic resistance through gene
duplication and/or mutation does not occur in all species.
Why reinvent the wheel—or, in this case, drug resistance?
Gene transfer mechanisms such as conjugation, described
in Chapter 9, can move antibiotic resistance genes from
one organism to another and from one species to another.
In fact, several drug resistance genes found in pathogenic
bacteria actually had their start in the chromosomes of the
drug-producing organisms and were passed on through
gene swapping. For instance, Streptomyces clavuligerus produces a beta-lactamase (encoded by the bla gene) that protects this organism from the penicillin it produces. Transfer
of a drug resistance gene is particularly evident if the gene
has been incorporated into a plasmid and that plasmid is
found in a new species.
Antibiotic resistance within uncontacted communities.

Insight about the origins of antibiotic resistance in our
human microbiome was provided in 2015 by Maria
Dominguez-Bello (New York University and the University of Puerto Rico) and her collaborators, who reported
on the fecal, oral, and skin microbiomes of uncontacted
Amerindians in the Amazon. The Amerindians had no previous contact with Westerners who could be a source of
antibiotic-resistant microbes, or to antibiotics that could
provide selective pressure to develop antibiotic resistance.
Without such contact, you might expect the microbiomes
of this culture to lack antibiotic resistance genes. You would
be wrong.
What the scientists found by DNA sequencing was that
bacteria in the Amerindian microbiome did contain antibiotic resistance genes, possibly obtained by exchange with
antibiotic-producing soil microbes. To test their functionality, the genes were cloned, placed under the control of

a constitutive plasmid promoter to ensure expression, and
transferred to E. coli. Many of the Amerindian microbiome genes conferred resistance to natural as well as synthetic antibiotics. The authors, however, suspect that many
of these genes are silenced in the native microbes of the
Amerindian microbiota. Yet introduction of antibiotic
selective pressure could readily select for regulatory mutations that activate those genes.
It is also worth noting that the microbiomes of the
Amerindians were unprecedented in their high bacterial
and functional diversity. The diversity is thought to have
developed, at least in part, in response to the more intimate
contact that Amerindians have with the natural environment compared to Westerners.
Multidrug-resistant pathogens. An interesting case study

of antibiotic resistance is provided by the Gram-positive
bacterium Enterococcus faecalis, a natural inhabitant of
the mammalian gastrointestinal tract that can cause lifethreatening disease if granted access to other body sites (as
in subacute bacterial endocarditis; see Section 26.6). E. faecalis is naturally resistant to numerous antibiotics, making
disease treatment particularly challenging.
Vancomycin is one of the last lines of defense for treating serious E. faecalis infections. Unfortunately, increasing
numbers of vancomycin-resistant strains (called VREs) have
arisen in recent years. The completed genome sequence
of one vancomycin-resistant strain illustrates the reason.
The organism has an incredible propensity for incorporating mobile genetic elements that encode drug resistance.
About a quarter of the genome consists of mobile or exogenously acquired DNA, including 7 probable phages, 38
insertion elements, numerous transposons, and integrated
plasmid genes. One such mobile element encodes vancomycin resistance in the sequenced strain.
Multidrug resistance in various microbes (for example,
Salmonella enterica) has also been attributed to the presence of integrons. Integrons are gene expression elements
that account for rapid transmission of drug resistance
because of their mobility and ability to collect resistance
gene cassettes (see eTopic 9.5).
We should note that the development of antibiotic resistance is not without consequence to the bacterium. Altering one aspect of an organism’s physiology for the better
may weaken another area. Bacteria may become resistant to
a certain antibiotic, but that resistance comes at a price. For
example, the altered DNA gyrase that affords resistance
to quinolones may not function as well as the “normal”
gyrase does. Thus, when both resistant and susceptible
organisms cohabit the same environment, the wild-type
(sensitive) strain may grow faster and eventually overwhelm
the mutant strain—unless fluoroquinolone is present, of
course.

CHAPTER 27

Methods to Identify DrugResistant Pathogens

The faster a clinical laboratory can identify a pathogen’s
antibiotic susceptibility pattern, the more quickly a clinician can prescribe a narrow-spectrum antibiotic. The traditional MIC method described in Section 27.1 can take
3 days—one day to grow the organism on an agar plate
from a clinical sample, one day to prep the MIC tubes, and
another day for the organisms to grow and for the technician to read the results. The automated MIC can cut
one day off of that timeline. Meanwhile, the seriously ill
patient is subjected to empiric therapy in which very broadspectrum antibiotics—sometimes two or three drugs—are
used to “cover” as many pathogens as possible until the
organism’s identity and antibiotic susceptibility pattern are
known.
Fortunately, more rapid tests that can provide answers
in less than a day are slowly being introduced into the
clinical laboratory. For instance, multiplex PCR platforms are available that can detect pathogen-specific or
drug resistance genes within an hour directly from respiratory or stool samples. A miniature magnetic resonance
machine has also been developed that can detect pathogens at concentrations as low as one organism per milliliter of blood within a few hours. Combining these
technologies could mean that a sample brought to the
lab at 8 a.m. could be ready by lunch. Such speed could
quickly lead to more focused, pathogen-directed therapy.
Unfortunately, we have a long way to go before realizing
this ideal.

How Did We Get into This Mess?

Consider the following case: A grandmother brings
her 4-year-old grandchild to the physician. The child
is screaming because he has an extremely painful sore
throat. Simply looking at the throat is not diagnostic. The
raw tissue could mean the child is suffering from a bacterial infection, in which case antibiotics are needed. Alternatively, a virus could be the cause—a situation in which
antibiotics do nothing but pacify the grandparent, or parent. More often than not, the clinician will prescribe an
antibiotic without ever knowing the cause of disease. The
problem is this: The more an antibiotic is used, the more
opportunities there are to select for an antibiotic-resistant
organism.
The presence of drug does not cause resistance, but it
will kill off or inhibit the growth of competing bacteria
that are sensitive, thereby allowing the resistant organism
to grow to high numbers. Resistance can form not only
in the pathogen itself, but also in a member of the normal
microbiota. The danger, then, is that the gene imparting

■

ANTIMICROBIAL THERAPY

■

1115

resistance might be horizontally transferred to other
bacteria—some of them pathogens. A study in 2016 from
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention found that
nearly one in three antibiotic prescriptions in the United
States is inappropriate. For acute respiratory infections,
only half of the prescriptions for antibiotics were deemed
appropriate.
When should antimicrobials be administered? Certainly,
in life-threatening situations where time is of the essence,
antibiotics should be administered even before the cause
of the infection is known. On the other hand, the most
prudent course to take when a patient has a simple infection is to confirm a bacterial etiology, and then prescribe.
An exception may be in an elderly or otherwise immunocompromised individual, who may be more susceptible to
secondary bacterial infections that can occur subsequent to
viral disease.
Another proposed source of antibiotic resistance is
the widespread practice of adding antibiotics to animal
feed. Giving animals subtherapeutic doses of antibiotics
in their food makes for larger, and therefore more profitable, animals. The reason antibiotics promote livestock
growth is unclear but may be the result of altering the
diversity of gut microbiota. Some estimates suggest that
80% of all antibiotics used in the United States are fed
to healthy livestock. The consequence is that the animals
may serve as incubators for the development of antibiotic
resistance. Even if the resistance develops in nonpathogens, the antibiotic genes produced can be transferred to
pathogens.
Feeding growth-promoting antibiotics to cattle can
also stimulate the spread of pathogenicity genes between
bacteria. The antibiotics are added to feed at subinhibitory concentrations that do not kill the bacteria, but stress
them instead. Stress can trigger SOS responses (see Chapter 9) that reactivate prophages embedded into bacterial chromosomes. If those phages carry toxin genes, the
new phage can transfer toxin production to new strains
or species cohabiting the intestine. For example, the
Shiga toxin genes (stx) carried by certain pathovars of
E. coli are associated with prophage genomes. Growthpromoting antibiotics such as carbadox [methyl-3(2-quinoxalinylmethylene)-carbazate-N1, N 4-dioxide] or
monensin (not used in humans) have been shown to reactivate these stx-carrying prophages and foster distribution
of stx to other strains. The unusual O104:H4 Shiga toxin–
producing E. coli that in 2011 caused a European outbreak
of hemolytic uremic syndrome may have been generated
by this mechanism. Bradley Bearson of the National Laboratory for Agriculture and the Environment (Ames, Iowa)
has also shown that carbadox will induce prophage replication in pathogenic Salmonella and Shigella strains. The
phage can subsequently transfer virulence or antibiotic

1116

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

A.

B.

1 × 1010

Salmonella enterica P22 lysogen
Shigella flexneri Sf6 lysogen
E. coli HK97 lysogen
E. coli I lysogen

Carbadox

© KELLIE WINTER

Phages/ml

1 × 109
1 × 108
No treatment

1 × 107
1 × 106

FIGURE 27.23 ■ Carbadox induces prophage replication
in enteric pathogens. A. Bradley Bearson showed that

0

1

2

3

Time (h)

carbadox, an antibacterial compound formally used to promote
growth in swine, activates prophage replication in several enteric
bacteria. A phage example is shown on the screen behind him. B. Carbadox (0.5 μg/ml) was added to growing cultures of lysogens for 3 hours
(closed symbols). At the indicated times, cells were killed with chloroform and supernatants were titrated for phage on susceptible hosts. The
data illustrate that carbadox-treated lysogens generated 100- to 1,000-fold higher titers of phage.

resistance genes to other bacteria (Fig. 27.23). Efforts to
curb the addition of antibiotics to animal feed have been
under way since the 1960s.
Many, or all, of these events conspired to produce an
incredibly dangerous bacterium that is resistant to almost
every antibiotic known. The organism, a Klebsiella pneumoniae, was first isolated in 2008 in Örebro, Sweden,
from a Swedish citizen returning from New Delhi, India
(Fig. 27.24). This organism is resistant to most commonly

used antibiotics, such as aminopenicillins, beta-lactam/
beta-lactamase inhibitors, aminoglycosides, fluoroquinolones, cephalosporins, tigecycline (structurally similar to
tetracycline), and carbapenems. It carries the NDM-1 plasmid noted earlier, and numerous other antibiotic resistance
genes. Despite attempted treatment with linezolid, the
patient died.
The Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA)
coined the term ESK APE pathogens almost a decade ago,
referring to the six bacterial species that collectively cause
about two-thirds of all U.S. nosocomial infections and
have effectively escaped the ability to be treated by existing
drugs. These bacteria are Enterococcus faecium, Staphylococcus aureus, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Acinetobacter baumannii, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Enterobacter species.
Considerable effort has been made to identify new antibiotics capable of killing or stopping the growth of these
pathogens.
Thought Questions

27.10 Figure 27.24 shows a distinctive-looking colony
ASM MICROBELIBRARY.ORG © BUXTON

morphology. Why are the colonies on this agar plate red and
mucoid?

27.11 Could genomics ever predict the drug resistance
phenotype of a microbe? If so, how?

Fighting Drug Resistance
FIGURE 27.24

MacConkey agar plate containing a sputum
culture of Klebsiella pneumoniae. K. pneumoniae carrying
■

the antibiotic resistance gene blaNDM-1 is emerging as a dangerous,
drug-resistant pathogen.

Several strategies are being used to stay one step ahead of
drug-resistant pathogens. In some instances, dummy target
compounds that inactivate resistance enzymes have been
developed. Clavulanic acid, for example, is a compound

CHAPTER 27

sometimes used in combination with penicillins such as
amoxicillin. Clavulanic acid is a beta-lactam compound
with no antimicrobial effect. It is, however, a chemical
decoy that competitively binds to beta-lactamases secreted
from penicillin-resistant bacteria. Because the enzyme
releases bound clavulanic acid very slowly, the amoxicillin remains free to enter and kill the bacterium. Another
strategy is to alter the structure of the antibiotic in a way
that sterically hinders the access of modifying enzymes.
Figure 27.25 illustrates how adding a side chain to gentamicin, converting it to amikacin, blocks the activity of various aminoglycoside-modifying enzymes. Of course, we are
now seeing resistance to amikacin developing (this resistance is ribosome based, involving mutational alteration of
the S12 protein or 16S rRNA).

A. Gentamicin
The yellow-highlighted sites are all
open to attack from
aminoglycoside-modifying enzymes.
AAC(2′)
H 3C
H3CHN

HO
3′′

HO

H 2N

ANT(2′′)
APH(2′′)

O

3

ANT(2′′)
APH(2′′)
H2NCH2CH2

N

R1
AAC(6′)

Gentamicin R1
R2
C1
CH3
CH3
C1a
H
H
C2
CH3
H

HO
3′′

CH

O

2′′

HO

H 2N

O
O

1

C

NH

OH

6

4

3

O
NH2

2′

O

HO
3′

4′
6′

OH
NH2

O
O

O

N

ANTIMICROBIAL THERAPY
O

F

F
O

N

Still open
to enzymatic
attack

AAC(6′)

AAC(3)

OH
This side chain protects amikacin from
attack by AAC(3,2′), APH(3′,2′′), and
ANT(2′′) by steric hindrance.

FIGURE 27.25 ■ Fighting drug resistance. A. Sites where
gentamicin is vulnerable to enzymatic inactivation. AAC = aminoglycoside acetyltransferase; ANT = aminoglycoside adenylyltransferase; APH = aminoglycoside phosphotransferase. Inset shows
the R groups for different gentamicin compounds: C1, C1a, and C2.
B. Gentamicin can be chemically modified at the highlighted sites
to prevent loss of activity due to enzyme action. The side groups
block access to enzyme active sites by steric hindrance (that is, the
added groups prevent the active site from interacting with its target
structure) but do not inactivate the antibiotic.

■

1117

O
OH

N

N

NH
Oxazolidinone

FIGURE 27.26

Quinolone

Quinolone-oxazolidinone hybrid. Physically
combining two different antibiotics may help reduce the emergence
of drug-resistant bacteria.
■

Linking antibiotics is another strategy currently used to
limit resistance. Recent advances have been made in linking
a quinolone to an oxazolidinone to form a hybrid antibiotic with dual modes of action (Fig. 27.26). Because it has
two modes of action, this hybrid antibiotic may limit the
development of antibiotic resistance. Here’s why: The rate
of spontaneous resistance to a given antibiotic is roughly
one out of 107 cells. For spontaneous resistance to develop
to two antibiotics, that probability rises to one out of 1014,
making it very unlikely that an organism can become doubly drug resistant. However, multidrug resistance efflux
pumps, integron cassettes, and plasmids carrying multiple
antibiotic resistance genes can overwhelm that approach.
Scientists are also thinking “outside the box” by developing new, more pathogen-specific, antimicrobials. One
such avenue, described in Special Topic 27.1, involves synthetically engineering bispecific antibodies that contain
binding sites for two different virulence factors.

Biofilms, Persisters, and the
Mystery of Antibiotic Tolerance

APH(3′)
AAC(2′)
ANT(4′)
H3C

H 2N

4′
6′

R2

AAC(3)

B. Amikacin

3′

O

OH
4
O
NH2

6

1

2′

H2N

O

2′′

■

Why do some infections return after bactericidal antibiotic treatment is discontinued? The reason is a subpopulation of dormant organisms, called persister cells, that
arise within a population of antibiotic-susceptible bacteria.
The stalled metabolism of persisters renders them tolerant
to bactericidal antibiotics during treatment. Removing the
drug allows persisters to grow and reestablish infection.
The strategy is analogous to a hiker’s tactic, on accidentally encountering a bear in the woods, of “playing dead”
to avoid being attacked.
Persistence is a long-recognized mystery of microbiology.
Joseph Bigger in 1944 noticed that penicillin would lyse a
growing culture of Staphylococcus aureus, but a small number of persister cells always survived. These persisters were not
mutants made permanently resistant through mutation. They
acted as though dormant. Persister cells that tolerate antibiotic
treatment can be found in any biofilm or population of lateexponential-phase cells. In addition to causing antibiotic treatment failures, persistence may be the reason for latent bacterial
infections such as recrudescent typhus or latent tuberculosis.

1118

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

SPECIAL TOPIC 27.1-- Are Designer Antibodies the Next Antibiotics?
The use of broad-spectrum antibiotics to treat an infectious
disease could be called the “nuclear option” of antimicrobial
therapy. Not only do these antibiotics kill the intended pathogen, but they also wipe out much of our microbiota. Nearly
indiscriminate clinical use of broad-spectrum antibiotics has
spawned widespread resistance to all classes of antimicrobials, sparking fear that we are fast approaching a postantibiotic
world in which traditional antibiotics no longer work. The situation, though dire, has fostered interest in developing new,
more focused, pathogen-specific antimicrobial strategies to
treat infections—something that would minimize the use of
broad-spectrum antibiotics. One such option is monoclonal
antibody technology.
A monoclonal antibody (mAb) originates from a single
antibody-producing B-cell clone and is specific for a single
epitope. Once identified in the laboratory, a B cell that produces a desired antibody is fused to an immortal line of cancer
cells. The result, called a hybridoma, can live indefinitely and
secrete antigen-specific monoclonal antibodies on demand.
Monoclonal antibodies directed against virulence factors can
disrupt a target microbe’s pathogenesis and facilitate clearance of the pathogen by the immune system (for example, via
opsonization).

A recent advance in this technology is the ability to construct bispecific antibodies that can bind two different epitopes. Bispecific antibodies are usually made by engineering
single-chain variable fragment (scFv) domains that are specific for different epitopes and fusing them to the free termini of mAb heavy-chain or light-chain sequences. Because
two different epitopes are targeted on a pathogen, bispecific
antibodies should be more effective antimicrobials than are
monoclonal antibodies.
C. Kendal Stover and colleagues at MedImmune, LLC,
in Gaithersburg, Maryland (Fig. 1), have constructed
novel bispecific antibodies that target the dangerous,
multiantibiotic-resistant pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa,
a major cause of lung and burn infections. The chimeric antibody, called BiS4αPa (or MEDI3902), is shown in Figure 2.

Fab (Anti-PcrV)

scFv (Anti-Psl)

Hinge-Fc

MEDIMMUNE LLC

FIGURE 2

FIGURE 1 ■ Developing bispecific antibodies. MedImmune’s senior director Kendall Stover (right) and senior scientist
Antonio DiGiandomenico developed the bispecific antibody
directed against Pseudomonas aeruginosa.`

The mechanisms that cause persistence in the face of
bactericidal antibiotics are varied. The laboratory of Kim
Lewis recently published evidence that stochastic depletion of ATP in Staphylococcus aureus cells underlies persister formation. In Gram negative bacteria so-called
toxin-antitoxin modules play a role. One example involves
the hipA and hipB genes in uropathogenic E. coli. HipA is
the toxin part of a toxin-antitoxin module (see eTopic 10.4)

■ Anti-Pseudomonas bispecific antibody BiS4
Pa (MEDI3902). This bispecific antibody has binding sites for Psl

(an extracellular sugar polymer implicated in biofilm formation) and
PcrV (a component of the Pseudomonas type III secretion system).
It also includes an Fc region that can promote opsonization and
complement binding. Fab light chain is light blue; Fab heavy chain
is dark blue; PcrV binding site is red; scFv variable light chain (VL)
is light orange and variable heavy chain (VH) is dark orange; Pslbinding site is salmon; hinge and Fc are green. Linkers between VH
and VL in scFv and between scFv and IgG sequences are gray.

in which the antitoxin, HipB, binds to and neutralizes
HipA. A delicate counterbalance between HipA and HipB
levels allows cells to grow normally. However, because
HipB antitoxin is less stable than HipA, a portion of HipA
can become active if antitoxin synthesis lags. As it is freed
of antitoxin, HipA will phosphorylate and inactivate some
EF-Tu molecules, thereby slowing translation (Chapter 8
explains the role of EF-Tu in translation). Active HipA

CHAPTER 27

■

ANTIMICROBIAL THERAPY

■

1119

Why was the bispecific antibody better than the monospecific anti-PcrV at protecting
80
Control IgG (0.75 mpk)
mice? The bispecific antibody iniAnti-PsI (0.75 mpk)
60
tially binds to the high-abundance
BiS4αPsl (1.0 mpk)
Anti-PcrV (0.75 mpk)
Psl polysaccharide coating the
40
BiS4αPcrV (1.0 mpk)
organism and produces a “cloud”
BiS4αPa-N297Q (1.0 mpk)
of antibody. The antibody cloud
BiS4αPa (1.0 mpk)
20
increases the likelihood that
the anti-PcrV binding site of the
0
0
24
48
72
96
120
bispecific antibody will find and
Time after infection (h)
inactivate the less abundant surface PcrV molecules. This idea
FIGURE 3 ■ Effect of bispecific antibody BiS4 Pa on survival in an acute-pneuwas tested by comparing how
monia model. Mice were treated with molar-equivalent doses of the indicated antibodies
well BiS4αPa and anti-PcrV pre(mpk = milligrams per kilogram of body weight) followed by intranasal infection with wild-type
vented the Pseudomonas type
Pseudomonas strain 6206 (1.1 × 106 CFUs). Mouse survival results were compiled from six indeIII
secretion–dependent
killpendent experiments. BiS4αPa-N297Q contains an amino acid substitution of glutamine (Q) for
ing
(cytotoxicity)
of
host
cells.
asparagine (N) at residue 297 in the Fc region. The mutation diminishes Fc binding to phagocyte
P. aeruginosa injects a phosphoFc receptors and complement.
lipase (ExoU) through its type III
secretion system into host cells. ExoU then kills host cells
by lysing host cell membranes. Consistent with the “cloud”
hypothesis, the bispecific antibody prevented the cytotoxic
effect at far lower concentrations than did monospecific
BiS4αPa includes antibody-binding sites for PcrV (a compoanti-PcrV antibody.
nent of the Pseudomonas type III secretion system) and Psl
These studies suggest that pathogen-targeted, bispecific
(an extracellular sugar polymer that coats Pseudomonas and
antibodies
could be used in at least two ways: prophylactically
is implicated in biofilm formation). The bispecific antibody
in
severely
ill patients at high risk for contracting lethal infecwas constructed by taking the monoclonal antibody against
tions,
or
as
a direct treatment for acute drug-resistant PseuPcrV and genetically inserting a Psl-binding scFv domain
domonas
infections
for which few antibiotic options remain.
within the hinge region connecting the anti-PcrV Fab segWho
knows?
Designer
antimicrobial antibodies may, indeed,
ment to the Fc region.
be
our
next-generation
antibiotics.
BiS4αPa was then shown to inhibit Pseudomonas biofilm formation by blocking Psl, as well as by interfering with
the secretion of Pseudomonas effector proteins by blocking
RESEARCH QUESTION
the type III secretion system component, PcrV. Furthermore,
How would you test whether Pseudomonas aeruginosa can
because of its Fc region, the bispecific antibody promotes
develop resistance to BiS4αPa? Discuss why, or why not,
opsonization of Pseudomonas by phagocytes. All of these
resistance could develop.
properties should translate into effective antipseudomonad
activity for the bispecific antibody. Figure 3 shows that this
DiGiandomenico, Antonio, Ashley E. Keller, Cuihua Gao,
antibody readily protected mice from Pseudomonas in a
Godfrey J. Rainey, Paul Warrener, et al. 2014. A multifuncmouse model of acute pneumonia. Notice, too, how much
tional bispecific antibody protects against Pseudomonas
better than anti-PcrV alone BiS4αPa was at protecting mice.
aeruginosa. Science Translation Medicine 6:262ra155.
Percent survival

100

will also phosphorylate and inactivate glutamyl-tRNA
synthetase. The lack of charged glutamyl-tRNA also stalls
translation, but in a way that activates synthesis of (p)
ppGpp/ppGpp by RelA (part of the stringent response
discussed in Chapter 10). Elevated ppGpp stimulates a
protease called Lon protease to degrade a series of ten or
more different antitoxin proteins, including HipB. The
toxins that are unleashed encode mRNA nucleases that

further inhibit translation and cell growth. The result is a
dormant cell.
How might dormancy explain antibiotic tolerance? If
persisters are dormant and have little or no cell wall synthesis, translation, or topoisomerase activity, then even if bactericidal antibiotics can bind to their targets, target function
cannot be corrupted. Tolerance, then, provides antibiotic
resistance at the price of not growing. An antibiotic can kill

1120

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

all susceptible bacteria in an infection, but the remaining
persister cells serve as a source of population regrowth (and
reinfection) once the antibiotic is removed.

The Future of Drug Discovery

The pervasive nature of bacterial resistance to current antibiotics has led many to declare that we are in the “postantibiotic era.” But is humankind really doomed to a future in
which antibiotics will no longer work? The hope is that the
prudent use of current antibiotics and innovative strategies
for finding new ones, such as the approach described in the
Current Research Highlight, will allow us to continue to
effectively control evolving bacterial pathogens.
How do you find new antibiotics? Certainly, the classic
approach—in which microbes, plants, and even animals
collected from around the world are screened for their
abilities to make new antibiotics—is still valid and remains
a fruitful source of new potential drugs. Even previously
unculturable bacteria have been screened for new antibiotics, as described in Special Topic 4.1.
The antibiotic platensimycin, made by Streptomyces platensis is a recent example in which old brute-force screening
of natural products led to a new antibiotic. The screening
method, although laborious, was novel. Merck scientists
screened 250,000 natural product extracts for an ability to
specifically inhibit bacterial fatty acid biosynthesis. Fatty
acid biosynthesis is an attractive target for antibiotic development because the process and proteins involved are different from those of eukaryotes. The strategy specifically
targeted the protein FabF because it is an essential component of fatty acid synthesis and is conserved among key
pathogens such as Staphylococcus aureus.
Scientists engineered a strain of S. aureus to contain a
gene expressing an antisense RNA to fabF mRNA. When the
antisense RNA was induced, it bound to fabF mRNA and
prevented efficient translation. As a result, the level of FabF
protein in the cell decreased. The strain could still grow but
would be exquisitely sensitive to any compound that targeted
the remaining FabF protein. Fewer molecules of FabF present
per cell means that fewer molecules of an active ingredient
in a natural product are needed to stop fatty acid synthesis.
Thus, zones of inhibition on an agar plate will be wider than
they would be if cells produced normal amounts of FabF. This
novel screening method led to the discovery of platensimycin.
Platensimycin binds FabF and exhibits bacteriostatic,
broad-spectrum activity, acting on Gram-positive and
Gram-negative bacteria. It is only the third entirely new
antibiotic developed in the last four decades (daptomycin
and linezolid, an oxazolidinone, are the other two). The
novel chemical structure of platensimycin and its unique

mode of action provide a great opportunity to develop a
new class of critically needed antibiotics—a class that selectively targets fatty acid biosynthesis. However, as of this
writing, the antibiotic has not won FDA approval for use.
More information on fatty acid biosynthesis and inhibitors
can be found in Chapter 15.
Another recent success story paired brute-force screening with combinatorial chemistry to identify a novel antibiotic. Almost 30% of Earth’s humans (2 billion people)
harbor latent tuberculosis infections (Mycobacterium tuberculosis). What makes the situation even more desperate is
that of the 9 million new TB cases each year, 500,000 are
multidrug-resistant (MDR). Unfortunately, the antibiotics
for this pathogen have not changed for 40 years—until now.
To find new anti-tuberculosis agents, a team led by Belgian scientist Koen Adries screened 70,000 compounds for
antimicrobial effects on Mycobacterium smegmatis, a fastgrowing relative of M. tuberculosis. One compound that
significantly affected growth was chemically modified to
increase its efficacy. After exhaustive clinical trials, the new
drug, now called bedaquiline, was approved by the FDA in
2013 to treat MDR-TB. The antibiotic selectively targets
the organism’s energy-generating ATP synthase—a novel
mode of action—and starves the pathogen of energy. The
hope is that this new antibiotic can finally stem the rising
tide of TB. Tempering that hope, however, is the knowledge that bedaquiline-resistant mutants of M. tuberculosis
have already been isolated in the laboratory.
Newer strategies of drug discovery have centered on
genome sequence analysis and associated genetic techniques
to identify potential bacterial molecular targets. Once a target
is identified, clever screening techniques are used to find natural antibiotics, and molecular modeling is used to synthetically design potential inhibitor molecules. High-throughput
biochemical screens of large collections of synthetic chemicals have also been attempted. Although many promising
lead drugs have been identified, unfortunately only a rare
few have proved therapeutically useful. Examples of metagenomic and peptidogenomic approaches to drug discovery are
described in eTopic 15.4 and Special Topic 15.1, respectively.
So now what? The functions of genes that constitute poten-

tial new drug targets fall into three broad categories: those
required only for growth of bacteria in laboratory media
(in vitro–expressed genes), those required only for bacterial infection (virulence genes or in vivo–induced genes; the
latter are discussed in eTopic 25.2), and those required for
bacterial growth both in vitro and in vivo (essential housekeeping genes). The second and third categories clearly
constitute new potential drug targets, but there is also a
subcategory of in vitro–expressed genes that could be drug
targets. These are conditionally essential genes needed

CHAPTER 27

only under some in vitro conditions (for instance, minimal
defi ned medium) and some in vivo conditions.
A recent example showing that conditionally essential genes might be useful as drug targets was reported by
Marvin Whiteley at the University of Texas at Austin. His
group studies Pseudomonas aeruginosa, a potentially lethal
lung pathogen that plagues cystic fibrosis patients. This
bacterium readily grows in the sputum of these patients,
so the scientists wondered which bacterial genes might
be essential for growth in this substance. Using a massive
pool of Tn5 transposon insertions, Whiteley’s group discovered that insertion mutants defective in vitamin production grew poorly, if at all, in CF sputum. CF sputum must
have a vitamin deficit that forces the microbe to synthesize
those cofactors. The inference is that Pseudomonas enzymes
required for vitamin synthesis are rational targets for small
inhibitors of molecules. Such inhibitors would limit growth
of Pseudomonas in vivo but have no effect on growth in
the nutrient media typically used to identify new antibiotics
and determine MIC values.
Virulence genes and proteins of pathogens hold great
promise as targets for new drugs because these genes, too, are
required for in vivo growth. However, these proteins are also
conditionally essential, so inhibitors fail to inhibit growth
in vitro. Virulence proteins that can be potential drug targets are easy to find by measuring loss of virulence when the
gene is missing (for instance, the gene encoding the tip of a
type III secretion system), but how do you screen for specific
inhibitors of these proteins? New high-throughput screening platforms that measure in vivo growth need to be developed to find chemical inhibitors of virulence. Currently, it is
easier to make monoclonal antibodies that target virulence
proteins than it is to design and find chemical inhibitors.
Monoclonal antibodies are now being tested as pathogenspecific antimicrobials (see Special Topic 27.1).
Other intriguing ideas may lead to novel antimicrobial
therapies. One involves using photosensitive chemicals that
can penetrate the microorganism and generate toxic reactive
oxygen species (such as superoxide) when exposed to specific
wavelengths of visible light (obviously good only for topical
use). Another clever approach is to interfere with quorumsensing mechanisms of pathogens (see eTopic 27.3). Finally,
the promise and flexibility of synthetic-biology approaches
discussed in Chapter 12 could revolutionize the process of
antibiotic discovery and production.

To Summarize
■
■

Antibiotic resistance is a growing problem worldwide.
Certain microbes make antibiotics to eliminate competitors in the environment and prevent self-destruction

■

ANTIMICROBIAL THERAPY

■

1121

by means of various antibiotic resistance mechanisms.
Genes encoding some of these drug resistance mechanisms have been transferred to pathogens.
■

■

■

■

■

■

■

Mechanisms of antibiotic resistance include modifying
the antibiotic, destroying the antibiotic, altering the target
to reduce affinity, and pumping the antibiotic out of the
cell. Multidrug resistance efflux pumps use promiscuous binding sites to bind antibiotics of diverse structure.
Antibiotic resistance can arise spontaneously through
mutation, can be inherited by gene exchange mechanisms, or can arise de novo through gene duplication
and mutational reengineering.
Indiscriminate use of antibiotics has significantly contributed to the rise in antibiotic resistance.
Measures to counter antibiotic resistance include
synthetically altering the antibiotic, using combination
antibiotic therapy, and adding a chemical decoy.
Persister cells in a population have stopped actively growing, making them tolerant to bactericidal antibiotics.
The quest to discover novel antibiotics includes
designing candidate antimicrobial compounds to
interact with and inhibit the active site of a known microbial enzyme, and screening previously unculturable
microbes for new antibiotics.
Potential targets for rational antimicrobial drug
design include proteins expressed only in vivo or proteins
expressed both in vivo and in vitro.

27.4

Antiviral Agents

A father pleading with a physician to give his child antibiotics when the infant is suffering with a cold is an alltoo-common dilemma faced by the general practitioner,
but there is nothing of substance the physician can do. The
common cold is caused by the rhinovirus, and no antibiotic designed for bacteria can touch it. Why are there so
few antiviral agents in the clinician’s arsenal? The reason
is that applying the principle of selective toxicity is much
harder to achieve for viruses than it is for bacteria. Viruses
routinely usurp host cell functions to make copies of themselves. Thus, a drug that hurts the virus is likely to also
harm the patient. Nevertheless, there are several useful
antiviral agents for which selective viral targets have been
found and exploited. Some of these agents are listed in
Table 27.3. Select examples are discussed in this section.
All of the molecular mechanisms of viruses presented in
Chapter 11 are studied as potential drug targets.

1122

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

TABLE 27.3-Examples of Antiviral Agents
Virus

Agent

Mechanism of action

Result

Influenza virus

Amantadine

Inhibits viral M2 protein

Prevents viral uncoating

Zanamivir

Neuraminidase inhibitor (nasal spray)

Prevents viral release

Oseltamivir (Tamiflu)

Neuraminidase inhibitor (oral prodrug)

Prevents viral release

Guanosine analog

Halts DNA synthesis

Famciclovir

Prodrug of penciclovir, a guanosine analog

Halts DNA synthesis

Herpes simplex virus and
Acyclovir
varicella-zoster virus (shingles)
Cytomegalovirus

Ganciclovir

Similar to acyclovir

Halts DNA synthesis

Foscarnet

Analog of inorganic phosphate

Binds and inhibits virus-specific
DNA polymerase

Respiratory syncytial virus
and chronic hepatitis C virus

Ribavirin

RNA virus mutagen

Causes catastrophic replication errors

Hepatitis C virus

Sofosbuvir (Sovaldi)

Analog inhibitor of HCV polymerase

Halts RNA synthesis

Simeprevir (Olysio)

Protease inhibitor

Prevents viral maturation

Zidovudine (AZT)

Nucleoside analog; resembles thymine

Inhibits reverse transcriptase

Nevirapine

Binds to allosteric site

Inhibits reverse transcriptase

Nelfinavir

Protease inhibitor

Prevents viral maturation

HIV

Raltegravir

Integrase inhibitor

Prevents integration into host genome

Maraviroc

CCR5 entry inhibitor

Prevents virus entry into host cells

Antiviral Agents That Prevent
Virus Uncoating or Release

Membrane-coated viruses are vulnerable at two stages:
when the virus is invading the host cell and after viral propagation, when the progeny viruses release from the host
cell. The flu virus presents a good example of both.

Case History: Antiviral Treatment
of Infant Influenza

A 9-month-old infant arrived at the Johns Hopkins Hospital
with an acute onset of fever, cough, regurgitation from his gastrostomy feeding tube, and dehydration. This illness followed
a series of chronic problems, including bronchiolitis (infection and inflammation of the bronchioles) caused by respiratory syncytial virus, and neonatal group B streptococcal sepsis.
(Neonatal sepsis is often caused by Lancefield group B Streptococcus agalactiae; Lancefield group classification is described
in Chapter 28.) Physical exam revealed fever, a severe cough
resulting in respiratory distress, a rapid heart rate, and moderate dehydration. Nasopharyngeal aspirate was positive for
influenza A antigen. The patient was treated with oseltamivir when influenza was diagnosed. He gradually improved
and was discharged home 4 days after admission.
In 2003, an unusually severe form of influenza (H3N2)
spread across the United States. Most states reported a

higher-than-normal number of influenza-related deaths
of children and young adults. Several factors, however,
helped keep the outbreak from becoming an epidemic of
larger proportions. First, the administration of flu vaccine afforded the population what is called herd immunity (discussed in Section 24.6). Herd immunity occurs
when only a portion of the population is immunized.
The vaccinated individuals will not become infected and
so cannot spread the disease to others. At the very least,
this slows the progression of infection throughout the
population.

Note:

It is impossible to immunize all humans against any given
disease. However, it is estimated that immunizing about 80% of a
population for influenza can halt an epidemic by cutting off transmission. Unfortunately, this level of immunization is rarely achieved.

The second factor that prevented an influenza pandemic
was the availability of antiviral agents that can limit the
disease course. As a result of studying the molecular biology of influenza, scientists discovered two selective targets. Influenza virus (200 nm) is encased in a membrane
envelope donned when the virion buds from an infected
cell. As described in Section 11.2, the envelope contains
the viral proteins neuraminidase (NA) and hemagglutinin
(HA). Spikes of hemagglutinin bind to sialic acid receptors
on the host cell and trigger receptor-mediated endocytosis. The virus ends up inside the resulting endosome. After

CHAPTER 27
A. Amantadine
H
H
H
N+

B. Zanamivir
HO
HO
HN

■

ANTIMICROBIAL THERAPY

■

1123

C.
OH
H
O

O HN
HN

COO–

NH2

FIGURE 27.27 ■ Inhibitors of influenza
proteins. A. Amantadine inhibits the M2
protein. B. Zanamivir inhibits neuraminidase.
C. Neuraminidase without (left) and with
(right) bound inhibitor. (PDB: 2HTQ)

the endosome is formed, proton pumps in the membrane
acidify endosomal contents. The drop in pH changes the
structure of hemagglutinin on the viral membrane so that
it can now bind to receptors on the endocytic membrane.
The result is fusion of the two membranes and release of
the virion into the cytoplasm.
For hemagglutinin structure to change, the interior of
the enveloped virion must also be acidified. Acidification
is mediated by a membrane channel formed by the virusencoded M2 protein. The drug amantadine (Fig. 27.27A)
is a specific inhibitor of the influenza M2 protein that prevents M2 channel formation, which, in turn, prevents viral
uncoating. Unfortunately, amantadine-resistant strains
of influenza have developed, in part because of the widespread use of amantadine by Chinese poultry farmers. As a
result, the drug is no longer recommended as a treatment
for influenza.
The second target of the influenza virus is the envelope
protein neuraminidase. The newer antiflu drugs, such as
zanamivir (Relenza) and oseltamivir (Tamiflu), are neuraminidase inhibitors that act against types A and B influenza strains (Fig. 27.27B and C). Neuraminidase on the
viral envelope allows virus particles to leave the cell in
which they were made. The enzyme cleaves any sialic acid
on the cell surface that may have bound to the hemagglutinin on the virus. Unencumbered, the virus can leave the
cell surface and infect another cell. Neuraminidase inhibitors prevent sialic acid cleavage, causing the virus particles
to aggregate at the cell surface. Surface aggregation reduces
the number of virus particles released. The contributions of
different NA and HA genes to the severity of influenza are
discussed in eTopic 27.4.
The neuraminidase inhibitors, when used within 48
hours of disease onset, decrease shedding and reduce the
duration of influenza symptoms by approximately one
day. However, flu symptoms generally last only 3–10 days.
While this does not sound like a substantial benefit, shortening the course of the flu in the elderly can minimize
damage to the lungs, which in turn reduces the chance of

developing life-threatening secondary bacterial infections
such as pneumonia and bronchitis.

Antiviral DNA Synthesis Inhibitors

Most antiviral agents work by inhibiting viral DNA synthesis. These drugs chemically resemble normal DNA nucleosides, molecules containing deoxyribose and analogs of
adenine, guanine, cytosine, or thymine. Viral enzymes then
add phosphate groups to these deoxynucleoside analogs to
form deoxynucleotide analogs. The deoxynucleotide analogs are then inserted into the growing viral DNA strand
in place of a normal nucleotide. Once inserted, however,
new nucleotides cannot attach to the nucleotide analogs,
and DNA synthesis stops. These DNA chain–terminating
analogs (Fig. 27.28) are selectively toxic because viral
A.

O

O
CH3

HN
O

O

N
–

O

HO
H

O

H

H

P

O
H

H
H

H

H
OH H

Deoxyribonucleotide
containing thymine

Zidovudine
B.

O
N
HO

O

N

O

O

O–

H
N3

CH3

HN

N

Acyclovir

O
N

NH
N

NH2

N
O

HO
H
H

NH
N

NH2

H
H

OH H
Deoxyguanosine

FIGURE 27.28

■ Antiviral inhibitors that prevent DNA
synthesis. Zidovudine (AZT) (A) and acyclovir (B) are analogs of

thymine and guanine nucleotides, respectively. Because the analogs
have no 3´ OH to which another nucleotide can add, chain elongation ceases.

1124

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

polymerases are more prone to incorporate nucleotide analogs into their nucleic acid than are the more selective host
cell polymerases. Antiviral DNA synthesis inhibitors work
on DNA viruses or retroviruses, but not on viruses such as
influenza, with its RNA genome.

Antiretroviral Therapy

Retroviruses are RNA viruses that use viral reverse transcriptase to make DNA and then use viral integrase to
insert that DNA into the eukaryotic host cell genome (see
Chapter 11). The integrated provirus can then be activated
to make retroviral RNA. The retroviral RNA travels to the
cytoplasm and directs synthesis of more virus particles.
One of the most devastating retroviruses is human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), the cause of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) (see Section 11.3).

Case History: Treatment of HIV

A married couple came to the community clinic for prenatal care. He was 20 years old. She was 19 and reportedly
2 months pregnant with her first child. She denied intravenous (IV) drug use or a history of other sexual partners and
had no history of sexually transmitted disease; however, a
routine prenatal HIV antibody screen was reported as positive for HIV-1. Careful questioning of the patient and her
husband elicited from him a history of IV drug use 5 years
earlier. An HIV antibody screen for him was also positive.
The laboratory results indicated that the wife might not
yet require therapy (she had a low viral load—that is, less
than 1,000 copies per milliliter of blood—and a high CD4
T-cell count), but since she was pregnant, a short course of
antiretroviral therapy (AZT) would be helpful in preventing transmission of the virus to her child. The husband had
an HIV viral load of 10,000 copies per milliliter and was
started on combination antiretroviral therapy, including a
protease inhibitor.
Being diagnosed with HIV is no longer a death sentence.
Advances in antiretroviral therapy (ART) over the past
10 years have transformed HIV into a manageable chronic
condition. At least half, if not most, of the HIV-positive
people in the United States now live long enough to die
from diseases of aging, such as heart attacks or strokes.
Because it is such a treatable infection, the CDC even recommends that everyone be tested for HIV. The reason for
this recommendation is that many people do not know they
are infected, but treating an asymptomatic, HIV-positive
person reduces the risk of sexually transmitting the virus.
Antiretroviral therapy can also prevent transplacental transmission from an HIV-positive pregnant woman to her

fetus, as in our case history. The drugs described next are
important components of effective treatment.
Nucleoside, nucleotide, and nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors. As an RNA retrovirus, HIV uses a

reverse transcriptase to make DNA that then integrates into
host nuclear DNA (discussed in Section 11.3). The antiretroviral drug zidovudine (abbreviated ZDV or AZT), which
was used in the case history, is a nucleoside analog recognized by reverse transcriptase. Once incorporated into a
replicating HIV DNA molecule, the DNA chain–terminating property (lack of a 3´ hydroxyl group) of AZT prevents
further DNA synthesis. Nucleoside inhibitors must undergo
three successive phosphorylation steps inside the cell to
become an active trinucleotide form of the drug. Nucleotide inhibitors are essentially monophosphorylated analogs
that require only two phosphorylation steps for activation.
In the case history described, AZT therapy was used
to prevent transplacental transmission of the virus from
mother to fetus. Because HIV transmission from the
mother to the neonate can also occur at delivery or by
breast-feeding, treatment of the mother and the child post
delivery is important for preventing transmission.
In addition to nucleoside inhibitors, there are also nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors. For example,
the drug delavirdine binds directly to reverse transcriptase
and allosterically inactivates the enzyme.
Protease inhibitors. To make optimal use of its limited pro-

virus DNA sequence, HIV generates long, nonfunctional
polypeptide chains that are proteolytically cleaved into the
actual proteins and enzymes used to replicate and produce
new virions. For example, the gag and pol genes reside
next to each other in the HIV genome and are transcribed
as a single mRNA molecule (see Section 11.3). The Gag
and Pol open reading frames overlap but are offset by one
base. This mRNA produces two polyproteins, called Gag
and Gag-Pol, the latter being the result of a shift in reading frames that takes place during translation. Once made,
both polyproteins are cleaved by HIV protease. The Gag
protein is proteolytically cleaved to make different capsid
components (p17, p24, and p15, which is further cleaved to
make nucleocapsid protein p7) (Fig. 27.29A). Gag-Pol is
cleaved to make reverse transcriptase and integrase.
Protease inhibitors such as Viracept and Lopinavir
belong to a powerful class of drugs that block the HIV
protease (Fig. 27.29B). When the protease is inactivated,
the polyproteins remain uncleaved and the virus cannot
mature, even though new virus particles are made. Because
immature HIV particles cannot infect other cells, progress
of the disease stalls. Note that protease inhibitors do not
cure AIDS; they can only decrease the number of infectious copies of HIV.

CHAPTER 27
A.
p15

p24
Gag polyprotein
Protease
Protease

p17

Protease

Protease
B.

Inhibitor

FIGURE 27.29

■ HIV protease inhibitor. A. Representation
of HIV protease cleavage of a single Gag polyprotein into multiple,
smaller proteins. B. The protease enzyme is shown here as a ribbon
structure, while the protease inhibitor BEA 369 is shown as a stick
model. (PDB code: 1EBY)

Antiviral therapy with protease inhibitors is recommended for patients with symptoms of AIDS and for asymptomatic patients with HIV viral loads above 30,000 copies
per milliliter of blood. Treatment should be considered even
for patients with viral loads as low as 5,000 copies per milliliter, as for the husband in the case history presented earlier.
Entry inhibitors. Another way to stop HIV is to prevent the

virus from infecting cells in the first place. Drugs called entry
inhibitors do just that: They stop entry. There are two types
of entry inhibitors. CCR5 inhibitors block virus envelope
protein gp120 (also known as SU) from binding to host surface protein CCR5, a coreceptor that, together with CD4, is
needed for virus binding (see Chapter 11 and Figure 11.24
for details). As a result of CCR5 inhibition, the virus never
attaches. Fusion inhibitors, in contrast, do not prevent initial binding, but prevent HIV membranes from fusing with
T-cell membranes and thereby halt viral entry. Imagine trying to enter a room through a door. CCR5 inhibitors are like
removing the doorknob from the door so there is nothing
to grab. Fusion inhibitors, however, are like gluing the door
shut. You can grab the knob but still cannot open the door.
Treatment regimens. Because HIV can mutate rapidly and

become resistant to single-drug therapies (see Section 11.3),

■

ANTIMICROBIAL THERAPY

■

1125

treatment today involves administering combinations of
three or more antiretroviral drugs. This therapeutic strategy
is called highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART).
Most current HAART regimens include three drugs—usually two nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors, plus a
protease inhibitor, a nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase
inhibitor, or an integrase inhibitor. Integrase inhibitors, fi rst
approved in the United States in 2007, block the enzyme
needed to insert viral DNA into the host genome.
You might wonder why HIV cannot be eliminated from
an infected person if the available antiretroviral drugs are
so effective. In 2011, Timothy Schaker at the University
of Minnesota, Twin Cities, examined patients undergoing ART who had undetectable blood levels of HIV. His
group found evidence that the virus in these individuals
still remained trapped in lymphatic tissues that were poorly
penetrated by the drugs. So, even though ART can lower
HIV to undetectable levels in blood, tissue pockets of HIV
remain, able to reestablish infection if ART is stopped. New
strategies designed to more effectively force drugs into tissues might be the cure we have long awaited.
Remarkably, “cures” of HIV have recently been accomplished through early and aggressive therapy. In 2013, a
newborn baby in rural Mississippi was treated aggressively
with antiretroviral drugs starting about 30 hours after
birth—something that was not usually done (unfortunately, the HIV virus has since been found in this baby).
Then, in that same year, it was revealed that a group of 14
adults treated within 4–10 weeks of infection, but whose
treatment had been inadvertently interrupted for 3 years,
did not relapse while off the drugs. The “cured” patients
still had traces of HIV in their blood, but these levels were
easily kept in check by their immune systems.
HIV treatment as prevention. AIDS can be a devastating

disease. Fortunately, we have effective antivirals that can
prevent HIV replication and AIDS. Could treating at-risk
populations with antivirals before exposure be effective
at preventing infection? This strategy is known as preexposure prophylaxis. In fact, the FDA has approved the
daily use of an HIV medicine, Truvada (tenofovir/emtricitabine), by healthy but high-risk people hoping to lower
their risk of infection by a sexual partner. Both drugs are
nucleoside analogs of adenosine and cytosine, respectively,
and are reverse transcriptase inhibitors. Although this is an
approved strategy, it is controversial even among physicians.
Some fear the drug will encourage risky behavior.

Future Antivirals May
Target Host Functions

As you can see from the preceding discussion, most antiviral drugs approved for clinical use target viral proteins

1126

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

hepatitis C, HIV, SARS-CoV). Another potential target is
the enzyme alpha-glucosidase in endoplasmic reticulum.
Many virus glycoproteins depend on host glucosidases
Kinase inhibitors:
erlotinib, sunitinib,
for proper folding. The glucosidase inhibitor celgosivir
imatinib
Chloroquine
has, indeed, proved effective against many unrelated
viruses in vitro and in rodent models, but not yet
Entry
Release
in humans. Nevertheless, the enzyme warrants
Endosomal
further investigation. Host kinases that regulate
acidification
intracellular virus trafficking are also potential
drug targets.
A more pathogen-specific antiviral agent
Fusion
Membrane
(ABX464) affects HIV replication by binding
trafficking
to the host cap-binding complex (CBC). (“Cap”
refers to the 5´ 7-methylguanosine cap added to
Assembly
eukaryotic and viral mRNAS.) The CBC controls
export of host mRNA from the nucleus to the
cytoplasm where mRNA is translated to protein.
Genome
Protein
replication
The HIV Rev protein brings HIV mRNA to the
folding
CBC. ABX464 binds to the CBC and specifically
blocks Rev-mediated export of viral RNA while
not interfering with host transcripts. Because the
drug binds to a host protein rather than a viral
Glucosidase
CypA
protein, it is less likely that HIV can develop resistance. This antiviral agent is currently in clinical
Nucleus
trials.
Lipid
Figure 27.30 also shows some host-targeted
Other
metabolism
drugs already approved for other purposes, such as
chloroquine (antimalarial agent) and statins (anticholesterol
metabolism). These drugs are now being
Interferon,
Statins
Celgosivir
DEB025,
nitazoxanide
SCY-635 evaluated for their usefulness against emerging viruses.
Chloroquine inhibits endosome acidification, which is
FIGURE 27.30 ■ Potential host targets for broad-spectrum
antivirals. Different stages of viral development are shown (entry,
needed by some enveloped viruses to escape the vacuole
fusion, genome replication, assembly). Examples of broad-spectrum
and enter the host cytoplasm (dengue virus and Zika virus,
compounds are connected to the corresponding targeted proteins
for instance). Statins interfere with lipid metabolism needed
or pathways by blunt arrows. CypA = cyclophilin A.
for the life cycles of viruses such as hepatitis C virus. How
therapeutically effective these drugs will be as antiviral
agents is unclear.
There are many challenges to the host-as-target approach
(proteases, polymerases, entry proteins) because they afford
to antiviral therapy. Host proteins function in a complex
some measure of selective toxicity. However, a perceived
network of interactions, so elucidating drug mechanisms
limitation of these direct-acting antivirals is their narrow
of actions is difficult. Toxicity is another worry, although
spectrum of virus coverage. Narrow-spectrum antivirals
it may be possible to identify a therapeutic concentration
cannot provide adequate protection against newer, rapidly
window in which the drug inhibits virus replication but has
emerging viral threats. Examples include flavivirus dengue,
minimal toxic effects on the patient.
coronaviruses SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV, and the filovirus Ebola. Finding new broad-spectrum antivirals could
address this need. But what do we target?
Thought Question
A novel approach is to ignore the virus but target host
cell pathways that are required by multiple viruses for
27.12 The text states that cells and viruses would have
difficulty developing resistance to antiviral drugs that target
replication (Fig. 27.30). For example, cyclophilin A is
host proteins rather than viral proteins. Why would targeting a
involved in host and viral protein folding. Cyclophilin A
host protein decrease the likelihood of developing resistance?
inhibitors such as alisporivir impair the folding of viral
Propose a mechanism by which the drug could still become
proteins and augment innate immune responses. These
ineffective against a virus.
drugs affect a variety of DNA and RNA viruses (dengue,

CHAPTER 27

To Summarize
■

■

■

■

■

Fewer antiviral agents than antibacterial agents are
available because it is harder to identify viral targets that
provide selective toxicity.
Preventing viral attachment to, or release from, host
cells is a mechanism of action for antiviral agents, such
as amantadine and zanamivir, used to treat influenza
virus.
Inhibiting DNA synthesis is the mode of action for
most antiviral agents, although they work only for DNA
viruses and retroviruses.
HIV treatments include reverse transcriptase inhibitors that prevent the synthesis of DNA, protease
inhibitors that prevent the maturation of viral polyproteins into active forms, and entry inhibitors that
either prevent HIV from binding to host membranes
or inhibit fusion of the HIV envelop to the host cell
membrane.
Future antiviral agents may target host proteins needed
by the virus to replicate. To be useful, such drugs must
exhibit concentration-dependent selective toxicity against
viral replication rather than host function.

Antifungal Agents

Fungal infections are much more difficult to treat than bacterial infections, in part because fungal physiology is more
similar to that of humans than bacterial physiology is. The
other reason is that fungi have an efficient drug detoxification system that modifies and inactivates many antibiotics.
Thus, to have a fungistatic effect, repeated applications of
antifungal agents are necessary to keep the level of unmodified drug above MIC levels.

A 37-year-old male presented to the emergency department of
a Florida hospital with persistent fever, malaise, and a painful right-arm mass. He denied trauma to the arm. White
blood cell count was elevated at 27,000/μl, and chest X-ray
revealed a left-lung infiltrate. Bronchoscopy revealed granulomatous inflammation containing a single yeastlike mass.
Incision and drainage were performed on the arm mass, and
cultures were obtained. Serum cryptococcal antigen tests were
negative, as were tests for Bartonella henselae and Toxoplasma. Cultures from the right arm grew out a fungal form
similar to that identified from the bronchoscopy specimens.

1127

■

Superficial mycoses (fungal infections) such as athlete’s foot,
and systemic mycoses such as blastomycosis, require very
different treatments. Imidazole-containing drugs (clotrimazole, miconazole) are often used topically in creams for
superficial mycoses (Fig. 27.31A). Others, such as itraconazole, are administered orally. Superficial mycoses include
infections of the skin, hair, and nails, as well as Candida

A. Clotrimazole

Cl

B. Griseofulvin
H 3C
O

O
CH3

Cl

Core
imidazole
N ring

CH3

O

O

H 3C
N

O O

C. Nystatin

H3C

O

OH
O

OH

OH
CH3

OH
HO

OH

HO
O

–

OOC

OH

O
O
OH
D. Amphotericin B
H3C

Case History: Blastomycosis

ANTIMICROBIAL THERAPY

A tentative diagnosis of Blastomyces dermatitidis was confirmed using PCR. The patient was placed on amphotericin
B, and his fevers and leukocytosis subsequently subsided. His
medication was changed to fluconazole for a recommended
duration of 6 months.

H3C

27.5

■

HO

NH2

CH3
OH

OH

O
O
CH3

OH OH

OH

OH OH O

OH
COO–

H3C
H 3C
NH2
O

O
OH

OH

FIGURE 27.31 Examples of antifungal agents. A. Clotrimazole belongs to the group of imidazole antifungals, so named because they all contain an imidazole ring. B. Griseofulvin is produced
by Penicillium griseofulvum. C. Nystatin is a polyene macrolide
produced by Streptomyces noursei. D. Amphotericin B is a polyene
produced by Streptomyces nodosus.
■

1128

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

TABLE 27.4-Major Antifungal Agents and Their Common Uses
Clinical applicationsa
Systemic mycoses
Drug/Mode of administration

Coccidioidomycosis

Histoplasmosis

Blastomycosis

Paracoccidioidomycosis

Amphotericin B/Intravenous

+

+

+

+

Nystatin/Oral; topical

–

–

–

–

Natamycin/Topical; eyedrops

–

–

–

–

Clotrimazole/Topical

–

–

–

–

Miconazole (Monistat)/Topical

–

–

–

–

Ketoconazole/Topical

–

–

+

–

Itraconazole/Oral

+

+

+

+

Fuconazole/Oral

+

+

+

?c

Voriconizole

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Polyenes (fungicidal)

Azoles (fungistatic): imidazoles

Azoles (fungistatic): triazoles

Allylamines (fungicidal)
Terbinafine (Lamisil)/Topical or oral
Griseofulvin (fungistatic)
Griseofulvin/Oral
Echinocandins
Caspofungin/Intravenous
Antimetabolites (fungistatic or fungicidal)
5-Fluoro-cytosined (flucytosine)/Oral
a

+ indicates that the drug inhibits growth of the disease-causing agent; – indicates that the drug is not useful for the disease.

b

mc = mucocutaneous but not systemic candidiasis.

c

Insufficient data.

d

Used only in combination with amphotericin B.

infections of moist skin and mucous membranes (for example, vaginal yeast infections). The imidazole-containing
drugs appear to disrupt the fungal membrane by inhibiting
sterol synthesis. Lamisil (a terbinafine compound) is a different class of agent that selectively inhibits ergosterol synthesis by fungi. Humans do not make ergosterol nor use it
in their cell membranes. Lamisil is currently a popular antifungal agent used to treat superficial mycoses.
More chronic dermatophytic infections typically require
another antifungal agent, called griseofulvin, produced by
a Penicillium species (Fig. 27.31B). Griseofulvin disrupts
the mitotic spindle and derails cell division (called metaphase arrest). This action does not kill the fungus, but as
the hair, skin, or nails grow and are replaced, the fungus
is shed.
Vaginal yeast infections caused by Candida are often
treated with nystatin, a polyene antifungal agent synthesized by Streptomyces that forms membrane pores

(Fig. 27.31C). The name “nystatin” came about because
two of the people who discovered it worked for the laboratory of the New York State Public Health Department
(now the Wadsworth Center).
The serious, sometimes fatal, consequences of systemic mycoses require more aggressive therapy. The
drugs used in these instances include amphotericin B
(produced by Streptomyces; see Fig. 27.31D) and f luconazole. Amphotericin B binds to the sterols in fungal membranes and destroys membrane integrity. It has
a high affinity for ergosterol, which is prevalent in fungal but not mammalian membranes. Fluconazole, on the
other hand, inhibits the synthesis of ergosterol. Thus,
fungal cells grown in the presence of f luconazole make
defective membranes. Typically, curing systemic fungal
infections requires long-term treatment to prevent disease relapse. Table 27.4 lists a number of other commonly used antifungal agents.

CHAPTER 27

■

ANTIMICROBIAL THERAPY

■

1129

Clinical applicationsa
Opportunistic mycoses
b

Aspergillosis

Candidiasis

Cryptococcosis

Dermatophytosis

+

+

+

–

–

+mc

–

–

+ Superficial

+ Superficial

–

–

–

+mc

–

+

–

+mc

–

+

–

+

–

+

Dandruff shampoo

+

+ mc

+

+

Sporotrichosis

■

–

+

+

+

Sporotrichosis

+

–

–

Fusarium

–

–

–

+

–

–

–

+

+ (Fungistatic)

+ (Fungicidal)

–

–

+

+

+

–

Fungal infections are difficult to treat because of similarities in human and fungal physiologies.
Imidazole-containing antifungal agents inhibit sterol
synthesis.

■

Griseofulvin inhibits mitotic spindle formation.

■

Nystatin produces membrane pores.

■

Mycotic keratins

+

To Summarize
■

Other

Amphotericin B binds to membranes and destroys
membrane integrity.

Concluding Thoughts
Antibiotics have greatly improved the health and wellbeing of humans and animals around the globe. Millions

Phaeohyphomycosis

of people live today because antimicrobial drugs cured
infectious diseases that we’ve dreaded for centuries.
Unfortunately, by the late twentieth century, a sense of
complacency about infections and antibiotics was pervasive among citizens of developed countries. This complacency led to the irresponsible use of antibiotics, and
now a crisis of antibiotic resistance looms. We may even
be entering a postantibiotic era. Despite government
and industry throwing considerable amounts of money
and human effort at the problem, very few new, clinically useful antibiotics have been discovered over the past
four decades. And when one is found, pathogens keep
developing resistance. Nevertheless, hope remains. New
approaches to antimicrobial discovery are continually
being conceived and tested. With any luck, one or more
of the strategies will pay off, keeping us one step ahead of
the microbes.

CHAPTER 28

■

CLINICAL MICROBIOLOGY AND EPIDEMIOLOGY

■

1133

CHAPTER 28

Clinical Microbiology and Epidemiology
28.1 Clinical Microbiology: Specimen Collection and

Handling
28.2 Approaches to Pathogen Identification
28.3 Principles of Epidemiology
28.4 Detecting Emerging Microbial Diseases

highlight

A N I N T E RV I E W W I T H

Profiling gut microbiota. Dysbiosis of the gut microbiome
is associated with Crohn’s disease, ulcerative colitis, irritable
bowel syndrome (IBS), inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), diabetes, and obesity. Christina Casén and colleagues at Genetic
Analysis AS devised a diagnostic test for gut dysbiosis. The
test uses 54 DNA probes targeting taxon-specific variable regions in 16S ribosomal DNA (V3–V9 in the figure). Probes that
bind a region are fluorescently labeled and mixed with barcoded magnetic pull-down beads containing complementary
probes. Fluorescence level reflects prevalence of a taxonomic
group. “Normobiotic” is compared to IBS and IBD patients.
Source: Casén et al. 2015. Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 42:71–83.
16S target

V1

V2

V3
8

V4
22

V5
3

V6
11

V7
10

V8

bp
1,400

0
700
IBS
Normobiotic
600
IBD

250

200

150

400
300

100

200
50

Bacteroides/Prevotella

Faecalbacterium

Firmicutes (clostridia)

Proteobacteria

0

Shigella/Escherichia

Ruminococcus

Actinobacteria

Shigella/Escherichia

100
Proteobacteria

0

ANALYSIS AS, OSLO, NORWAY

What fascinates you about intestinal
microbiota?
I’m amazed that we can finally study the
“black box” of intestinal microbiota in
such detail. We’ve learned that intestinal microbiota affect so many facets of
our lives, such as gastrointestinal disease, obesity, diabetes, mental illnesses,
and even healthy brain function of
infants. I’m also fascinated by how gut microbiota builds in an
individual. Environmental surroundings, birth method, mother’s microbiota (even during pregnancy)—all affect the infant’s
microbiota. I am most fascinated that severe Clostridioides difficile infections can be cured simply by fecal transplants from
healthy donors.
How might profiling gut microbiota contribute to patient care?

500

Firmicutes (bacilli)

Normalized fluorescence signal

V9

CHRISTINA CASÉN, MOLECULAR BIOLOGIST, GENETIC

GENETIC ANALYSIS AS

C U R R E N T R E S E A RC H

I

nfections have killed more people than all of Earth’s
wars combined. Today the spread of disease is controlled in large part by worldwide surveillance agencies that can detect outbreaks quickly, before major
epidemics develop. These agencies rely on smaller
clinical microbiology laboratories scattered throughout the world that help clinicians diagnose infectious
diseases. Here in Chapter 28, we discuss the principles
of clinical microbiology and epidemiology that are used
to identify, treat, and contain outbreaks, and explain
how profiling our microbiota can predict diseases.

IBS, for instance, is currently diagnosed in broad subgroups
based on clinical symptoms (diarrhea, chronic constipation, or
a mix). Patients within subgroups, however, harbor very different microbiota. So, profiling patient microbiota can lead to
more specific diagnoses. Profiling microbiota can also indicate
how a patient might respond to treatments such as anti–tumor
necrosis factor. Fecal bacteriotherapy might then convert a
nonresponder profile into responder. Finally, monitoring the
profile of a recovered patient could signal a coming relapse.
Preventive medication could shorten the period to remission.
1133

1134

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

On January 12, 2010, the small country of Haiti on the
Caribbean island of Hispaniola was violently shaken by
a magnitude 7.0 earthquake. Over 100,000 people died,
thousands of buildings collapsed, and the already fragile
sanitation system was severely crippled. Almost immediately, volunteers from around the world poured in to help
rescue the living, recover the dead, and rebuild what little infrastructure remained. Then, in October, a cholera
epidemic struck. Over the next 5 years, 700,000 cases of
severe diarrhea (see Chapter 25) ravaged the populace, and
more than 9,000 died. Where did it come from? Haiti had
never experienced cholera before.
Extensive epidemiological studies utilizing wholegenome sequencing strategies eventually traced the Haitian strain of Vibrio cholerae halfway around the world
to a September 2010 cholera outbreak in Nepal. How did
this faraway strain make it to Haiti so fast? Unwittingly,
the United Nations sent troops infected with the organism
from Nepal to Haiti to assist in the recovery. The Nepalese
troops set up camp and used a nearby river for sanitation.
The river became contaminated with V. cholerae and carried the pathogen through the town of Mirebalais, the site
of the first reported cholera case. From there, the infection
spread.
Such compelling stories underscore the integral roles
that clinical microbiology and epidemiology play in health
care. The Haitian cholera epidemic and the Current
Research Highlight demonstrate how modern methods of
DNA analysis have improved our ability to track disease
around the world and even predict impending disease in an
individual. In Chapter 28 we begin by explaining the basic
strategies and methodologies used to diagnose infectious
diseases, and we end with a discussion of how epidemiologists identify and track emerging pathogens. Our goal is
not to catalog every infectious disease, but to demonstrate
general principles and problem-solving approaches.

28.1

Clinical Microbiology:
Specimen Collection
and Handling

As in any good detective mystery, the first step in investigating an infectious disease is to identify the most likely
suspects. We can accomplish this, in part, by observing the
disease symptoms in a patient and knowing which organisms typically produce those symptoms. It also helps if
the physician is aware of a similar disease outbreak under
way in the community. Beyond these clues, the etiological
agent must be identified through biochemical, molecular,
serological, or antigen detection strategies.

Why Take the Time to Identify
an Infectious Agent?

This is the first question many students ask when contemplating the effort and expense required to identify the genus
and species of an organism causing an infection. Why not
simply treat the patient with an antibiotic and be done with
it? While this approach sounds appealing, there are several
compelling reasons for identifying an infectious agent.
Antibiotic resistance. As discussed in Chapter 27, antibi-

otic resistance is an increasingly serious global problem.
Characterizing a microbe’s antibiotic resistance profi le is
part of any microbial identification process. Understanding which antibiotics are effective in treating an infectious
agent will help the physician avoid prescribing an inappropriate drug. Furthermore, knowing which drugs are ineffective enables health organizations to track the spread of
antibiotic-resistant strains. For example, before 1970, most
strains of Neisseria gonorrhoeae were susceptible to penicillin. Today, most strains are resistant not only to penicillin, but also to many other antibiotics. Remember, too,
that viral pathogens are not susceptible to antibiotics, so
knowing that a patient has a viral disease can prevent the
inappropriate use of antibiotics.
Pathogen-specific disease complications. Many diseases

have serious complications that are common to a given
organism or strain of organism. For example, children
whose sore throats are caused by certain strains of Streptococcus pyogenes can develop serious complications affecting
the heart and kidney long after the infection has resolved.
These complications are the immunological consequence
of bacterial and host antigen cross-reactivity; they are
called sequelae (singular, sequela) because they occur after
the infection itself is over. Life-threatening sequelae, such
as rheumatic fever and acute glomerulonephritis caused by
certain strains of S. pyogenes, produce severe damage to the
heart and kidney, respectively. Knowing early on that S.
pyogenes has caused a child’s sore throat allows the physician to prescribe antibiotics that will quickly eradicate the
infection and prevent the development of sequelae.

Note:

Penicillin or a penicillin-like antibiotic is the usual treatment for Streptococcus pyogenes infection. Contrary to what
you might expect, S. pyogenes has not developed any penicillinresistant strains. It is not understood why.

Tracking the spread of a disease. Consider a situation
in which ten infants scattered throughout a city develop
bloody diarrhea. The clinical laboratory identifies the same
strain of Shigella sonnei, a Gram-negative bacillus, as the
cause in each case.

CHAPTER 28

Immunological or nucleic acid amplification tests can be
used to type a strain (discussed later). Finding the same
strain in all cases suggests that they probably originated
from the same source. Shigellosis is transferred from person to person by what is called the fecal-oral route. Carriers
of Shigella will shed this organism in their feces. Inadequate hand washing after defecation will leave bacteria on
the hands, which can then transfer the pathogen to foods
or utensils, or to another person by touching.
Public health officials, armed with the knowledge that
all the infants have the same strain of Shigella, then question the parents and learn that all of the children attend the
same day-care center. By testing the other children and the
workers in that center, officials can stop the infection from
spreading. This investigative process is called epidemiology (covered in Section 28.3).

■

CLINICAL MICROBIOLOGY AND EPIDEMIOLOGY

■

1135

Identifying pathogens present at body sites containing
normal microbiota is more challenging. A stool or fecal sample, for instance, is normally teeming with microbiota. These
specimens are typically plated onto selective media—for
example, MacConkey, Hektoen, or colistin–naladixic acid
(CNA) agar (described in the next section)—to eliminate or
decrease the number of normal microbiota that might contaminate the specimen. The following techniques are used to
collect specimens from nonsterile body sites:
Swabs. Throat swabs (Fig. 28.1B), for example, should be
placed in specialized liquid nutrient transport medium.
Sputum. Deep lung secretions expectorated for oral collection (Fig. 28.1C).
Stool samples. Cup or rectal swab; for identifying diarrhea-causing microbes.
Abscesses. Needle aspirations.

Specimen Collection and Processing

To diagnose an infectious disease, physicians must collect,
and the laboratory must process, a wide variety of clinical
specimens. The types of specimens range from simple cotton swabs of sore throats to urine and fecal samples. Here
we describe how these samples should be collected. Note
that, upon receiving and processing these specimens, the
clinical microbiologist must wear latex gloves and use a
laminar flow biosafety hood (see Fig. 5.28) as protection
against potential infectious agents.
Some body sites should not contain any microorganisms
when collected from a healthy individual. These include
blood, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), pleural fluid from the
space that lines the outside of the lungs, synovial fluid
from joints, and peritoneal fluid from the abdominal cavity. Because these sites are normally sterile, specimens can
be plated onto nonselective agar media as well as selective
media. Nonselective media, such as blood or chocolate
agars, can be used because any organism found in these
specimens is considered significant.
The following techniques are used to collect specimens
from sterile body sites:
Cerebrospinal fluid. Lumbar punctures (spinal taps;
Fig. 28.1A); testing for meningitis.
Blood samples. Generally taken by syringe from two
body sites and placed in liquid media for aerobic and
anaerobic culture. The same organism isolated from
blood samples taken from the two sites is considered
the likely etiological agent.
Pleural, synovial, and peritoneal fluid. Samples are
aspirated by syringe. The fluid can be viewed microscopically for inflammatory cells and cultured on agar
aerobically and anaerobically.

Urine samples. Midstream clean catch (will contain
some microflora from urethra) or collected from catheters placed in the bladder (should be sterile); testing
for urinary tract infections.

Note:

The minimum standard for diagnosing a urinary tract
infection used to be a finding of greater than 100,000 organisms
per milliliter of urine. As noted in the text, this is no longer the case.

Urine is a special case. Urine in the bladder of a healthy
individual was once considered sterile. Studies now show
that the bladder does, indeed, have normal microbiota (at
low numbers) although their role in human health is unclear.
Why didn’t we see them before? Most members are either
anaerobic or difficult to grow on the standard media used to
culture urine. Even though we now know that the bladder
contains normal microbiota, for practical purposes clinical
microbiologists still consider urine to be “sterile,” or nearly
so. The symptoms of urinary tract infections (which include
increased frequency, painful urination, and suprapubic or
flank pain) occur only when significant numbers of easily
grown, aerobic or facultative microbes are present.
Urine is sampled in several ways. When collected from a
catheterized patient, urine should contain few, if any, aerobically culturable organisms. Catheterization involves passing
thin, sterile tubing through the urethra and directly into the
bladder (Fig. 28.1D). (Catheterization is used primarily to
assist urination by immobilized patients, but it also provides
a convenient way to collect urine for bacteriological examination.) Unfortunately, the simple process of inserting the catheter through the nonsterile urethra can sometimes introduce
organisms into the bladder and precipitate an infection. Also,
when culturing urine from a catheterized patient, the urine
should be collected from a port in the catheter, never from
the collection bag. Urine may sit for hours in the collection

1136

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY
B. Throat swab

NANCY STONE

WILL & DENI MCINTYRE/SCIENCE SOURCE

A. Lumbar puncture

D. Urinary catheter
Bladder

C. Sputum collection

TERRY TUMPY/CDC

Urethra

Catheter

FIGURE 28.1

■ Specimen collection. A. Urinary catheter, showing placement in the urethra. B. Throat swab. C. Sputum collection.
A TB patient has coughed up sputum and is spitting it into a sterile container. The patient is sitting in a special sputum collection booth that
prevents the spread of tubercle bacilli. The booth is decontaminated between uses. D. Lumbar puncture to obtain cerebrospinal fluid.

bag, so organisms initially present at insignificant numbers
have time to replicate to high numbers even if the patient
does not have a urinary tract infection (UTI).
When a catheter is not in place, urine is most commonly
collected by what is called the midstream clean-catch technique, which is performed by the patient. In this procedure,
the external genitals are first cleaned with a sterile wipe containing an antiseptic. The patient then partially urinates
to wash as many organisms as possible out of the urethra
and then collects 5–15 milliliters of the midstream urine
in a sterile cup. This urine sample will usually not be sterile, because of urethral contamination, but the number of
bacteria will be low. The clinical laboratory determines how
many organisms per milliliter are present in the midstream
catch and tells the physician whether an infection is present.
Finding more than 1,000 organisms of a single species per
milliliter of urine from a midstream clean catch is now considered indicative of an infection in a symptomatic patient.

Once a specimen from any body site has been properly
collected, it must be transported to the clinical laboratory
under conditions that will not undermine the viability of
the pathogen. Then, after arriving in the lab, the sample
must be processed quickly using protocols that ensure
growth of likely pathogens.

Case History: Abdominal Abscess

A 4-year-old boy was admitted to the hospital for evaluation and treatment of persistent pain in the rectal area. His
problem had begun about a week earlier with ill-defined
pain in the same area. He had a white blood cell count of
24,900 (normal 4,000–11,000) with 87% neutrophils (normal 60%). An abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan
revealed an abscess adjacent to his rectum. A needle aspiration drained 20 ml of yellowish, foul-smelling fluid from
the abscess. Aerobic cultures of this specimen plated on blood

CHAPTER 28

■

CLINICAL MICROBIOLOGY AND EPIDEMIOLOGY

■

1137

A.

FIGURE 28.2

and MacConkey agars were negative. Why didn’t
the infectious agent grow?

roides fragilis (1.5–4 μm in length).
B. Vacutainer anaerobic specimen collector. Plunging the inner
tube to the bottom will activate a
built-in oxygen elimination system.
The anaerobic indicator changes
color when anaerobiosis has been
achieved.

DON STALONS/CDC

The problem in this instance is related to specimen collection and processing. Internal abscesses
located near the gastrointestinal tract are often
anaerobic infections, in this case caused by the
Gram-negative rod Bacteroides fragilis, a strict
anaerobe (Fig. 28.2A). Section 5.5 discusses
anaerobes. Intestinal microbes, the majority of
which are anaerobic, can sometimes escape the
intestine if the organ is damaged in some way.
The specimen in this instance should have been
collected under anaerobic conditions by aspiration into a nitrogen-filled tube prior to transport
to the clinical laboratory. Alternatively, a swab of
the abscess material can be inserted into a special
transport tube that has a built-in oxygen elimination system (Fig. 28.2B). Because the specimen was collected aerobically, many anaerobic
microbes were probably killed by the oxygen.
Nevertheless, B. fragilis has a stress response
system that permits survival of this anaerobe for
1 or 2 days in oxygen, so some of the bacteria
may have survived transport. The laboratory still
had a chance to find the organism, which raises
the second problem in the case. After receiving
the specimen, the lab cultured it only under aerobic conditions. The laboratory should have also
incubated a series of plates anaerobically (see Section 5.5, Fig. 5.20). This case, therefore, illustrates the importance of both proper specimen
collection and proper processing.

■ Anaerobic
infection. A. Gram stain of Bacte-

B.
1. Remove tube
from package.

2. Remove plunger
with attached swab.
Collect sample.
Plastic foil
package
Plunger

3. Reinsert swab
and press plunger
through stopper
so that inner tube
drops to bottom
of outer tube.

4. Mix by
swirling.
Transport to
laboratory.

Stopper

Swab
Inner
tube

Platinum
catalyst
Anaerobic
indicator

Biosafety Containment Procedures

Medical and laboratory personnel are exposed to extremely
dangerous pathogens on a daily basis. When working with
dangerous pathogens, clinical microbiologists must protect
themselves from accidental infection and at the same time
be certain the pathogen does not escape from the lab.

Case History: Fatal Meningitis

On July 15, an Alabama microbiologist was taken to the
emergency room with acute onset of generalized malaise,
fever, and diffuse myalgias. She was given a prescription for
oral antibiotics and released. On July 16, she became tachycardic and hypotensive and returned to the hospital. She died
3 hours later. Blood cultures were positive for Neisseria meningitidis serogroup C. Three days before the onset of symptoms,
the microbiologist had prepared a Gram stain from the blood
culture of a patient subsequently shown to have meningococcal

disease; she had also handled agar plates containing cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) cultures from the same patient. Co-workers reported that fluids were aspirated from blood culture
bottles at the open laboratory bench. No biosafety cabinets,
eye protection, or masks were used for this procedure. Testing
at CDC indicated that the isolates from both patients were
indistinguishable. The laboratory at the hospital infrequently
processed isolates of N. meningitidis and had not processed
another meningococcal isolate during the previous 4 years.
The microbiologist in this case did not take appropriate
measures to protect herself and ended up with a laboratory-acquired infection leading to meningitis. The CDC
has published a series of regulations designed to protect
workers at risk of infection by human pathogens. Infectious agents are ranked by the severity of disease and ease
of transmission. The more severe the disease or the more

1138

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

TABLE 28.1*Biological Safety Levels and Select Agentsa
Biosafety levels (BSLs)
BSL 1

BSL 2

BSL 3

BSL 4

Class of
disease agent

Agents not known to
cause disease.

Agents of moderate
potential hazard; also
required if personnel may
have potential contact with
human blood or tissues.

Agents may cause disease by
inhalation route.

Dangerous and exotic
pathogens with high risk
of aerosol transmission;
only 11 labs in the United
States handle these.

Recommended
safety
measures

Basic sterile
technique; no mouth
pipetting.

Level 1 procedures plus
limited access to lab;
biohazard safety cabinets
used; hepatitis vaccination
recommended.

Level 2 procedures plus ventilation
providing directional airflow
into room, exhaust air directed
outdoors; restricted access to lab
(no unauthorized persons).

Level 3 procedures plus
one-piece positivepressure suits; lab is
completely isolated from
other areas present in the
same building or is in a
separate building.

Representative
organisms
in class

Bacillus subtilis

Bordetella pertussis

Bacillus anthracis (anthrax)

Ebola virus

E. coli K-12

Campylobacter jejuni

Brucella spp. (brucellosis)

Guanarito virus

Saccharomyces spp.

Chlamydia spp.

Burkholderia mallei (glanders)

Hantavirus

Clostridium spp.

California encephalitis virus

Junin virus

Corynebacterium
diphtheriae

Coxiella burnetii (Q fever)

Kyasanur Forest disease
virus

Cryptococcus neoformans

EEE (eastern equine
encephalitis) virus

Cryptosporidium parvum

Francisella tularensis (tularemia)

Machupo virus

Dengue virus

Japanese encephalitis virus

Marburg virus

Diarrheagenic E. coli

La Crosse encephalitis virus

Entamoeba histolytica

LCM (lymphocytic
choriomeningitis) virus

Tick-borne encephalitis
viruses

Giardia lamblia
Haemophilus influenzae
Helicobacter pylori
Hepatitis virus
Legionella pneumophila
Listeria monocytogenes
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
Neisseria spp.
Salmonella spp.
Shigella spp.
Staphylococcus aureus
Toxoplasma
Pathogenic Vibrio spp.
Yersinia enterocolitica

Lassa fever virus

Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Rabies virus
Rickettsia prowazekii (typhus
fever)
Rift Valley fever virus
SARS (severe acute respiratory
syndrome) virus
Variola major (smallpox) and
other poxviruses
VEE (Venezuelan equine
encephalitis) virus
West Nile virus
Yellow fever virus
Yersinia pestis

a

Organisms in blue are on the list of CDC select agents that are considered possible agents of bioterrorism.

easily it is transmitted, the higher the risk category. On the
basis of this ranking, four levels of biological containment
are employed (Table 28.1).
Biosafety level 1 organisms have little to no pathogenic
potential and require the lowest level of containment.
Standard sterile techniques and laboratory practices are
sufficient.
Biosafety level 2 agents have greater pathogenic potential, but vaccines and/or therapeutic treatments (for

example, antibiotics) are readily available. The pathogen in
the case described here, Neisseria meningitidis, is in this
risk group. These agents require more rigorous containment procedures, such as limiting laboratory access when
experiments are in progress and using biological laminar
flow cabinets if aerosolization is possible.
Biosafety level 3 pathogens produce a serious or lethal
human disease. Vaccines or therapeutic agents may be available. To safely handle these organisms, level 2 procedures are

CHAPTER 28

■

CLINICAL MICROBIOLOGY AND EPIDEMIOLOGY

■

1139

plastic pipette as a straw). This practice is now forbidden,
for obvious reasons. As of this writing, there are 11 BSL4
laboratories operating in the United States.
It is important to note that most clinical microbiology laboratories are equipped to handle BSL2 organisms.
Patient samples suspected to contain a level 3, or higher,
agent are sent directly to regional reference laboratories or
to the CDC for analysis.

Thought Questions

28.1 Two blood cultures, one from each arm, were taken
from a patient with high fever. One culture grew Staphylococcus epidermidis, but the other blood culture was negative (no
organisms grew out). Is the patient suffering from septicemia
caused by S. epidermidis?
28.2 A 30-year-old woman with abdominal pain went to

DR. KEVIN KAREM/CDC

her physician. After the examination, the physician asked the
patient to collect a midstream urine sample that would be sent
to the lab across town for analysis. The woman complied and
handed the collection cup to the nurse. The nurse placed the
cup on a table at the nurses’ station. Three hours later, a courier service picked up the specimen and transported it to the
laboratory. The next day, the report came back: “greater than
200,000 CFUs/ml; multiple colony types; sample unsuitable
for analysis.” Why was this determination made?

FIGURE 28.3

■ Biosafety level 4 containment. Dr. Kevin
Karem at the CDC performs viral plaque assays to determine the
neutralization potential of serum from smallpox vaccination trials.
He is protected by a positive-pressure suit working in a biosafety
level 4 laboratory. The airflow into his suit is so loud that he must
wear earplugs to protect his hearing. Note that this virus is used
under extremely tight security at the CDC, one of only two places in
the World allowed to do so.

supplemented with a lab design ensuring that ventilation air
flows only into the room and that exhaust air vents directly
to the outside, thus producing negative pressure. Negative
pressure will keep any organism that may aerosolize from
escaping into hallways. In addition, access to the lab is strictly
regulated and includes double-door air locks at the entrance.
By law, extremely dangerous pathogens such as the
Ebola virus, for which there is no treatment or vaccine, may be studied only at a biosafety level 4 containment facility. Practices here dictate that lab personnel wear
positive-pressure lab suits connected to a separate air supply
(Fig. 28.3). The positive pressure ensures that if the suit is
penetrated, organisms will be blown away from the breach
and not sucked into the suit.
As reasonable as these regulations may seem, they were
not always in effect. Prior to 1970, scientists had an almost
cavalier approach toward handling pathogens. For instance,
culture material was routinely transferred from one vessel
to another by mouth pipetting (essentially using a glass or

To Summarize
■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

Identifying a pathogen enables clinicians to prescribe
appropriate antibiotics, anticipate possible sequelae,
and track the spread of the disease.
Specimen collection is a critical first step in the process
of identifying a pathogen.
Common specimens include blood, pus, urine, sputum, throat swabs, stool, and cerebrospinal fluid.
Specimens from sites containing normal microbiota
must be handled differently from specimens taken from
normally sterile body sites.
A specimen from an abscess or other infection that
might contain anaerobes must be collected under
anaerobic conditions.
Various levels of protective measures are used in
handling potentially infectious biological materials.
Biosafety level 1 agents are generally not pathogenic
and require the lowest level of containment.
Biosafety level 2 agents are pathogenic but not typically transmitted via the respiratory tract. Laminar flow
hoods are required.

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

Biosafety level 3 agents are virulent and transmitted
by the respiratory route. They require laboratories with
special ventilation and air-lock doors.
Biosafety level 4 agents are highly virulent and require
the use of positive-pressure suits.

28.2

Approaches to Pathogen
Identification

Now that we have collected a sample, how do we identify
the pathogen, and do it quickly? Pathogens can be identified on the basis of a variety of observations, including the
patient’s symptoms, the presence of organisms in stained
clinical specimens, biochemical clues, and serology (the
presence in a patient’s serum of antibodies reactive against
a specific microbe).

Conventional Approaches
Staining procedures. Some specimens, such as CSF and
sputum, can be directly stained with the Gram stain procedure (described in Section 2.3) or the acid-fast stain.
Knowing that an organism is Gram-positive, Gram-negative, or acid-fast guides which additional tests the clinical
microbiologist must run. The case that follows illustrates
how the acid-fast stain is critical for presumptively identifying mycobacteria.

Case History: Tuberculosis

by the acid-fast stain, a technique first described in 1882
(called the Ziehl-Neelsen stain) that is used to find the
tubercle bacillus in a patient’s sputum. The acid-fast stain
enables a technician to visualize bacteria such as Mycobacterium species that are not stained by the Gram stain. Mycobacteria have a very waxy outer coat composed of mycolic
acid that resists penetration by most dyes—an obstacle the
acid-fast stain was designed to overcome.
The original Ziehl-Neelsen acid-fast stain used phenol
and heat to drive carbolfuchsin (a red dye) into mycobacterial
cells on glass slides. Destaining with an acidic alcohol solution removes the stain from all cell types except mycobacteria. The slide is subsequently counterstained with methylene
blue, after which the mycobacteria will be seen as curved,
red rods (called acid-fast bacilli), while everything else will
appear blue (Fig. 28.4A). A more modern version of the
acid-fast stain uses the fluorochrome auramine O to stain
the mycolic acid. This dye also resists removal by an acidic
alcohol wash, so the mycobacteria will fluoresce bright yellow when observed under a fluorescence microscope.
Although the acid-fast stain is very useful, it detects
organisms in the sputum of tuberculosis patients only
about 60% of the time; and even if they are found, confirmatory tests are needed for a definitive diagnosis. Growthdependent identification of M. tuberculosis typically starts
with inoculating the sputum sample to a blue-green Löwenstein-Jensen medium (selective for mycobacteria) and
waiting several weeks for the organism to grow before additional tests can be done (Fig. 28.4B). However, while the
organism grows, a rapid, nucleic acid amplification test
(NAAT) can be used to quickly detect even small amounts
of the organism, even in AFB-negative sputum samples.
The NAAT tests are described later in this section.

A 31-year-old male presented to an emergency department
(ED) in New York City after experiencing gross hemoptysis
(blood in sputum). He had a 2-month
history of productive cough, a 25-pound A. Acid-fast stain
weight loss, night sweats, and fatigue.
A chest X-ray revealed bilateral cavitary
infiltrates. The initial sputum specimen
was negative by Gram stain but positive
for acid-fast bacilli (AFB). The specimen
was submitted for a nucleic acid amplification assay (NAAT) to detect 16S
rRNA, as well as for culture and sensi4 µm
tivity. The patient had a history of heavy
FIGURE 28.4 ■ Acid-fast stain
alcohol and drug use.
The likely suspect in this case is Mycobacterium tuberculosis, although other
mycobacterial species are possible
causes. M. tuberculosis is presumptively
diagnosed in the clinical laboratory

and growth of Mycobacterium tuberculosis. A. Acid-fast Ziehl-Neelsen

stain of M. tuberculosis. B. LöwensteinJensen medium enables growth of
mycobacterial species, some of which
grow extremely slowly. The colonies
have a “bread crumb–like” appearance.

B. M. tuberculosis colonies on Löwenstein-Jensen agar

COURTESY OF CLADIO BASILLICO, MD/NEW YORK UNIVERSITY

■

■

CDC

1140

CHAPTER 28
Growth and biochemical testing. Once the Gram reac-

tion of an organism is known, the conventional laboratory approach used to identify bacterial pathogens requires
understanding basic microbial physiology and how diverse
it is. Thousands of bacterial species are capable of causing
disease, but no two species have the same biochemical “signature.” The clinical microbiologist can look for reactions,
or combinations of reactions, that are unique to a given
species, as in the following case history.

Case History: Medical Detective Work

A 38-year-old woman with no significant previous medical
history came to the emergency room complaining of a mild
sore throat persisting for 3 days. Her symptoms included
arthralgia (joint pain), myalgia (muscle pain), and a lowgrade fever. The day before coming to the ER she had had a
severe headache with neck stiffness, nausea, and vomiting. She
was not taking any medications, had no known drug allergies, and did not smoke. She lived with her husband and two
children, all of whom were well. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
was collected from a spinal tap. The CSF appeared cloudy
(it should be clear) and contained 871 white blood cells per
microliter (normal is 0–10/μl), the glucose level was 1 mg/dl
(normal is 50–80), and the total protein level was 417 mg/dl
(normal is less than 45). Gram stain of a CSF smear revealed
Gram-negative rods. The CSF sample was sent to the diagnostic laboratory for microbial identification.
As discussed in Thought Question 26.9, low glucose and
elevated protein levels in CSF are indicators of bacterial (not
viral) infection. The increase in white blood cells revealed
that the woman’s immune system was trying to fight the
disease. The presence of Gram-negative rods in the CSF
smear confirmed a diagnosis of bacterial meningitis, since
CSF should be sterile. Now it was up to the clinical laboratory to determine the etiological agent.
Algorithms to identify bacteria. Over the years, clinical

microbiologists have developed algorithms (step-by-step
problem-solving procedures) that expose the most likely
cause of a given infectious disease. For instance, only a limited number of microbes are known to cause meningitis.
The microbiologist poses a series of binary yes/no questions about the clinical specimen in the form of biochemical or serological tests. Typical questions in this case might
include: Is an organism seen in the CSF of a patient with
symptoms of meningitis? Is the organism Gram-positive or
Gram-negative? Does it stain acid-fast? Answers to a fi rst
round of questions will then dictate the next series of tests
to be used.
Because speed is of the essence in deciding how to
treat the patient, a series of tests is not always carried out

■

CLINICAL MICROBIOLOGY AND EPIDEMIOLOGY

■

1141

sequentially. To save time, a slew of tests are carried out
simultaneously, but the results are interpreted sequentially
using the algorithm. In our case history, for instance, consider the most common causes of bacterial meningitis: Neisseria meningitidis, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus
influenzae, and Escherichia coli.
The CSF sample was Gram-stained by a microbiologist and simultaneously plated onto three media: chocolate agar, blood agar, and Hektoen agar. Chocolate agar is
an extremely rich medium that looks brown, owing to the
presence of heat-lysed red blood cells (Fig. 28.5A and B).
Because it is so nutrient-rich, all four organisms will grow
on chocolate agar. However, nutritionally fastidious organisms such as N. meningitidis and H. influenzae will not
grow well, if at all, on ordinary blood agar, because these
bacteria cannot lyse red blood cells and release required
nutrients. Less fastidious organisms, such as S. pneumoniae
and E. coli, will grow on blood agar, but of these two, only
E. coli can grow on Hektoen agar (Fig. 28.5C–E), which
is a selective and differential medium for enteric Gramnegative rods. Hektoen is selective because bile salts and
dyes inhibit the growth of Gram-positives. It is differential
because the medium reveals organisms that ferment lactose
or sucrose and produce hydrogen sulfide. Differential and
selective media are described in Section 4.3.
In our case history, the Gram stain of the CSF revealed
Gram-negative rods, which ruled out N. meningitidis
(a Gram-negative diplococcus) and S. pneumoniae (a Grampositive diplococcus). The organism in CSF did grow
on blood agar, which eliminated H. influenzae (a Gramnegative, nonenteric rod) as a candidate. It also grew on Hektoen, where it produced orange, lactose-fermenting colonies.
Thus, the organism was a Gram-negative, enteric rod, and
likely E. coli. Additional biochemical tests confirming the
identity of the organism had to be carried out, but this simple
example shows how simultaneous tests can be interpreted.
Identifying Gram-negative bacteria. The Gram-negative

bacterium in this case was subjected to a battery of 36 biochemical tests in an automated microbial identification
instrument (Fig. 28.6A). Most clinical laboratories in the
United States and Europe now use these automated identification systems. The organism is inoculated into the wells
of a prepared microtiter dish in which each well contains
materials that test an organism’s ability to ferment different
carbon sources or make different metabolic end products
(Fig. 28.6B and C). By monitoring the growth or change
in color produced in different wells, the instrument can
quickly identify the pathogen’s metabolic profi le, sometimes within 5–6 hours. For each bacterial species, the system software “knows” the probability that a given reaction
will be positive or negative, and from that information the
program can identify the pathogen.

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY
B. Colonies of N. gonorrhoeae

C. Hektoen agar

COURTESY OF DR. JOHN W. FOSTER

COURTESY OF DR. JOHN W. FOSTER

A. Chocolate agar

COURTESY OF DR. JOHN W. FOSTER

1142

E. S. enterica colonies on Hektoen

COURTESY OF DR. JOHN W. FOSTER

COURTESY OF DR. JOHN W. FOSTER

D. E. coli colonies on Hektoen

FIGURE 28.5 ■ Chocolate agar and Hektoen agar: two widely used clinical media. A. Uninoculated chocolate agar. Its color is
due to gently lysed red blood cells that provide a rich source of nutrients for fastidious bacteria. B. Chocolate agar inoculated with Neisseria
gonorrhoeae. This organism will not grow well on typical blood agar, because important nutrients remain locked within intact red blood cells.
C. Uninoculated Hektoen agar, which contains lactose, peptone, bile salts, thiosulfate, an iron salt, and the pH indicators bromothymol blue
and acid fuchsin; the bile salts prevent growth of Gram-positive microbes. D. Hektoen agar inoculated with Escherichia coli. This organism
ferments lactose to produce acid-fermentation products that give the medium an orange color, owing to the pH indicators acid fuchsin and
bromophenol blue. E. Hektoen agar inoculated with Salmonella enterica. This organism does not ferment lactose but grows instead on the
peptone amino acids. The resulting amines are alkaline and produce a more intense blue color with bromothymol blue. Salmonella species
also produce hydrogen sulfide gas from the thiosulfate. Hydrogen sulfide reacts with the medium’s iron salt to produce an insoluble, black iron
sulfide precipitate visible in the center of the colonies.
B.

C.

JOHN W. FOSTER

COURTESY AND © BECTON, DICKINSON AND COMPANY

JOHN W. FOSTER

A.

FIGURE 28.6 ■ Automated microbiology system. A. The BD Phoenix system uses plates with numerous reaction wells and a computerized plate reader to automatically identify pathogenic bacteria. This type of instrument automatically generates and evaluates the numbers.
B. Microbial identification plate. C. Loading a multiwall ID plate with a multichannel pipettor. All wells are simultaneously loaded with the same
volume and number of bacteria.

■

CLINICAL MICROBIOLOGY AND EPIDEMIOLOGY

■

1143

A. Uninoculated strip
A simplified example of the pathogen identification process is shown in Figure 28.7. The
analytical profile index (API 20E) strip can test
20 metabolic processes. An uninoculated con1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
trol and strips for two organisms are pictured
in Figure 28.7. Overnight incubation is needed
B. E. coli results after 24 hours
before the chamber reactions can be read, so the
API strip does not deliver results as quickly as the
automated systems do. Different-colored reactions in each chamber are scored as positive or
C. P. mirabilis results after 24 hours
negative, depending on the color (Table 28.2 and
eTopic 28.1). For example, in the indole chamber
(well 9 in Fig. 28.7B), a red reaction at the top of
the tube is positive and indicates that the organism can produce indole from tryptophan. A colFIGURE 28.7 ■ API 20E strip technology for the biochemical idenorless chamber would be a negative result. Go to
tification of Enterobacteriaceae. A. Uninoculated API strip. Each well
eTopic 28.1 to see how API strips can also be used
contains a different medium that tests for a specific biochemical capability.
The well numbers correspond to Table 28.2. The color of each medium after
to generate a seven-digit number that identifies
24-hour incubation indicates a positive or negative reaction (see Table 28.2).
the bacterium.
B, C. API results for E. coli (B) and Proteus mirabilis (C). Plus (+) and minus (–)
The results of the API chambers can be used
indicate positive and negative reactions, respectively.
as a dichotomous key, by making a stepwise
interpretation that begins with a key reaction. A simplified dichotomous key using a limited number of enteric
Gram-negative species is shown in Figure 28.8. Often,
the first reaction examined is lactose fermentation (tagged
“ONPG” in Table 28.2). The lactose reaction is read as
TABLE 28.2*Reading the API 20E
positive or negative, depending on the color. Then, following a printed flowchart, the technician goes to the next key
Well
reaction—say, indole production—and reads it as positive
number
Test
Reaction tested
or negative. If the organism is a lactose fermenter and the
1
ONPGa
Beta-galactosidase
indole test is positive, then the choices have been narrowed
2
ADH
Arginine
dihydrolase
to E. coli or Klebsiella species (the other lactose-positive,
3
LDC
Lysine decarboxylase
indole-positive organisms in the figure do not cause men4
ODC
Ornithine decarboxylase
ingitis). Another reaction is read to distinguish between
5
CIT
Citrate utilization
the next two choices. The process continues until a single
species is identified.
6
H2S
H2S production
In reality, many more reactions than the 11 shown have
7
URE
Urea hydrolysis
to be used to make a definitive identification, because of
8
TDA
Tryptophan deaminase
species differences with respect to a single reaction. For
9
IND
Indole production
example, Figure 28.8 shows that Klebsiella pneumoniae
10
VP
Acetoin production
and Klebsiella oxytoca (highlighted in yellow) exhibit oppo11
GEL
Gelatinase
site indole reactions, even though they are of the same
12
GLU
Glucose fermentation/oxidation
genus. Even within a given species, only a certain percent13
MAN
Mannitol fermentation/oxidation
age of strains might be positive for a given reaction. The
14
INO
Inositol
fermentation/oxidation
inherent danger in using a dichotomous key is that one
15
SOR
Sorbitol fermentation/oxidation
anomalous result can lead to an incorrect identification. Be
16
RHA
Rhamnose fermentation/oxidation
aware, too, that the phenotypic dichotomous key does not
17
SAC
Sucrose fermentation/oxidation
mirror a phylogeny tree, in which the two Klebsiella species
would branch from a common ancestor.
18
MEL
Melibiose fermentation/oxidation

Identifying nonenteric Gram-negative bacteria. The pro-

cedures we have outlined will accurately identify members of Enterobacteriaceae, but there are pathogenic

19

AMY

Amygdalin fermentation/oxidation

20

ARA

Arabinose fermentation/oxidation

a

ONPG = ortho-nitrophenyl-beta-D-galactoside.

COURTESY OF FACULTÉ DE MÉDECINE PARIS DESCARTES

CHAPTER 28

1144

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

Gram-negative rod
Glucose
Neg

Lactose
(ONPG)

Pos

Pseudomonas spp.; others

Neg

Indole

Pos
Neg

H2S
Neg

Pos

Neg

Pos

Shigella
flexneri

Neg

Neg

Neg

Pos
Neg

Pos

Pos

LDC
Pos

Neg

Pos

Neg

Klebsiella
pneumoniae

Pantoea
Pos

Enterobacter
cloacae

ODC

Providencia
stuartii

Neg

Citrobacter
freundii

Salmonella Proteus
enterica
mirabilis

Yersinia
pestis

Pos

Citrate

ADH

Sorbitol
Neg

VP

H2S
Urease

Citrate

Pos

Pos

Urease
Neg

Kluyvera
Pos

Klebsiella
oxytoca

Escherichia
coli

Yersinia
enterocolitica

Serratia
marcescens

FIGURE 28.8 ■ Simplified biochemical algorithm to identify Gram-negative rods. The diagram presents a dichotomous key using
a limited number of biochemical reactions and selected organisms to illustrate how species identifications can be made using biochemistry.
Abbreviations and reactions: ADH (arginine dihydrolase): stepwise degradation of arginine to citrulline and ornithine; citrate (CIT): citrate utilization as a carbon source; glucose (GLU): glucose fermentation to produce acid; H2S: production of hydrogen sulfide gas; indole (IND): indole
production from tryptophan; lactose (ONPG): lactose fermentation to produce acid (ortho-nitrophenyl-beta-D-galactoside, cleaved by betagalactosidase); LDC (lysine decarboxylase): cleavage of lysine to produce CO2 and cadaverine; ODC (ornithine decarboxylase): cleavage of
ornithine to make CO2 and putrescine; sorbitol (SOR): sorbitol fermentation to produce acid; urease (URE): production of CO2 and ammonia
from urea; VP (Voges-Proskauer test): production of acetoin or 2,3-butanediol. (Note: “Neg” for Pseudomonas in terms of glucose indicates
an inability to ferment glucose. Pseudomonas can still use glucose as a carbon source.)

Gram-negative bacilli found in other, nonenteric, phylogenetic families. For instance, one possibility in the preceding case history is that the Gram-negative bacillus seen
in CSF smears would not grow on blood agar or on the
other selective media, but would grow as small, glistening
colonies on chocolate agar. This result would implicate the
Gram-negative rod Haemophilus influenzae.
Meningitis caused by H. influenzae was a major problem
prior to 1988, before the introduction of a vaccine containing H. influenzae type b capsular material. Growth of
H. influenzae requires hemin (X factor) and NAD (V factor), so confirming the identity of H. influenzae involves
growing the organism on agar medium containing hemin
and NAD (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide). This can
be done by placing small filter paper disks containing these
compounds on a nutrient agar surface (not blood agar)
that has been covered with the organism. H. influenzae
will grow only around a strip containing both X and V
factors. Alternatively, X and V factors can be incorporated
into Mueller-Hinton agar, as shown in Figure 28.9A. The

organism grows on chocolate medium because the lysed
red blood cells release these factors. Although XV growth
phenotype is still used for identification, fluorescent antibody staining is more specific (discussed shortly).
A completely different identification scheme would have
been used in the preceding meningitis case if the laboratory
had discovered the organism to be a Gram-negative diplococcus (rather than a Gram-negative rod). A Gram-negative diplococcus would suggest Neisseria meningitidis. N.
gonorrhoeae is also possible, but it is less likely because the
gonococcus lacks the protective capsule that meningococci
use to survive in the bloodstream. Without this capsule, N.
gonorrhoeae is not as resistant to serum complement and
cannot disseminate to the meninges.
The first test to determine whether the organism
is a species of Neisseria is the cytochrome oxidase test
(Fig. 28.9B). Cytochrome oxidase is the terminal oxidoreductase for O2 (discussed in Chapter 14). In this test, a few
drops of the colorless reagent N, N, N´, N´-tetramethylp-phenylenediamine dihydrochloride are applied to the

CHAPTER 28
A.

■

CLINICAL MICROBIOLOGY AND EPIDEMIOLOGY

■

1145

B.
V factor

X and V factor

COURTESY OF DR. JOHN W. FOSTER

BRENDA MILLER AND JOHN FOSTER, UNIVERSITY OF SOUTH ALABAMA

X factor

Blood
agar

FIGURE 28.9

■ Haemophilus influenzae growth factors and Neisseria meningitidis oxidase reaction. A. H. influenzae will grow
on an agar plate (here, Mueller-Hinton agar) only when the medium has been fortified with both X factor (hemin) and V factor (NAD), but not
either one alone. Nor will the organism grow on blood agar. B. Oxidase-positive reaction for N. meningitidis. Oxidase reagent (which is colorless) was dropped onto colonies of N. meningitidis grown on chocolate agar. The test is called the cytochrome oxidase test, but it really tests
for cytochrome c.

suspect colonies. The reaction, which takes place only if
the organism possesses both cytochrome oxidase and cytochrome c, turns the p-phenylenediamine reagent (and the
colony) a deep purple/black. While many bacteria possess
cytochrome oxidase, Neisseria is one of only a few genera that also contain cytochrome c in their membranes.
Oxidase-positive organisms use cytochrome oxidase to
oxidize cytochrome c, which then oxidizes p-phenylenediamine. Other oxidase-positive bacteria include Pseudomonas, Haemophilus, Bordetella, Brucella, and Campylobacter
species—all of them Gram-negative rods. None of the
Enterobacteriaceae, however, are oxidase-positive, because
they lack cytochrome c.
An oxidase-positive, Gram-negative diplococcus is very
likely a member of Neisseria. Differentiation between species of Neisseria is based on their ability to grow on certain
carbohydrates, or it can be determined using immunofluorescent antibody staining tests that test for the presence of
different capsule antigens in N. meningitidis.
Identifying Gram-positive pyogenic cocci. Recall from

Section 26.2 the case of the woman with necrotizing fasciitis. How did the laboratory determine that the etiological agent was Streptococcus pyogenes? A sample algorithm, or
flowchart (Fig. 28.10), shows how this is done. The physician sends a cotton swab containing a sample from a lesion
to the clinical laboratory. The laboratory technician streaks
the material onto several media: (1) blood agar (which will
grow both Gram-positive and Gram-negative organisms);
(2) blood agar containing the inhibitors colistin and naladixic acid (called a CNA plate, this agar will grow only

Gram-positives); and (3) MacConkey agar (which will grow
only Gram-negative organisms; see Section 4.3). The suspect organism in this case grows on the CNA and blood
plates. Because it grows in the presence of the Gram-negative inhibitory compounds in CNA, one would immediately
suspect the organism to be Gram-positive—an assumption
borne out by the Gram stain.

Note:

Though the skin is normally populated by many different
microorganisms, samples from an infected lesion are overwhelmingly populated by the etiological agent. The pathogen predominates because it outgrows normal microbiota. Using selective
media to isolate the infectious agent will further simplify diagnosis
by decreasing the growth of any normal microbiota that may still
be present.

The algorithm tells the laboratory technician that since
the organism is a Gram-positive coccus, the next step is
to test for catalase production. Catalase, which converts
hydrogen peroxide (H 2O2) to O2 and H 2O, clearly distinguishes staphylococci from streptococci (remember, Gram
stain morphology alone is insufficiently reliable to make
that distinction). The catalase test is performed by mixing a
colony with a drop of H 2O2 on a glass slide. Effusive bubbling due to the release of oxygen indicates catalase activity
(see Fig. 28.10). Staphylococci are catalase-positive; streptococci are catalase-negative. Note that many other organisms possess catalase activity, including the Gram-negative
rod E. coli. According to the algorithm, however, E. coli
would not be considered, because it does not grow on
CNA agar and is not Gram-positive.

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

Lesion

Growth
Growth
No growth
COURTESY OF DR. JOHN W. FOSTER

Blood agar
CNA agar
MacConkey agar

Gram stain
(Gram-positive
cocci)

COURTESY OF DR. JOHN W. FOSTER

PART 5

Catalase

Neg

Pos
Coagulase

Hemolysis on blood agar
Pos
β
COURTESY OF DR. JOHN W. FOSTER

Staphylococcus
aureus
Novobiocin
Resistant

Staphylococcus
saprophiticus

Bacitracin

Optochin

Neg

None

COURTESY OF DR. JOHN W. FOSTER

α

COURTESY OF
DR. JOHN W. FOSTER

■

COURTESY OF DR. JOHN W. FOSTER

1146

Susceptible

Staphylococcus
epidermidis

Pos

Neg
Pos

Streptococcus pneumoniae

COURTESY OF DR. JOHN W. FOSTER

COURTESY OF DR. JOHN W. FOSTER

FIGURE 28.10 ■ Algorithm for identifying Gram-positive
pathogenic cocci. The red arrows follow the identification of

Neg

Streptococcus pyogenes

Note:

When performing a catalase test from colonies grown
on blood agar, be sure not to transfer any of the agar, since red
blood cells also contain catalase.

Having established that the organism is catalase-negative, the technician examines the blood plate for evidence of
hemolysis. Three types of colonies are possible: nonhemolytic, alpha-hemolytic, and beta-hemolytic. Nonhemolytic
streptococci do not produce any lytic zone. Alpha-hemolytic strains produce large amounts of hydrogen peroxide
that oxidize the heme iron within intact red blood cells
to generate a green product. As a result, alpha-hemolytic
streptococci produce a green zone around their colonies

Streptococcus pyogenes. The bacitracin and optochin results are
designated “positive” if the organism is susceptible and “negative” if
the organism is resistant to the agent.

called alpha hemolysis—even though the red blood cells
remain intact. (For example, Streptococcus mutans, a cause
of dental caries and subacute bacterial endocarditis, is
alpha-hemolytic.) Still other streptococci produce a completely clear zone of true hemolysis surrounding their
colony. This is called beta hemolysis. Red blood cells are
hemolyzed completely by exported enzymes, called hemolysins, that lyse red-cell membranes. The flowchart in Figure 28.10 indicates that the organism from the case history
was beta-hemolytic.
The final relevant test in this flowchart involves susceptibility to the antibiotic bacitracin, which identifies the most
pathogenic group of beta-hemolytic streptococci. The betahemolytic streptococci are subdivided into many different
groups, known as Lancefield groups, based on differences
in the composition of a carbohydrate antigen anchored
to peptidoglycan. These cell wall differences are distinguished from each other immunologically and divide the

MARINE BIOLOGICAL LABORATORY

CHAPTER 28

FIGURE 28.11

■ Rebecca Lancefield. In 1918, Dr. Lancefield
joined the Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research in New York
City, where she studied the hemolytic streptococci, known then as
Streptococcus haemolyticus. She was the first to use serum precipitation methods to classify S. haemolyticus into groups according to
differences in cell wall carbohydrate antigens. The basic technique
is still used today and in her honor is known as the Lancefield classification scheme.

streptococci into Lancefield groups A–U. Rebecca Lancefield (Fig. 28.11), for whom the classification scheme is
named, was the first to use immunoprecipitation to group
the streptococci (immunoprecipitation is described in Section 24.2 and eAppendix 3). The vast majority of streptococcal diseases are caused by group A beta-hemolytic
streptococci (also called GAS), defined as the species Streptococcus pyogenes.
Unfortunately, the Lancefield classification procedure is
somewhat time-consuming and not readily amenable as a
rapid identification method. However, the group A betahemolytic streptococci are uniformly susceptible to the
antibiotic bacitracin. Thus, a simple antibiotic disk susceptibility test can be used to indicate GAS (that is, S. pyogenes). But beware—many bacteria are bacitracin sensitive,
so, like the catalase test, to be useful for identification the
bacitracin test must be used in conjunction with an algorithm. The technician must follow the appropriate algorithm before assigning importance to this or any other test
result. It is irrelevant, for instance, if an alpha-hemolytic
organism is bacitracin susceptible. Some of these may exist,
but they are not associated with disease. The organism in
our case of necrotizing fasciitis, however, was beta-hemolytic, so bacitracin susceptibility indicated that the organism was S. pyogenes.
The other tests named in Figure 28.10 are equally
important for identifying Gram-positive infectious agents.

■

CLINICAL MICROBIOLOGY AND EPIDEMIOLOGY

■

1147

For example, Streptococcus pneumoniae is an important
cause of pneumonia. Like S. pyogenes, S. pneumoniae is a
catalase-negative, Gram-positive coccus; but unlike S. pyogenes, it is alpha-hemolytic. Optochin susceptibility is a
property closely associated with S. pneumoniae, while other
alpha-hemolytic strains of streptococci are resistant to this
compound. Thus, an optochin susceptibility disk test is a
useful tool for identifying S. pneumoniae.
Coagulase catalyzes a key reaction used to distinguish
the pathogen Staphylococcus aureus, which causes boils and
bone infections, from other staphylococci, such as the normal skin species Staphylococcus epidermidis. To conduct a
coagulase test, a tube of plasma is inoculated with the suspect organism. If the organism is S. aureus, it will secrete
the enzyme coagulase. Coagulase will convert fibrinogen
to fibrin and produce a clotted, or coagulated, tube of
plasma. Coagulase-negative staphylococci can still be medically important, however. Staphylococcus saprophiticus, for
instance, is an important cause of urinary tract infections.
It can be distinguished from S. epidermidis by resistance to
novobiocin.

Thought Question

28.3 Use Figure 28.10 to identify the organism from the
following case: A sample was taken from a boil located on
the arm of a 62-year-old man. Bacteriological examination
revealed the presence of Gram-positive cocci that were also
catalase-positive, coagulase-positive, and novobiocin resistant.

Rapid Techniques for
Pathogen Identification

Conventional, petri plate–dependent methods used to
identify pathogens take a minimum of 3 days to complete
and may take several weeks, depending on the pathogen.
Brucella species, for instance, can take 14–21 days to grow
in blood culture bottles. The delay may be annoying for
the physician, but agonizing for the patient awaiting a cure.
Today, technologies that offer more rapid identifications,
sometimes within minutes, have been introduced into the
clinical laboratory.
Nucleic acid–based pathogen detection. Most diagnostic
laboratories today use rapid DNA-based methods in addition to conventional petri dish microbiology. The DNAbased methods take mere hours to detect and identify
bacteria and viruses. DNA/RNA detection methods are
especially useful for viruses, which otherwise require elaborate electron microscopy to view morphology, or serology
to detect an increased presence of antiviral antibodies. The
problem with serology is that by the time these antibodies

1148

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

become detectable in blood, the patient is usually already
recovering from the disease.
The polymerase chain reaction (PCR). PCR is the most

widely used molecular method in the diagnostic toolbox (see Section 7.6, Fig. 7.28). DNA primers that bind
to unique genes in a pathogen’s genome can be used to
specifically amplify DNA or RNA present in a clinical or
environmental specimen thought to harbor a pathogen.
Successful amplification is visualized as an appropriately
sized DNA fragment (amplicon) in agarose gels following
electrophoresis.
Why is PCR needed to detect the presence of these
nucleic acids? Without the PCR amplification steps, clinical
samples usually provide too little nucleic acid from infecting microorganisms to be detected. For example, sputum
samples containing Mycobacterium tuberculosis, the cause
of tuberculosis, yield minuscule amounts of bacterial DNA.
Amplifying M. tuberculosis nucleic acid by PCR, however,
will turn one copy of DNA into billions of copies.
PCR is very quick. Preparing a clinical specimen for PCR
by extracting the DNA or RNA usually takes less than an
hour. PCR itself is completed in 1–2 hours. Detection of
the PCR-amplified DNA by DNA gel electrophoresis takes
an additional 1–2 hours. So, what might take 2–3 days (or
sometimes weeks) using biochemical algorithms may take
less than a day using PCR.
The table in eTopic 28.2 lists several instances in which
DNA detection tests are useful. A specific example presented in Figure 28.12 illustrates the use of PCR to
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

–

(bp)

SCHOOL OF VETERINARY MEDICINE, UC DAVIS

1,030
515
300

150
+

FIGURE 28.12

■

Multiplex PCR identification of Clostridium

botulinum. C. botulinum cells are typed by which toxin genes a
strain possesses, not on the basis of surface antigens. Isolates can
be typed in a single PCR reaction that includes primer pairs specific
for each of the four major toxin genes: types A, B, E, and F. Because
multiple products are sought in a single reaction, this is called multiplex PCR. Each lane in the agarose gel was loaded with multiplex
products from different isolates of C. botulinum and subjected
to electrophoresis. The slower-moving fragments (toward top of
gel) are larger than those moving farther down the gel toward the
positive pole. Lane 1, DNA size markers; lane 2, type A (cntA); lane
3, type B (cntB); lane 4, type E (cntE); lane 5, type F (cntF); lane 6,
types A, B, and F; lane 7, types B, E, and F; lane 8, types A, B, E, and F.

type different strains of the anaerobic pathogen Clostridium botulinum, the cause of food-borne botulism. These
organisms are not typed serologically, as is the case for
Streptococcus pneumoniae. C. botulinum is divided into different types based on the neurotoxin genes they possess. In
this example, multiplex PCR was used to simultaneously
search for these toxin genes. Multiplex PCR uses multiple
sets of primers, one pair for each gene, combined in a single tube with a specimen. Care must be taken to be sure
that the primers chosen make different-sized products, do
not interfere with each other, and do not produce artifactual (biologically false) products that can confuse interpretation. Multiplex PCR can help identify sets of specific
genes present in a single species or can screen for the presence of multiple pathogens in a clinical sample. In the latter, primer sets are designed to amplify genes unique to
each pathogen.
PCR can quickly identify microbial DNA in clinical
samples, but what about RNA? Many RNA viruses cause
disease. Can molecular tools identify them?

Case History: West Nile Virus

A 55-year-old man was admitted to a local hospital complaining of headache, high fever, and neck stiffness. The man
appeared confused and disoriented. He also complained of
muscle weakness. History indicated he had received several
mosquito bites approximately 2 weeks previously. A blood specimen was sent to the laboratory. The report the following day
indicated that the patient was suffering from West Nile virus.
West Nile virus (WNV) is an RNA-containing virus that
infects primarily birds and culicine mosquitoes (a group of
mosquitoes that can transmit human diseases). Humans
and horses serve only as incidental, dead-end hosts for
the virus. Replication of virus in this bird-mosquito-bird
cycle begins when adult mosquitoes emerge in early spring
and continues until fall. Among humans, the incidence
of disease peaks in late summer and early fall. Birds provide an efficient means of geographic spread of the virus.
As a result, over the past two decades the virus has spread
throughout much of the United States.
Isolating a disease-causing virus is extremely challenging. Most laboratories are not equipped for the special
tissue culture techniques required to grow viruses. Consequently, many viral infections, including human West
Nile virus infections, have been diagnosed by measuring
the antibody response of the patient (described shortly).
For instance, the presence of West Nile virus–specific IgM
in cerebrospinal fluid is a good indicator of current WNV
infection, but it is indirect and inconclusive. Real-time
PCR is a molecular test that can quickly reveal the presence
of the viral RNA.

CHAPTER 28
Conversion of mRNA to cDNA by reverse transcription
5′

3′
RT

3′

ATCGTGC
TAGCTCG

5′

5′

3′
RT

ATCGTGC
TAGCTCG

3′

5′
RT

5′

ATCGTGC
TAGCTCG

3′

5′

5′

3′

3′

5′

1. A virus-specific DNA
primer is added to an
RNA prep from a clinical
sample.
2. Reverse transcriptase
(RT) copies first cDNA
strand.
3. RT digests and
displaces mRNA
and copies second
cDNA strand.
4. The result is
double-stranded cDNA.

FIGURE 28.13

■ Identifying viruses by reverse transcription
PCR. Reverse transcriptase uses viral RNA as a template to make

DNA. The DNA can then be amplified using standard PCR methods.

■

CLINICAL MICROBIOLOGY AND EPIDEMIOLOGY

■

1149

The trick is in the method used to quantify the result. In
one method, a third, fluorescent oligonucleotide (called the
probe) is added to the PCR reaction (see Fig. 12.13A). The
probe contains a fluorescent dye at the 3´ end and a chemical dye at the 5´ end that quenches (absorbs) energy emitted
from the fluorescent dye. As long as the two chemicals are
kept in close proximity by the intact probe, no light is emitted. The probe is designed to anneal to a sequence between
the binding sites of the two other primers (modifications on
the ends of the probe prevent it from being used as a primer).
So, in a successful amplification, Taq polymerase will synthesize DNA from the two outside primers and degrade the
probe oligonucleotide as it passes through that area. This
cleavage separates the dye from the quencher, and the dye
begins to fluoresce. The greater the amount of cDNA there
was to begin with, the fewer cycles it takes to register a fluorescence increase over background (Fig. 28.14).
Thought Question
RNA, then which patient would have the higher viral load in
their blood?

B.

---

-----------------------------

10,000

Patient 1

1,000
100
10
0
–1,000

CT = 10

----------------------

- ---

RT-qPCR is used routinely for the high-throughput diagnosis of many viral pathogens, including the West Nile virus.
Because West Nile virus (Flavi- A.
viridae family) contains single- Cycle number Amount of DNA
0
1
stranded RNA, its RNA must
1
2
be converted to DNA using
2
4
3
8
reverse transcriptase before PCR
4
16
can be attempted. The quantita5
32
6
64
tive advantage of RT-qPCR is
7
128
that you can estimate the num8
256
9
512
ber of virus particles present in
10
1,024
the sample by the number of
11
2,048
viral RNA molecules there.
12
4,096
13
8,192
The basic technique is as fol14
16,384
lows: RNA is first extracted from
15
32,768
16
65,536
the sample and a DNA primer
17
131,072
specific to a viral RNA sequence
18
262,144
19
524,288
is added. Once annealed, the
20
1,048,576
primer allows reverse tran21
2,097,152
22
4,194,304
scriptase to synthesize the first
23
8,388,608
strand of a complementary DNA
24
16,777,216
(cDNA) (Fig. 28.13). Reverse
25
33,554,432
26
67,108,864
transcriptase then digests the
27
134,217,728
initial RNA while synthesizing
28
268,435,456
29
536,870,912
the opposite DNA strand. The
30
1,073,741,824
more virus particles there are in
31
1,400,000,000
32
1,500,000,000
the sample (viral load), the more
33
1,550,000,000
viral RNA will be present and
34
1,580,000,000
the more cDNA product will
be made. The cDNA is then amplified by PCR using two
specific primers and a heat-stable DNA polymerase such as
Taq polymerase (see Section 12.2, Fig. 12.13).

28.4 If the results in Figure 28.14 came from testing for HIV

PCR baseline-subtracted RFU

Reverse transcription quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR).

-----

Patient 2

CT = 22

0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34
Cycle

FIGURE 28.14

■

Results of quantitative (real-time) PCR.

A. The exponential increase in PCR products after each cycle of
hybridization and polymerization. The switch to yellow indicates
the point where the increase in product plateaus because the primers have been exhausted. B. There is an increase in relative fluorescence units (RFUs) as the fluorescent dye is released from the
dual-labeled probe during quantitative PCR. The red line indicates
background fluorescence threshold. The cycle at which fluorescence rises above background is the cycle threshold (CT). In patient
1, the dashed curve shows that fluorescent PCR product remained
flat for the first ten cycles because the amount of DNA made, and
therefore the level of fluorescent dye released remained below
background. After cycle 10, fluorescence increased logarithmically:
CT = 10. For patient 2, the solid blue curve representing PCR product remained below detection for 22 cycles, and then increased:
CT = 22. The more starting DNA there is, the sooner RFU values
will increase over background (that is, the fewer cycles will be
needed to see the increase over background). The slope eventually
decreases because the fluorescent probe has become limiting.

1150

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

Rapid, next-generation DNA sequencing. In 2014, a

14-year-old boy with severe combined immunodeficiency
(SCID) was in a medically induced coma at a Wisconsin hospital. His brain had swollen with fluid as a result of encephalitis, but its cause was unknown. The usual diagnostic tests
and antibiotic treatments did not provide answers or relief.
In a last attempt to fi nd the infection’s cause, the boy’s physicians called Joseph DeRisi and Charles Chiu at UC San
Francisco, who are renowned for their use of next-generation DNA sequencing (see Chapter 7) to identify pathogens.
The scientists used this technology to perform an unbiased
metagenomic analysis of all the DNA contained in the boy’s
cerebrospinal fluid. After sequencing 3 million DNA fragments, the answer was apparent. There, staring out from
among the sequences of the boy’s genome, were DNA
sequences of the spirochete Leptospira santarosai, an easily
treatable organism. After being given intravenous high-dose
penicillin for 7 days, the boy eventually recovered.
Leptospirosis is a zoonotic disease. The organism
is excreted in the urine of infected animals, usually into
nearby bodies of freshwater. The child probably contracted
the disease during a trip to Puerto Rico, where he swam in
freshwater. Why didn’t immunological tests initially identify antibodies to Leptospira? The immunocompromised
state of the boy likely prevented him from making detectible
amounts of anti-leptospiral antibodies. DNA, then, was the
only way. This metagenomic strategy to detect pathogens is
not widely used yet because of its complexity, but someday
it could be used to diagnose any infection.
Rapid DNA sequencing by mass spectrometry. The future

of nucleic acid–based diagnostic microbiology includes a
new technology that combines PCR with mass spectrometry (MS). PCR can amplify DNA directly from clinical samples using primers that target conserved bacterial sequences
(for instance, 16S rRNA genes). MS then analyzes the
molecular weight of the “amplicon” and sequences it. As
described for proteins in eAppendix 3, sequencing involves
electron spray ionization to progressively shorten the PCR
product one base at a time, and mass spectrometry to calculate the weight of each new, shortened fragment. The
difference in molecular weights between the initial DNA
fragment and the progressively shortened ones is used to
determine the identity of each base removed and, thus, the
sequence of the fragment. Because culturing would no longer be needed, this technology could eventually replace the
time-honored petri dish.
Programmable RNA sensors. Zika virus is a fast-emerging,

insect-borne pathogen that causes serious developmental
defects, such as microcephaly, in infected fetal brains (see
the Current Research Highlight in Chapter 26, and Section
28.4). The virus has been declared a public health emergency

that requires a quick and easy diagnostic test. Keith Pardee
(University of Toronto) and Alexander Green (Arizona State
University), shown in Figure 28.15A, with a team of scientists led by James Collins, have designed just such a test
using synthetic-biology approaches (see Section 12.5). It is a
paper-based test that takes only 3 hours to complete.
The basis of the test is illustrated in Figure 28.15B. The
first step is to generate a “trigger” RNA that will ultimately
flip a riboswitch sensor. To make sufficient amounts of the
trigger RNA, a trigger primer that binds to a unique Zika
virus RNA sequence is added to a serum sample extract
that contains Zika virus RNA. Reverse polymerase uses
the primer to generate a cDNA template. To amplify copies of trigger RNA, a second, hybrid primer is added whose
3´ end binds to the Zika virus cDNA and whose 5´ end
includes a T7 phage promoter sequence. T7 RNA polymerase is then added to the new double-stranded cDNA to
generate multiple copies of Zika trigger RNA. This amplification process is called isothermic DNA amplification
because thermocycling, as used by PCR, is not needed.
The trigger RNA copies derived from the original infecting
virus will trip the riboswitch in the next phase of the test.
The synthetically constructed riboswitch sensor is shown
in Figure 28.15C. The RNA switch contains a hairpin
structure that blocks translation of downstream LacZ RNA
by sequestering the LacZ ribosome-binding site (RBS) and
start codon. This is called a “toehold” switch. When Zika
trigger RNA (made previously) is added, the trigger RNA
binds to the toehold switch and releases the LacZ RBS and
start codon. Translation of the mRNA produces LacZ protein that will convert a yellow substrate to a purple product (a
positive test). Once the trigger RNA is added to the switch,
the mixture is placed on paper disks containing protein synthesis components, which, after an hour, are analyzed by an
electronic reader. This rapid test product is not yet on the
market, but its development provides a glimpse of what this
technology can bring to the field of rapid diagnostics.
Serology-based pathogen detection. In

addition to
directly identifying a pathogen by culture isolation or by
PCR detection, evidence for a pathogen can be found in a
patient’s serum, as seen in the following case history.

Case History: Ebola Outbreak

On December 26, 2013, an 18-month-old West African boy in
the town of Meliandou, Guinea, fell ill with a mysterious disease of high fever, black stools, and vomiting. He died 2 days
later. By January 2014, several members of the boy’s family, as
well as staff at the nearby Guéckédou hospital, had developed
similar symptoms that included severe bloody diarrhea. All
died. Then, in February, a member of the boy’s family traveled to the capital city, Conakry, where he, too, fell ill and

CHAPTER 28
A.

■

CLINICAL MICROBIOLOGY AND EPIDEMIOLOGY

B.

■

1151

Sample
RNA

SETH KROLL/WYSS INSTITUTE AT HARVARD UNIVERSITY

Extract RNA
Toehold
switch
sensor

Zika RNA

Trigger
primer

Reverse
transcriptase
+ RNase H

T7 RNA
polymerase

cDNA
Chimeric T7/Zika
primer
T7 promoter

C.
RBS

Toehold

Conserved
sequence
region

AUG
Repressed
lacZ gene

Active
lacZ gene

Activated switch

Negative
Trigger RNA

FIGURE 28.15 ■ Diagnostic riboswitch sensor (toehold switch sensor) for
detecting Zika virus. A. Keith Pardee (left) and Alexander Green designed the new

LacZ

Positive
PARDEE ET AL. 2016.
CELL 165: 1255–1266.

Switch RNA
sensor

ds DNA

rapid test for Zika virus. Here they are looking at 500 paper-based reactions in two
384 well plates. B. Method to generate trigger RNA from Zika virus particles present in a clinical sample. C. Toehold switch sensor. Binding of
trigger RNA to the toehold sensor releases the sequestered RBS and start codon and enables translation of the LacZ message. Inset: Negative (left) and positive (right) tests for Zika virus. Source: Pardee et al. 2016 Rapid, Low cost Detection of Zika virus using Programmable Biomolecular Components.

died. The cause remained unknown, and no precautions were
taken. Consequently, over the next month the illness spread to
four other prefectures in Guinea, killing at least half of those
infected. In March, a World Health Organization (WHO)
laboratory at the Pasteur Institute in France finally identified the agent as the Zaire strain of Ebola virus, the most
deadly form of this filovirus. Laboratory confirmation tests
included RT-qPCR, viral antigen detection, and antibody
ELISA tests. Unfortunately, identification of the virus came
too late to stop the horrific Ebola epidemic that swept through
western Africa in 2014–15, killing thousands.
Ebola is another RNA virus, but one far more deadly
than the West Nile virus identified in the earlier case history. Pathogenesis of Ebola was discussed in Section 26.6
(Fig. 26.25). This case includes many elements of epidemiology (discussed later), all of which rely on an ability to
identify the presence of the virus. Diagnosis during this
epidemic involved three techniques. We already discussed
RT-qPCR, but what serological tests were used?

The ELISA test. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay

(ELISA) is an immunological technique that can detect
antigens or antibodies present in picogram quantities. (A
picogram is one one-thousandth of a nanogram.) One
form of ELISA detects serum antibodies. It is carried out
in a 96-well microtiter plate, which allows multiple patient
serum samples to be tested simultaneously. An antigen
from the virus (Ebola in this case) is attached (adsorbed) to
the plastic of the wells (Fig. 28.16). Albumin or powdered
milk is used to block the remaining sites on the plastic that
could result in false positives. Patient serum is then added.
Ebola-specific antibodies present in the serum will
react with the antigen attached to the microtiter plate.
The antigen-antibody complex is then reacted with rabbit antihuman IgG to which an enzyme has been attached,
or conjugated (for example, horseradish peroxidase). The
result is a chain of viral antigen connected to patient antibody connected to rabbit antibody-enzyme that links the
enzyme to the well. The chromogenic substrate for the
enzyme is added next (for example, tetramethylbenzidine).

1152

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)

Antigen capture
4. If Ebola antigen is present, the conjugated antibody
will be captured by the complex. The addition of
substrate will lead to production of a colored product.
Substrate

Product
3. Enzyme-conjugated
anti-Ebola antibody is
then added.

Albumin
ELISA plate

2. Ebola antigen from patient
serum will be captured by
antibody on plate.
Ebola antigen
Albumin

Plastic of
microtiter plate

1. Anti-Ebola monoclonal
antibody is attached to
the plate surface.

FIGURE 28.17

■ Antigen-capture ELISA. This ELISA technique
captures Ebola antigens circulating in patient serum.

Rinse off excess and
add patient serum.

Human anti-Ebola
antibody from patient
serum binds to Ebola
antigen.

Wash off unbound
serum and add
conjugated antibody.

Rabbit antihuman IgG
antibody with attached
(conjugated) enzyme

Wash off unbound
conjugated antibody
and add substrate.

Rate of conversion of
substrate to colored
product is proportional to
the amount of anti-Ebola
antibody that was present
in the patient’s serum.

FIGURE 28.16

■ Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA). ELISA to detect anti-Ebola antibodies circulating in

patient serum. The 96-well plate can be used to make dilutions of
a single patient’s serum to more precisely determine the amount of
anti-Ebola antibody, or it can be used to test samples from multiple
patients.

If enzyme-conjugated antibody has bound to human IgG
captured by the antigen in the well, the enzyme will convert the substrate to a colored product (blue for tetramethylbenzidine). Enzyme activity can be measured with
an ELISA plate reader. The amount of colored product
formed, detected as absorbance with a spectrophotometer,
will be an indication of the amount of anti-Ebola antibody
present in the patient sample.

Thought Question

28.5 Why does adding albumin or powdered milk prevent
false positives in ELISA?

Antigen capture is another ELISA technique, but in this
instance, anti-Ebola antibody, not viral antigen, is adsorbed
to the wells of a microtiter plate (Fig. 28.17). Patient serum
is then added to the wells. If the serum contains Ebola antigen, the antigen will be captured by the antibody attached
to the well. Then a second, enzyme-conjugated antibody
against the Ebola antigen is added. The more antigen there
is in the serum, the more enzyme-linked antibody will affix
to the well. Addition of the appropriate chromogenic substrate will produce a colored product that can be measured.
Antibody against Ebola, or any other viral pathogen,
may be easier to detect than viral antigen because antibodies will be present at higher levels than the virus itself. But
since there is a delay between the time when the virus is
first present in serum and when the body manages to make
antibody, a speedier diagnosis can be made by directly
detecting viral antigen.

CHAPTER 28

CLINICAL MICROBIOLOGY AND EPIDEMIOLOGY

■

1153

B.

DR. M.S. MITCHELL/CDC

© GLORIA J. DELISLE AND LEWIS TOMALTY. QUEENS UNIVERSITY,ONTARIO.
LICENSE: ASM MICROBE LIBRARY

A.

■

FIGURE 28.18

■ Fluorescent antibody stain. A. Streptococcus pneumoniae capsules (cells approx. 0.8 μm; fluorescence microscopy).
The capsule is the green halo. The center of the halo is the cell. B. Legionella pneumophila (cells approx. 1 μm in length) from a respiratory
tract specimen.

Thought Questions

28.6 Why does finding IgM to West Nile virus indicate a
current infection? Why wouldn’t finding IgG do the same?
28.7 Specific IgG antibodies against an infectious agent can
persist for years in the bloodstream, long after the infection
resolves. How is it possible, then, that IgG antibody titers can
be used to diagnose recently acquired diseases such as infectious mononucleosis? Couldn’t the antibody be from an old
infection?

Fluorescent antibody staining. Chapter 26 presents a case

history involving an 80-year-old nursing-home resident
who contracted pneumonia caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae. The laboratory diagnosis was probably made
using the biochemical algorithm previously described.
However, there are over 80 serological types of S. pneumoniae, each one containing a different capsular antigen. How can the lab identify which antigenic type has
caused the infection? One way is to stain the organism
with antibodies.
Figure 28.18A illustrates the result of staining a smear
of the isolated streptococcus with fluorescently tagged antibodies directed against a specific antigenic type of capsule.
Viewed under a fluorescence microscope, the organism
is “painted” green when the right antibody binds to the
capsule. In the case of pneumonia, this knowledge probably will not help in treating the patient, but its broader
value is in determining whether a single type of organism
is the cause of an outbreak of pneumonia, which in turn is
of epidemiological value for identifying the source of the
bacterium.

On the other hand, fluorescent antibody staining techniques are critically important for rapidly identifying organisms that are difficult to grow. Infected tissues can be subjected
to direct fluorescent antibody staining. Figure 28.18B, for
example, shows a direct fluorescent antibody stain of pleural
fluid from a patient with Legionnaires’ disease.
Identifying pathogens using mass spectrometry. Mass

spectrometry (MS) was briefly described in Section 10.6
in the discussion of proteomics. This technology is now
able to identify whole bacteria in clinical labs. One such
technique is called matrix-associated laser desorption/
ionization–time-of-fl ight mass spectrometry (MALDITOF-MS). Whole bacteria or an extract is mixed with a
matrix solution and spotted on a metal plate (Fig. 28.19)
that absorbs energy from a laser and converts it to heat. The
heat ionizes proteins in the sample.
Matrix-associated laser desorption/ionization is a soft
ionization technique that leaves proteins intact but ionized.
An electrostatic field then accelerates the ionized proteins
through a vacuum tube, and their time of flight before
hitting a detector is measured. How long a protein takes
to reach the detector depends on its mass-to-charge ratio.
Large proteins with a high mass-to-charge ratio take longer
to travel than small proteins with a small mass-to-charge
ratio. The results are printed as a series of peaks. The pathogen can be identified by comparing the pattern of peaks
with those in a database of organisms (Fig. 28.20).
MALDI-TOF-MS has been incorporated into the work
flows of many diagnostic microbiology laboratories across
the world. The procedure is very fast. Once a sample is
loaded, an identification result can be delivered in approximately 15–30 seconds. In most cases of infection, a single

1154

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

1.00

4. Time of flight for each
protein is recorded
and graphed.

Neutral
field (drift)

Laser

TOF

Peak intensity

MS detector [mass to charge (m/z ratio)]

3. Electrostatic field
accelerates proteins
through a vacuum tube.

–

–

Protein and matrix

0.00

Electrostatic
field
(acceleration)

+

1. Whole colony or extract
is mixed with matrix solution
and spotted on metal plate.

1,013

1,123

5. Pathogen is identified
by comparing patterns
of peaks against database.

2. Laser ionizes
protein-matrix mix.

A. Neisseria meningitidis

FIGURE 28.19

■ MALDI-TOF-MS identification of
pathogenic bacteria.

B. Neisseria gonorrhoeae
×104

×104
5

2.0
Intensity (arbitrary units)

4
Intensity (arbitrary units)

513

MS profile [mass to charge (m/z) ratio]

+

3

2

1.5

1.0

0.5

1

0

0.50

0.0
8,000

6,000

10,000 12,000 14,000 16,000 m/z

6,000

Mass/charge ratio

FIGURE 28.20

■

8,000

10,000 12,000

14,000 16,000 m/z

Mass/charge ratio

MALDI-TOF-MS comparison of pathogenic Neisseria species.

colony isolate must be used for identification, but the
technology can now identify bacteria directly from blood
(sepsis) or urine (cystitis).

Other Pathogens Identified by
Conventional or Rapid Diagnostics

Space does not permit a complete listing of the methods used
to identify microbial pathogens, but Table 28.3 presents
some additional examples. In general, bacteria that are easily
cultured are grown in the laboratory, after which biochemical

tests are performed. Bacterial, viral, and fungal species that
are difficult to grow are typically identified using immunological techniques that either identify a microbial antigen
present in infected tissues or measure a rise in antibody titer.
Nucleic acid–based methodologies are also used to identify
organisms that are difficult to grow. Eukaryotic microbial
parasites such as Plasmodium species (the cause of malaria),
Giardia lamblia (which causes giardiasis, a diarrheal disease),
and Entamoeba histolytica (the cause of amebic dysentery) can
be identified via their telltale morphologies under the microscope, making biochemical tests unnecessary.

1156

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

the strip components are working. Figure 28.21B shows results of a test for
Control line
Test line
Legionella antibodies.
C-ps derived from S. pneumoniae
Two properties that are critical to
Other components
Antipneumococcal C-ps colloidal
any POC test are sensitivity and specgold-labeled rabbit polyclonal antibody
ificity. Sensitivity measures how
Antipneumococcal C-ps solid-phase
often a test will be positive if a
rabbit polyclonal antibody
patient has the disease. SensitivSolid-phase goat antirabbit IgG antibody
Immunoconjugates
ity reflects how small a concentration of antigen the test can
B.
detect. In contrast to sensitivity, specificity measures how
often a test will be negative if a patient does not have the
disease. Specificity reflects how well a test can distinguish
between two closely related antigens (for example, StrepControl
tococcus strains carrying group A versus group B capsular
Test
antigens). Assays with high specificity and sensitivity are
valuable diagnostic tools.
Commercial POC tests are widely available for the
Sample well
diagnosis of bacterial and viral infections and for parasitic
diseases, including malaria (Table 28.4). However, as convenient as these tests are, sensitivity may be compromised
■
FIGURE 28.21 Principle of immunochromatographic
rapid diagnostic tests. A. The example is a test for the presence
in the quest for a speedy result. Some tests exhibit insufof Streptococcus pneumoniae in sputum. An extract of sputum is
ficient sensitivity and should therefore be coupled with
placed onto one end of the strip where S. pneumoniae capsular
confirmatory tests when the results are negative (one test
antigen (C-ps) will bind antipneumococcal C-ps polyclonal antibodthat can produce false negatives is the Streptococcus pyogenes
ies. The resulting immunoconjugates move by capillary action to
rapid antigen detection test). Other POC tests need to be
the upper membrane and are captured by the antipneumococcal
confirmed when positive; for instance, a rapid malaria POC
C-ps solid-phase polyclonal antibodies, thereby forming sandwich
conjugates in the sample. A positive test result is indicated by the
test can produce false positives.
presence of both a test and a control line, whereas a negative result
There are several advantages and some disadvantages to
is indicated by the appearance of only a single control line. B. ImPOC rapid tests. The advantages are:
A.

REPRODUCED BY KIND PERMISSION OF THERMO
FISHER SCIENTIFIC INC

Dropping of
specimen

munochromatography test for anti–Legionella antibodies. Serum
placed on strip 1 contained antibodies to Legionella.

The typical POC test approved for use involves an
immunochromatographic assay. The test for Streptococcus
pneumoniae capsular antigen shown in Figure 28.21A
is one example. This particular immunochromatographic
test, called a “red colloidal gold” test, involves extracting
the relevant antigen (for example, capsule antigen) from
a clinical specimen and placing a few drops of the extract
on a test strip containing rabbit antibodies to the antigen.
The antibodies have red colloidal gold particles attached
to them. The antigen-antibody complexes, if present, move
by capillary action to the upper level of the strip, where
they are captured by a line of more anti-antigen antibodies embedded in the strip, forming an antibody-antigenantibody sandwich. The colloidal gold particles accumulate
and eventually produce a red test line, indicating the presence of the antigen. In contrast, rabbit antibodies that are
not bound to the antigen pass through the test line but
are captured by goat antirabbit IgG antibodies on a control
line, once again forming a red control line that indicates

■

Culturing is not required.

■

The clinician can immediately initiate specific antibiotic
therapy.

■

The consumption of antibiotics is avoided in the case of
a viral infection, and antiviral therapy, if possible, can be
initiated.

■

Infection chains among patients with similar symptoms
are revealed.

■

Compliance with patients who are difficult to reach is
improved.

The disadvantages include:
■

The tests provide no data on pathogen antibiotic
sensitivity.

■

There is a higher risk of the technician becoming
infected.

■

Double or multiple infections are more likely to be overlooked than in culture.

■

The levels of false positive or false negative results can
vary for different POC tests.

1158

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

The newer nucleic acid–based tests described earlier
exhibit better sensitivity and specificity than most immunochromatographic assays, but they require more expensive instrumentation and training. In the coming years,
further evolution of POC tests may lead to new diagnostic approaches, such as panel testing that targets all possible
pathogens suspected in a specific clinical setting. The development of next-generation serology-based and/or molecularbased multiplex tests will certainly facilitate quicker diagnosis
and improved patient care. We also saw earlier how synthetic
biology may revolutionize rapid diagnostics, as exemplified
by the newly described Zika virus riboswitch test.

To Summarize
■

■

■

■

■

■

■

Direct Gram or acid-fast stains are appropriate procedures to perform on some specimens. The results guide
the direction of subsequent testing.
Knowing which patient specimens should be sterile
and which should contain normal microbiota informs
the selection of media for processing the specimen. So,
too, does understanding whether anaerobes may be
expected.
Selective media are used to prevent growth of normal
microbiota while permitting growth of others (such as
Gram-positive bacteria versus Gram-negative bacteria).
Differential media exploit the unique biochemical
properties of a pathogen to distinguish it from similarlooking nonpathogens.
Growth-dependent pathogen identification uses
numerous, simultaneously run biochemical tests. An
algorithm or a dichotomous key is applied to the
results to identify the species. Different algorithms (or
decision trees) are applied to Gram-positive and Gramnegative bacteria.
Pathogens can be identified with biochemical analyses (useful for bacteria), molecular techniques (for
example, PCR; useful for bacteria or viruses), and/or
immunological methods (for example, ELISA; useful
for bacteria or viruses).
Fluorescent antibody staining can rapidly identify
organisms or antigens present in tissues.
Point-of-care (POC) diagnostic tests can rapidly identify the cause of an infectious disease. Therapy can be
initiated rapidly following a positive result. Sensitivity
(the ability to detect small amounts of the pathogen)
and specificity (the ability to distinguish one pathogen
from another) for any point of care test are factors used
to evaluate how accurate the test is at eliminating false
negative and false positive reactions, respectively.

■

■

Immunochromatography is the primary platform for
POC testing.
A drawback to POC tests is that simultaneous, multiple
infections may be missed.

28.3

Principles of
Epidemiology

In Section 25.1 we discussed how a new infectious disease
can be identified using a version of Koch’s postulates. But
how do scientists track the spread of a new disease, or find
and identify new variants of influenza virus that develop
thousands of miles away, and then predict when that virus
will arrive on our “doorsteps” many months in advance?
We start our discussion of epidemiology with a case in
which scientists had to trace a heinous criminal act back to
its source.

Case History: Inhalation Anthrax

On October 16, 2001, a 56-year-old African-American U.S.
Postal Service worker became ill with a low-grade fever, chills,
sore throat, headache, and malaise. These symptoms were
followed by minimal dry cough, chest heaviness, shortness of
breath, night sweats, nausea, and vomiting. On October 19,
the man arrived at a local hospital, where he presented with
a normal body temperature and normal blood pressure. He
was not in acute distress, but he had decreased breath sounds
and rhonchi (dry sounds in lungs due to congestion). No skin
lesions were observed, and he did not smoke. Total white blood
cell count was normal, but there was a left shift in the differential—that is, more polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs;
see Section 26.3). A chest X-ray showed bilateral pleural effusions (accumulation of fluids in the lung) and a small, rightlower-lobe air space opacity. Within 11 hours, blood cultures
taken upon admission grew Bacillus anthracis. Ciprofloxacin, rifampin, and clindamycin antibiotic treatments were
initiated, and the patient recovered. His job at the post office
was simply to sort mail.
From October 4 to November 2, 2001, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), and various state and
local public health authorities reported 10 confirmed cases of
inhalational anthrax and 12 confirmed or suspected cases
of cutaneous anthrax in persons who worked in the District
of Columbia, Florida, New Jersey, and New York. Many of
them were postal workers. It was clear that a biological attack
was in progress.
Painstaking detective work by federal agents and epidemiology scientists proved that the strain of Bacillus anthracis

CLINICAL MICROBIOLOGY AND EPIDEMIOLOGY

1159

A. Endemic versus epidemic

Endemic

Epidemic

Time
B.

Endemic, Epidemic, or Pandemic?

The terms “endemic” and “epidemic” are often used when
referring to disease outbreaks. A disease is endemic if it
is always present in a population at a low frequency. For
example, Lyme disease, caused by the spirochete Borrelia
burgdorferi, is endemic to the northeastern United States
because the organism has found a reservoir in deer and
ticks. Recall that a reservoir is an animal, bird, or insect
that harbors the infectious agent and is indigenous to a
geographic area. Humans become infected only when they
come in contact with the reservoir. Thus, the disease incidence is low but relatively constant. A disease is epidemic,
on the other hand, when larger-than-normal numbers of
individuals in a population become infected over a short
time. Epidemics arise, in part, because of rapid and direct
human-to-human transmission. Food-source epidemics,
for instance, are discussed in Chapter 16.
Figure 28.22A illustrates the difference in the frequency of cases observed between endemic and epidemic

■

AP PHOTO/JEAN-MARC BOUJU

used in the 2001 anthrax attack had the same genetic signature as a strain used by Bruce Ivins, a scientist working
at the army’s Fort Detrick biodefense laboratory. Although
his involvement was never proved, Dr. Ivins took his own
life as agents were about to arrest him.
The word “epidemiology” is derived from the Greek
meaning “that which befalls man.” In scientific parlance,
epidemiology examines the distribution and determinants of disease frequency in human populations. Put
more simply, epidemiologists determine the source of a
disease outbreak and the factors that influence how many
individuals will succumb to the disease. Epidemiological principles are also used to determine the effectiveness
of therapeutic measures and to identify new syndromes,
such as SARS (severe acute respiratory syndrome), MERS
(Middle East respiratory syndrome), and Lyme disease.
Some of the basic concepts of epidemiology were already
covered in Chapter 26 when we discussed infection cycles.
Now we will explore how those principles are used to
track disease.
Epidemiological early-warning systems require an
extensive organization that coordinates information from
many sources. In the United States, that duty falls to
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
On the world stage, it is the World Health Organization (WHO). Any disease considered highly dangerous or infectious is first reported to local public health
centers, usually within 48 hours of diagnosis. The local
centers forward that information to their state agencies,
which then report to the CDC in Atlanta. This is how
authorities in 2001 quickly recognized that an outbreak
of anthrax was under way.

■

No. of cases of a disease

CHAPTER 28

FIGURE 28.22

■ The difference between endemic and
epidemic disease. A. An endemic disease is continually present at

a low frequency in a population. A sudden rise in disease frequency
constitutes an epidemic. B. A health care worker stands outside a
quarantined area housing Ebola patients in the Ivory Coast. Epidemics can be minimized if infected persons are kept segregated from
the general population (quarantined) to avoid spread of the infectious agent.

disease. An endemic disease can become epidemic if the
population of the reservoir increases, allowing for more frequent human contact; or if the infectious agent evolves to
spread directly from person to person, bypassing the need
for a reservoir. This is the concern with the H5N1 avian flu
virus, which is endemic in animals and birds in Asia (see
Sections 11.2 and eTopic 26.3). A pandemic is an epidemic

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

that occurs over a wide geographic area, usually the world.
Pandemics may be long-lived, such as the bubonic plague
pandemic in the fourteenth century and the AIDS pandemic in the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries;
or they may be short-lived, as with the 1918 flu pandemic.
When discussing a disease, epidemiologists distinguish
between the prevalence and incidence of active cases. Prevalence describes the total number of active cases of a disease
in a given location, regardless of when the case first developed. Incidence, however, refers to the number of new
cases of a disease in that location over a specified time. Incidence reflects the risk a person has of acquiring the disease.
Incidence rates can provide insight into whether efforts to
limit a disease are working. Take a city of 100,000 people.
If the incidence of new cases rises from 10 cases/100,000
population in one year to 30 cases/100,000 population the
next year, then efforts to stem the disease are failing. Prevalence, reflecting the total burden on society, could also
increase over those two years or might remain the same—
say, 500 cases/100,000—if more people are being cured or
perhaps die in that second year despite the increase in new
cases. Endemic diseases maintain relatively constant prevalence and incidence rates. Outbreaks are typically marked
by an increase in both parameters.

A.

100 nm

B.

ANAT GIVON/AP PHOTO

■

DR. FRED MURPHY/CDC

1160

FIGURE 28.23

Finding Patient Zero

When trying to contain the spread of an epidemic, it is vital
to track down the first case of the disease (known as the
index case or patient zero) and then identify everyone who
has had contact with that individual so that they can be
treated or separated from the general population (quarantined) (Fig. 28.22B). When a new disease arises, the epidemiological search for the index case starts only after a
number of patients have been diagnosed and a new disease
syndrome declared. This is what happened with the Ebola
epidemic in 2015.
Identifying an index case within a specific community
is easier if the disease syndrome is already recognized, as
was the case with the 2003 severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) outbreak in Singapore. According to the
World Health Organization, a suspected case of SARS is
defined as an individual who has a fever greater than 38°C
(100.4°F), who exhibits lower respiratory tract symptoms,
and who has traveled to an area of documented disease or
has had contact with a person afflicted with SARS. The
index case in Singapore was a 23-year-old woman who had
stayed on the ninth floor of a hotel in Hong Kong while on
vacation. A physician from southern China who stayed on
the same floor of the hotel during this period is believed
to have been the source of her infection, as well as that of
the index patients who precipitated subsequent outbreaks
in Vietnam and Canada.

■

Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS).

A. The coronavirus that causes SARS (TEM). B. Citizens of China,
including the military, donned surgical masks in 2003 to slow the
spread of SARS.

During the last week of February, the woman, who had
returned to Singapore, developed fever, headache, and a dry
cough. She was admitted to Tan Tock Seng Hospital, Singapore, on March 1 with a low white blood cell count and
patchy consolidation in the lobes of the right lung. Tests
for the usual microbial suspects (Legionella, Chlamydia,
Mycoplasma) were negative. Electron microscopy of nasopharyngeal aspirations showed virus particles with widely
spaced club-like projections (Fig. 28.23A). At the time
of her admission to the hospital, the clinical features and
highly infectious nature of SARS were not known. Thus,
for the first 6 days of hospitalization, the patient was in a
general ward, without barrier infection control measures.
During this period, the index patient infected at least 20
other individuals, including hospital staff, nearby patients,
and visitors.
Within weeks, the WHO named the disease in China
“SARS” and issued travel alerts (discussed further in Section 28.3). These alerts allowed Singapore health officials
to rapidly identify the index patient and her contacts. As a
result, they were able to limit spread of the illness. When all
was said and done, SARS killed fewer than 1,000 victims

CHAPTER 28

■

CLINICAL MICROBIOLOGY AND EPIDEMIOLOGY

■

1161

TABLE 28.5*Notifiable Infectious Diseasesa
Bacterial
Anthrax

Hansen’s disease (leprosy)

Salmonellosis (non–typhoid fever types)

Botulism

Legionellosis

Shigellosis

Brucellosis

Leptospirosis

Staphylococcal enterotoxin

Campylobacter infection

Listeriosis

Streptococcal invasive disease

Chlamydia infection

Lyme disease

Streptococcus pneumoniae, invasive disease

Cholera

Meningitis, infectious

Syphilis

Diphtheria

Pertussis

Tuberculosis

Ehrlichiosis

Plague

Tularemia

E. coli O157:H7 infection

Psittacosis

Typhoid fever

Gonorrhea

Q fever

Vancomycin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (VRSA)

Haemophilus influenzae, invasive disease

Rocky Mountain spotted fever

Viral
Dengue fever

Measles

Rubella and congenital rubella syndrome

Hantavirus infection

Mumps

Smallpox

Hepatitis, viral

Poliomyelitis

Varicella (chickenpox), fatal cases only (all types)

HIV infection

Rabies

Yellow fever

Amebiasis

Giardiasis

Trichinosis

Cryptosporidiosis

Malaria

Cyclosporiasis

Microsporidiosis

Fungal
Coccidioidomycosis
Parasitic

a

For the latest list of notifiable agents, search on “CDC notifiable agents 2016” online.

worldwide, although thousands more became ill and recovered (Fig. 28.23B). Today, SARS remains a threat, but
one of lesser concern. Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
aureus (MRSA), H5N1 avian flu, and H1N1 swine flu are
considered more pressing dangers.

Identifying Disease Trends

How do epidemiologists first recognize that an epidemic is
under way, and then identify the agent and its source? Certain diseases, because of their severity and transmissibility,
are called reportable, or notifiable, diseases (Table 28.5).
Physicians are required to report instances of these diseases to a central health organization, such as the CDC
in the United States and the WHO. This reporting allows
the incidences of certain diseases within a population to
be tracked and upsurges noted. An emerging disease not
on the list of notifiable diseases can be detected as a cluster of patients with unusual symptoms or combinations of
symptoms. Such detection is possible because diseases of

unknown etiology are also reported to health authorities.
A new disease could manifest with common symptoms
(for example, the cough and fever of SARS) that cannot
be linked to a known disease agent by clinical tests. An
upsurge in cases, of either a reportable disease or an emerging disease, will set off institutional “alarms” that initiate
epidemiological efforts to determine the source and cause
of the outbreak.

John Snow (1813–1858), the
Father of Epidemiology

The first case in which the source of a disease outbreak
was methodically investigated arose in the mid-nineteenth
century. During a serious outbreak of cholera in the Soho
district of London in 1854, John Snow (Fig. 28.24A)
visited the addresses of all the diarrheal cases he learned
about. The source of the infection was unknown, but Snow
thought that if the cases clustered geographically, he might
gain a clue as to its location. Water in that part of London

1162

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY
A.

FIGURE 28.24

B.

■

was pumped from separate wells located in the various
neighborhoods. Snow realized there was a close association between the density of cholera cases and a single well
located on Broad Street (Fig. 28.24B). Simply removing
the pump handle of the Broad Street well put an end to
the epidemic, proving that the well water was the source of
infection (known as the “point source,” since all infections
originated from that point).
This approach succeeded brilliantly, even though the
infectious agent that causes cholera, Vibrio cholerae, was
not recognized until 1905, over 50 years later. Identifying clusters of patients afflicted with a given disease is still
used to locate potential sources of infectious disease outbreaks. Outbreaks of disease that originate from a common
source, as in the London cholera outbreak, are called common-source outbreaks. In contrast, a propagated outbreak
involves person-to-person transmission (SARS) or transmission by insect vectors (such as West Nile virus).
Thought Questions

28.8 Methicillin, a beta-lactam antibiotic, is very useful in
treating staphylococcal infections. The emergence of methicillin-resistant strains of Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) is a very
serious development because few antibiotics can kill these
strains. Imagine a large metropolitan hospital in which there
have been eight serious nosocomial infections with MRSA and
you are responsible for determining the source of infection so
that it can be eliminated. How would you accomplish this task
using common bacteriological and molecular techniques?
28.9 What are some reasons why some diseases spread

quickly through a population while others take a long time?

THE JOHN SNOW ARCHIVE AND RESEARCH COMPANION

B. A map of London
commissioned by
Snow in 1855 shows
the location of
cholera victims of
the 1854 outbreak.
The map illustrates
that each victim
within the marked
area lived closer to
the Broad Street
pump than to other
nearby pumps. The
Broad Street well is
found within the red
circle. Each black bar
represents a death
from cholera.

THE JOHN SNOW ARCHIVE AND RESEARCH COMPANION

Early epidemiology. A. John Snow.

Genomic Strategies Help Identify
Nonculturable Pathogens

Microbiologists have successfully developed many strategies to identify the causes of infectious diseases. As noted
earlier, Robert Koch in the late nineteenth century devised
a set of postulates that, when followed, can identify the
agent of a new disease (discussed in Sections 1.3 and 25.1).
One important tenet of Koch’s postulates is that the suspected organism must be grown in pure culture. However,
there are bacterial diseases for which the agent cannot be
cultured. How might they be identified?

Case History: Whipple’s Disease

In April, a 50-year-old man had an abrupt onset of watery
diarrhea with a stool frequency of up to 10 times every 24 hours.
This was the latest episode in a 6-year history of illness beginning with recurring fevers, flu-like symptoms, profuse night
sweats, and painful joint swelling. The current bout of diarrhea
was associated with gripping lower abdominal pain, especially
after meals. No blood or mucus was found in the stools. Blood
and stool cultures tested negative for known infectious agents.
Serology was also negative for syphilis, brucellosis, toxoplasmosis,
and leptospirosis. The man’s weight fell rapidly from 83 to 73 kg
within 4 weeks of onset. A flexible sigmoidoscopy showed only diffuse mild erythema in the bowel. However, the appearance of
the small bowel was consistent with malabsorption, a disease in
which nutrients are poorly absorbed by the intestine. A duodenal biopsy to look for the organisms of Whipple’s disease showed
large macrophages in the lamina propria (a layer of loose connective tissue beneath the epithelium of an organ). Bacterial rods

CHAPTER 28

characteristic of Whipple’s disease were seen with electron microscopy. PCR analysis of tissue samples confirmed the diagnosis.

FREDRICKS D.N. & D.A. RELMAN. J INFECT DIS 183, 1229-1237 (2001).

First diagnosed by George Whipple in 1907, Whipple’s disease is characterized by malabsorption, weight loss, arthralgia (joint pain), fevers, and abdominal pain. Any organ
system can be affected, including the heart, lungs, skin,
joints, and central nervous system. The cause of Whipple’s
disease went undiscovered for 85 years, but the disease
was suspected to be of bacterial etiology, even though an
organism was never successfully cultured. The agent was
finally identified in 1992—not by culturing, but by blindly
amplifying 16S rDNA sequences from biopsy tissues.
All bacterial 16S rRNA genes have some sequence regions
that are highly homologous across species and other sequences
that are unique to a species. Tissues from numerous patients
diagnosed with Whipple’s disease were subjected to PCR
analysis using the common 16S rDNA primers. If a bacterial
agent was present, it was predicted that PCR should successfully amplify a DNA fragment corresponding to the agent’s
16S rRNA gene. All tissues produced such a fragment, indicating that there were bacteria in the tissues. DNA sequence analysis of these fragments indicated that the organism was similar
to actinomycetes but was unlike any of the known species.
The organism is actually a Gram-positive soil-dwelling
actinomycete that was named Tropheryma whipplei in honor
of the physician who first recognized the disease. Because
of its bacterial etiology, Whipple’s disease can be treated
with antibiotics, usually trimethoprim sulfamethoxazole
(Bactrim, Septra, Cotrim). Figure 28.25 shows an in situ
hybridization for T. whipplei RNA in a tissue biopsy.

FIGURE 28.25

T. whipplei
RNA (blue)
Host nuclei
Host
cytoskeleton

■

CLINICAL MICROBIOLOGY AND EPIDEMIOLOGY

■

1163

This story reveals that Koch’s postulates (see Fig. 1.17)
must sometimes be modified when identifying the cause of
a new disease. In this instance, the organism could not be
cultured in pure form in the laboratory, but it was found, via
molecular techniques, in all instances of the disease. More
recent studies have successfully cultured T. whipplei in vitro.
The medium used was formulated on the basis of nutritional
requirements deduced from knowing the DNA sequence of
the T. whipplei genome (discussed in Section 25.7).

Molecular Approaches for
Disease Surveillance

A worldwide pandemic of pulmonary tuberculosis currently
affects over 2 billion people. Many of the Mycobacterium
tuberculosis infections are caused by multidrug-resistant
strains that are difficult, if not impossible, to kill with existing antibiotics (see Section 26.3). This problem is especially
serious among refugee populations attempting to flee wartorn countries. As a result, it is important to screen these
refugees as they enter neighboring countries with low incidences of tuberculosis. Although chest X-rays are mandatory in many cases, a positive image will be obtained only if
the disease is at a relatively advanced stage. Actively infected
individuals who have not developed the characteristic lung
tubercles seen on X-ray will not be identified.
Unfortunately, the acid-fast staining of sputum samples (discussed in Section 28.2) also fails to detect individuals at an early stage of infection. Studies have shown,
however, that PCR techniques are much more sensitive for
detecting these individuals. As time progresses, PCR surveillance strategies will be used more often to track the
worldwide ebb and flow of microbial diseases. PCR and
restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) strategies are already used for epidemiological purposes to type
(that is, determine the relatedness of) different microbial
isolates by generating a complex DNA profile that is specific for a particular strain (see Section 28.2). For example,
DNA profiles were used to link an outbreak of over 2,000
cases of salmonellosis in 2010 to a single strain of Salmonella enterica serovar Enteritidis. The results, conducted by
a national network of public health agencies (PulseNet), led
to the recall of over a half billion eggs.

50 µm

■ Whipple’s disease. Fluorescence in situ hybridization of a small-intestine biopsy in a case of Whipple’s disease
(confocal laser scanning microscopy). In this test, a fluorescently
tagged DNA probe that specifically hybridizes to Tropheryma whipplei RNA is added to the tissue. Other fluorescent probes are used
to visualize host nuclei and cytoskeleton. Blue = T. whipplei rRNA;
green = nuclei of human cells; red = intracellular cytoskeletal protein
vimentin. Magnification approx. 200×.

Bioterrorism

“A wide-scale bioterrorism attack would create mass panic
and overwhelm most existing state and local systems within
a few days,” said Michael T. Osterholm, director of the
Center for Infectious Disease Research & Policy at the
University of Minnesota, in October 2001. “We know this
from simulation exercises.”

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

Less than a month after the September 11 attack on the
World Trade Center, a biodefense scientist working at the
U.S. Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases (Fort Detrick, Maryland) allegedly sent weaponsgrade anthrax spores through the U.S. mail (see the earlier
inhalation anthrax case history). Thankfully, only 5 persons died, and a mere 25 became ill. But even though the
efficiency of the attack was poor, the impact was enormous.
Over 10,000 people took a 2-month course of antibiotics
after possible exposure, and mail deliveries throughout the
country were affected. The simple act of opening an envelope suddenly became a risky business.
As a result of this attack and other events, the CDC and
the National Institutes of Health (NIH) assembled a list of
select agents (marked in blue in Table 28.1) that could potentially be used as bioweapons. A bioweapon is considered to be
any infectious agent or toxin that has high virulence and/or
mortality rate. Microorganisms considered bioweapons can
be used to conduct biowarfare, with the intent of inflicting
massive casualties; or bioterrorism, which may result in only
a few casualties but cause widespread psychological trauma.
Although the branding of select agents is recent, biowarfare is not new. In the Middle Ages, victims of the Black
Death (plague caused by Yersinia pestis) were flung over
castle walls using catapults. During the French and Indian
War in the eighteenth century, British field marshal Jeffrey
Amherst distributed smallpox-infected blankets to Native
Americans. The Imperial Japanese Army during World
War II experimented with infectious disease weapons using
Chinese prisoners as guinea pigs. Even the United States participated by developing weapons-grade anthrax spores after
World War II. That project was discontinued in the 1970s.

KENNETH LAMBERT/AP

A.

The 2001 anthrax attack described earlier was not the
first act of bioterrorism in the United States. The first documented act occurred in 1984, when followers of the cult
leader Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh tried to control a local
election in The Dalles, Oregon, by infecting salad bars
with Salmonella. Over 700 people became ill. Rajneesh was
given a 10-year suspended sentence, fined $400,000, and
deported.
How effective are bioweapons? The method by which a
biological agent is dispersed plays a large role in its effectiveness as a weapon. Only a few people became ill during
the 2001 anthrax attack—not only because of the epidemiological surveillance, but because anthrax is inherently
difficult to disperse. Thousands of spores must be inhaled
to contract disease, which means that effective dispersal of
the spores is critical for the use of anthrax as a weapon.
Once spores hit the ground, the threat of infection is limited. Weapons-grade spores are very finely ground so that
they stay airborne longer. But, as we saw, the letter-borne
dispersal system did not effectively generate large numbers
of victims. Nevertheless, the potential threat of weaponsgrade anthrax on the battlefield led the U.S. military in
2006 to resume vaccinating all soldiers serving in Iraq,
Afghanistan, and South Korea.
An effective bioweapon would capitalize on person-toperson transmission. In an easily transmitted disease, one
infected person could disseminate disease to scores of others within 1 or 2 days. So, in terms of generating massive
numbers of deaths, anthrax was a poor choice. The goal
of most terrorists, however, is not to kill large numbers of
people, but to terrorize them. In that regard, the anthrax
attack succeeded (Fig. 28.26A).
B.

ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH

1164

FIGURE 28.26 ■ Dealing with bioterrorism. A. Members of a hazardous-materials team near Capitol Hill during the anthrax attacks in
2001. B. An Illinois man suffering from smallpox in 1912.

CHAPTER 28

The most effective bioweapon in terms of inflicting
death (biowarfare) would have a low infectious dose, be
easily transmitted between people, and be one to which a
large percentage of the population was susceptible. Smallpox fits these criteria and would be the bioweapon of choice
(Fig. 28.26B). Fortunately, however, smallpox has been
eradicated (almost) from the face of the Earth and is not
easily obtained. Two laboratories still harbor the virus—
one in the United States and one in Russia. It is believed
that the virus has been destroyed in all other laboratories.
Since smallpox is the perfect biowarfare agent, it is imperative that the last two smallpox repositories remain secure.
While the good news is that smallpox disease has been
eradicated, the bad news is that no individual born after
1970 has been vaccinated, with the exception of some military and laboratory personnel. As a result, anyone under
50 years of age is susceptible to smallpox. Even those of us
who received the smallpox vaccination over 45 years ago are
at risk, since our protective antibody titers have diminished.
A terrorist attack with smallpox would cause terrible numbers of deaths. A new, safer vaccine does exist, however, and
has been stockpiled. Were a smallpox attack to be launched,
the vaccine would be rapidly administered to limit the
spread of disease. Nevertheless, the economic and psychological impact of a smallpox epidemic would be devastating.
Research with organisms considered to be select agents
is tightly regulated. Because Yersinia pestis, for instance, is
a select agent, laboratory personnel working with it must
now possess security clearance with the Department of Justice (even though the organism itself can be handled under
biosafety level 2 conditions; see Table 28.1). The laboratory must also register with the CDC to legally possess this
pathogen, and access to the lab and the organism must be
tightly controlled.
Much has improved since Michael Osterholm offered his
dire assessment of a wide-scale bioterrorism attack. Education and surveillance procedures have been bolstered, and
new detection technologies are being developed (Special
Topic 28.1; see also eTopic 28.3). We will probably never
be fully protected from attack, biological or otherwise, but
recent efforts have improved the situation.

To Summarize
■
■

■

■

John Snow founded the discipline of epidemiology.
Epidemiology examines factors that determine the distribution and source of disease.
Endemic, epidemic, and pandemic are terms for different frequencies of disease in different geographic areas.
Finding patient zero (the index case) is important for
containing the spread of disease.

■

CLINICAL MICROBIOLOGY AND EPIDEMIOLOGY

■

■

■

■

1165

Molecular approaches using PCR and nucleic acid
hybridization are used to identify nonculturable pathogens and to track disease movements.
Bioweapons, when they have been used, typically kill
few people but incite great fear.
The CDC has assembled a list of select agents with
bioweapon potential.

28.4

Detecting Emerging
Microbial Diseases

News, whether obtained from traditional sources or Twitter, almost always carries stories of new infectious diseases
cropping up in the world, so-called emerging infectious
diseases. This section discusses the concept of emerging
diseases, how they develop, and how health organizations
detect and track them.

Emerging and Reemerging Pathogens

A world map showing the general locations of emerging and reemerging diseases is shown in Figure 28.27.
A reemerging disease is one thought to be under control
but whose incidence has risen. For example, the incidence
rate of tuberculosis dropped sharply in the 1950s, but the
number of cases since 1980 has increased just as dramatically. Tuberculosis is a reemerging disease. The trigger for
its reemergence was the AIDS pandemic. Immunocompromised AIDS patients are highly susceptible to infection by
many organisms, including Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
M. tuberculosis is also reemerging among non-AIDS
patients, owing to the development of drug-resistant
strains. Drug resistance in M. tuberculosis developed largely
because of noncompliance on the part of patients in completing their full courses of antibiotic treatment. Treatment
usually involves three or more antibiotics to reduce the risk
that resistance to any one drug will develop. Many patients
failed to take all three drugs simultaneously, allowing the
organism to develop resistance to one drug at a time, until
it became resistant to all of them. These highly drug-resistant strains are almost impossible to kill. The link between
noncompliance and the development of drug resistance is
the primary reason for the current requirement that tuberculosis patients be in the presence of a medical staff member when taking the multiple antibiotics prescribed.
As described in Section 28.3, highly infectious diseases
are identified using aggressive epidemiological surveillance. Communication among local, national, and world
health organizations is critical and helped expose the rise
in tuberculosis. To see for yourself how emerging diseases

1166

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

SPECIAL TOPIC 28.1** What’s Blowing in the Wind?
In April 1979, workers at a secret Soviet biological weapons
facility neglected to replace a filter in a laboratory ventilation
system, and a cloud of highly weaponized Bacillus anthracis
spores quickly spewed into the air outside. The deadly plume
drifted downwind, infecting humans and cattle across a wide
area. The resulting anthrax outbreak ultimately killed more
than 64 people. Had a rapid pathogen detection system been
available and deployed at the facility, all those lives could have
been saved. Unfortunately, 30 years ago such technology was
only the stuff of science fiction. Today, that technology exists
in small, portable forms.
Several multipathogen molecular detection platforms have
been developed. Some involve machines that detect antigenantibody interactions; others use automated PCR to amplify
specific pathogen genes and detect the products through
hybridization to immobilized oligonucleotides. The wet chemistries for all of these detection systems are carried out in a
roughly 2-inch square called lab-on-a-chip.
An interesting addition to the field of quick pathogen detection is the BioFlash-E sensor. Initially called PANTHER (Pathogen Analyzer for Threatening Environmental Releases), the
device was developed in 2008. BioFlash-E can detect and
identify a pathogen in as little as 3 minutes—significantly faster
than traditional methods requiring isolation and growth of the
pathogen (which can take 48 hours or longer). The sensor
(Fig. 1A) uses a cell-based technology called CANARY (Cellular
Analysis and Notification of Antigen Risks and Yields) that can
detect as few as a dozen particles of a pathogen per liter of air.
Currently, it can detect 24 pathogens, including the potential
bioterrorism agents of anthrax, plague, smallpox, and tularemia.
The device uses an array of B cells, each displaying antibodies specific to a particular bacterium or virus. The cells

are monitored, search the Internet for a website called
ProMED-mail. There you will find daily reports posted
from around the world that describe new outbreaks of
infectious diseases.
A posting on May 19, 2016, for example, reports 60 cases,
including 10 deaths, of hemorrhagic fever syndrome (symptoms of unexpected bleeding, fever, fatigue, and vomiting)
from South Sudan in Africa. Laboratory tests performed
thus far have eliminated a variety of viruses, including Ebola
and Marburg, that can cause these symptoms. Could this
be the leading edge of a new, deadly epidemic? Hindsight,
of course, is 20/20. A March 22, 2014, ProMED report
from Guinea in Africa described an outbreak of a disease
with similar symptoms that killed 60 people. A WHO laboratory had just identified it as Ebola. In the post, a physician working with the medical charity Doctors Without

are engineered to emit photons of light when they detect
their target pathogen. More specifically, the B cells have been
bioengineered to express the gene that encodes aequorin, a
calcium-sensitive bioluminescent protein. When a pathogen
surface antigen cross-links the appropriate B-cell surface
antibodies, a signal transduction cascade produces a rapid
influx of calcium (Fig. 1B). Aequorin in the B cell will luminesce within seconds of calcium influx, and the light emitted
is detected by a photon detector. The device then displays a
list of any pathogens found.
Quick pathogen detection technologies are constantly
being improved in the effort to defend against bioterrorism. Small, quick pathogen detection devices could be used
in buildings, subways, and other public areas. Eventually,
such technology is expected to supplant the classical clinical
microbiology practices that require growth of the microbe to
achieve identification. There is hope, for example, that such
devices could be used on farms or in food-processing plants
to test for contamination by E. coli, Salmonella, or other foodborne pathogens. Another potential application is in medical diagnostics, where the technology could be used to test
patient samples, giving rapid results without having to send
samples to a laboratory. Wherever it is used, successful quick
pathogen detection should provide the clinician with better
information to quickly prescribe the appropriate course of
treatment.

RESEARCH QUESTION
The research article referenced below describes a method of
biothreat detection that combines PCR with mass spectrometry (see Section 28.2). Why might this coupled technology
be superior for detecting biowarfare agents as compared to

Borders was quoted as saying: “The quicker we can contain this the fewer cases we’ll have, then the smaller the
scale of the epidemic. That’s the idea of going in as strong
as we can early on.” We now know that this report represented the leading edge of the horrific Ebola epidemic that
ravaged West Africa. As a fledgling microbiologist, tracking these ProMED reports allows you to see epidemics and
new diseases emerge almost in real time.

Thought Question

28.10 On the ProMED-mail web page (www.promedmail.
org), click on the interactive world map to view outbreaks
recorded by WHO. What outbreaks happened throughout the
world during the current year?

CHAPTER 28

A.

B.

1. B cells are exposed to
bioagents in test sample.

Antibodies

■

CLINICAL MICROBIOLOGY AND EPIDEMIOLOGY

1167

2. B-cell antibodies bind
to the agent.
Antigen
cross-linked
antibodies

Tyrosine kinase
© 2016 PATHSENSORS, INC. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.

■

3. Cross-linking
triggers a
phosphorylation
cascade.

Phospholipase C
PIP3
B cell with added
aequorin gene

IP3 + DAG
Ca2+

4. Calcium
influx activates
aequorin.

Light
emission

Open Ca2+ Aequorin
channels
Ca2+
Endoplasmic
reticulum

5. Photons
released hit the
photon detector.

FIGURE 1 ■ A. The BioFlash-E detection system uses aerosol collection technology and CANARY detection technology.
B. Principle of the bioelectronic sensor used in the BioFlash-E system. DAG = diacylglycerol; IP3 = 1,4,5-inositol trisphosphate;
PIP3 = phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate. Source: Modified from Martha S. Petrovick et al. 2008. Lincoln Lab. J. 17(1).

the more conventional use of molecular probes to detect PCR
amplicons? The authors also published the sequences of DNA
primers that their system uses to amplify indicator genes of
over 20 potential biowarfare agents. Discuss why this decision to publish was either good or bad.

Tracking an Emerging Disease

Sometimes world and national health organizations quickly
and efficiently identify and contain outbreaks of emerging infectious diseases, as was the case in 2003 with severe
acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) (eTopic 28.4). In other
instances, outbreaks take more time to contain, such as the
2014 Ebola epidemic in West Africa, described earlier. Agencies can also face difficulties in clearly identifying the causative
agent of an outbreak, as in the current 2015–16 Zika virus
outbreak in Brazil. The unfolding Zika virus story provides
an instructive example of how new diseases are identified.

Case History: Zika Virus

Brazil, 2015. Around the fourth month of her pregnancy, a
young woman from Recife, Brazil, awoke one morning with

Sampath, Rangarajan, Niveen Mulholland, Lawrence B.
Blyn, Christian Massirel, Chris A. Whitehouse, et al. 2012.
Comprehensive biothreat cluster identification by
PCR/electrospray-ionization mass spectrometry. PLoS
One 7:e36528.

fever, a fiery red rash, and pain in her joints. Her symptoms
went away within a few days, and she went about her life,
oblivious to what was to come. Five months later, in September 2015, she delivered her baby and immediately knew from
the look on the obstetrician’s face that something was terribly
wrong. Her son had an abnormally small head and incomplete brain development—something called microcephaly.
The young mother was devastated.
In August 2015, Dr. Vanessa van der Linden, a neurologist
in Recife, started noticing an increasing number of newborns with microcephaly (Fig. 28.28). Normally, months
would pass without her seeing a single case. Now there were
three or four in a single day. Using serological tests, she
ruled out the usual suspects, such as rubella (German measles) and toxoplasmosis. Imaging studies, however, revealed

1168

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

Multidrug-resistant
tuberculosis

Cryptosporidiosis

Antibiotic-resistant
“staph” bacteria

Variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob
disease (vCJD)
Diphtheria

SARS
H7N7
bird flu

MERS

E. coli
O157:H7
Cyclosporiasis

MERS

Hepatitis C

Whitewater
Arroyo virus

Dengue
fever
Hantavirus
pulmonary
syndrome

Zika
(microcephaly)

Typhoid
fever

Lyme disease
West Nile disease

Cholera

Yellow
fever

Cholera
Drug-resistant
malaria

Cholera

E. coli
O157:H7
H5N1 bird flu
Drug-resistant
malaria
Nipah virus
Ross River
virus
SARS

Ebola
hemorrhagic
fever

Hendra
virus

Human
monkeypox
Plague

Antibiotic-resistant
“staph” bacteria

SARS

Rift Valley
fever
HIV/AIDS

Lassa
fever
Marburg
virus

Severe acute
respiratory
syndrome
(SARS)

Enterovirus 71

Ebola

AP PHOTO/FELIPE DANA, FILE

FIGURE 28.27 ■ Locations of some emerging and reemerging infectious diseases and pathogens. The examples given represent extreme increases in the reported cases over the last 20 years. Many of these diseases, such as HIV/AIDS and cholera, are widespread
but show alarming increases in the areas indicated.

FIGURE 28.28

■

A child born with microcephaly in Brazil.

unusual patterns of calcification in the affected brains (a
possible sign of virus-induced necrosis). Vanessa knew
something odd was going on. Then her mother called.
Vanessa’s mother, Dr. Ana van der Linden, a neuropediatrician in another Recife hospital told her daughter that
she had seen seven babies with microcephaly in just one
day, and that some of the mothers remembered having a
rash early during pregnancy. Could there be an infectious
cause to these birth defects? In October, Vanessa alerted
the state health secretary about the spike in microcephaly

cases. This was the first step in the epidemiological journey
linking Zika virus, the cause of a normally benign, mosquito-transmitted disease in adults, to the development of
microcephaly in Zika virus–infected fetal brains.
As the number of microcephaly cases grew, suspicion by
public health officials initially fell on dengue virus, in part
because the symptoms of Zika fever resemble those of dengue fever and because prior to 2014, Zika virus infections
were rare in Brazil. Dengue virus was far more common
and considered the most likely cause of the women’s symptoms. Consequently, individuals who actually had Zika
fever were not screened for Zika virus; they were screened
by ELISA for anti–dengue virus antibodies. Unfortunately,
patient antibodies to Zika virus can cross-react with dengue
virus antigen, so a person infected with Zika can appear to
test positive for dengue (see the discussion of test specificity
in Section 28.2). This technical problem slowed efforts to
identify Zika virus as the cause of the women’s symptoms
and obscured the virus’s connection to the alarming rise
in newborn microcephaly. Today, there are more specific
RT-qPCR tests and virus isolations to confirm Zika virus
diagnoses.
Both Zika and dengue viruses have positive-sense RNA
genomes and are members of the Flaviviridae family of
viruses. West Nile virus, mentioned earlier, is also a member of this family. Zika, dengue, and West Nile viruses

CHAPTER 28

are transmitted to humans by Aedes mosquito vectors in
person-to-person or animal-to-human transmission cycles.
West Nile virus uses birds as natural reservoirs, whereas
Zika and dengue viruses infect primarily human and nonhuman primates. There are also some reports of sexual
transmission of Zika virus in areas devoid of the Aedes
mosquito vectors. As of July 2016, Zika virus was not considered endemic in the United States, even though there
are people living in the United States infected with Zika,
including 200–300 pregnant women initially infected elsewhere in the world.
How does a viral pathogen become endemic in a country? In order for Zika, and many other mosquito-borne
viruses, to become endemic in a new location, four things
must happen:
1. The mosquito vector must already be present in the
area.
2. A person infected in an endemic area such as Brazil
must travel to the nonendemic area.
3. A local mosquito must bite the infected traveler and
transmit the virus to another victim.
4. Finally, the virus must also be transmitted to an animal
reservoir that can maintain the virus within a geographical area. For example, West Nile virus, introduced into
the United States in 1999, quickly infected the native
bird population and is now transmitted from birds to
humans by mosquito.
As of September 2016, Zika virus had fulfilled three of
the four criteria in the United States. The Aedes mosquito
vector inhabits areas of at least 30 states, stretching from
California through the southern and northeastern states.
There are hundreds of people infected with Zika virus
now living in the United States. The virus has also been
introduced into the native mosquito population around
Miami, and the infected mosquitoes have transmitted the
Zika virus to several humans in the area. Fortunately, the
last requirement, finding a native animal host reservoir, is
thought to be unlikely. Zika virus is not known to infect
birds or animals other than nonhuman primates native to
much of South America and the Caribbean but not to the
United States.
How did Zika virus get to Brazil? Zika virus was previously recognized in Africa and Asia as causing mild disease
but had never been reported in Brazil. Epidemiologists have
used next-generation DNA sequencing of Brazilian Zika
virus isolates to explore its origin. The data indicate that the
Brazilian strain originated from an Asian strain that circulated in French Polynesia in 2013, but the event that introduced the Asian virus into Brazil is unclear. Regardless of
how it got there, once the virus was introduced, native mosquitoes fed on the carrier(s), became infected and began
transmitting the virus throughout the country. The disease

■

CLINICAL MICROBIOLOGY AND EPIDEMIOLOGY

■

1169

is now endemic to Brazil. There is no treatment for Zika
fever, although furious efforts are under way to develop a
vaccine. At the moment, the only protection against Zika
is to prevent infection by avoiding or eradicating the Aedes
mosquitoes.
So, have Koch’s postulates been fulfilled? Does Zika
virus infection of the mother lead to transplacental transmission of the virus to the fetus? And does virus replication interfere with fetal brain development? Evidence of
the virus has been found in the blood of mothers who have
delivered babies with microcephaly, and also in umbilical cord blood. The virus itself has been isolated from the
brains of fetuses who died from microcephaly (see the
Current Research Highlight in Chapter 26). Other studies have recapitulated the neurotropic nature of the virus
and indicate that Zika virus can interfere with neurogenesis during human brain development. In sum, the evidence
of a link is convincing but not yet ironclad. More epidemiological studies must be conducted to unequivocally prove
the link.
As of this writing, at least 1,000 babies in Brazil have
been born with microcephaly and other birth defects
linked to Zika virus. But it is important to point out that
despite the fear Zika virus brings to pregnant women, the
vast majority of confirmed Zika virus–infected pregnant
women deliver healthy babies. The World Health Organization (WHO) and the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) are carefully monitoring the spread of
Zika virus throughout the Americas by intensively screening mosquitoes.

Technology Helps New Infectious
Agents Emerge and Spread

Despite all we know of microbes and despite the many ways
we have to combat microbial diseases, our species, for all its
cleverness, still lives at the mercy of the microbe. Lyme disease, MRSA, SARS, MERS-CoV, Ebola, E. coli O157:H7,
HIV, “flesh-eating” streptococci, hantavirus, swine flu—
all of these and many other new diseases and pathogens
have emerged over the last 30 years. Worse yet, forgotten
scourges, such as tuberculosis, have reappeared. Yet in the
1970s, medical science was claiming victory over infectious
disease. What happened?
Part of the equation has been progress itself. Travel by
jet, the use of blood banks, and suburban sprawl have all
opened new avenues of infection. The spread of Zika virus
from Africa to Asia and then the Americas is but one example. People unwittingly infected by a new disease in Asia
or Africa can, traveling by jet, take the pathogen to any
other country in the world within hours. A person may not
even show symptoms until days or weeks after the trip. This
means that diseases can spread faster and farther than ever

1170

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

before. In addition, newly emerged blood-borne pathogens
can spread by transfusion. This was a major problem with
HIV before an accurate blood test was developed to screen
all donated blood.
Although human encroachments into the tropical rain
forests have often been blamed for the emergence of new
pathogens, one need go no farther than the Connecticut
woodlands to find such developments. Borrelia burgdorferi, the spirochete that causes Lyme disease, lives on deer
and white-footed mice and is passed between these hosts
by the deer tick (see Fig. 26.23)—an infection cycle that
has been going on for years. Humans crossed paths with
these animals long before the disease erupted in our communities. Why have we suddenly become susceptible? The
answer appears to be suburban development. In the wild,
foxes and bobcats hunt the mice that carry the Lyme agent.
These predators disappear as developers clear land and
build roads and houses, leaving the infected mice and ticks
to proliferate. Humans in these developed areas are more
likely to be bitten by an infected tick and contract the disease than in prior decades. Luckily, many diseases that successfully leap from animals to humans find the new host to
be a dead end, unable to spread the disease to others.
There are numerous examples in which technology and
progress have had the unintended consequence of breeding
disease. Here are just a few:
■

Mad cow disease. Modern farming practices (North
America and Europe) of feeding livestock the remains
of other animals help spread transmissible spongiform
encephalopathies, similar to Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease,
associated with prions. Because the prion is infectious,
the brain matter from one case of mad cow disease could
end up infecting hundreds of other cattle, which in turn
increases the chance that the disease could spread to
humans.

■

Lyme disease. Suburban development in the northeastern United States destroys predators of the mice that
carry Borrelia burgdorferi.

■

Hepatitis C. Transfusions and transplants spread this
blood-borne disease.

■

Influenza. Live poultry markets in Asia serve as breeding grounds for avian flu viruses that can jump to
humans.

■

Enterohemorrhagic E. coli (for example, E. coli
O157:H7). Modern meat-processing plants can accidentally grind trace amounts of these acid-resistant, fecal
organisms into beef while making hamburger.

Natural environmental events can also trigger upsurges
in the incidence of unusual diseases. For example, an
unprecedented outbreak of hantavirus pulmonary disease

occurred in 1993 in the Four Corners area of the Southwest, where Arizona, New Mexico, Colorado, and Utah
meet, when rain led to greater-than-normal increases in
plant and animal numbers. The resulting tenfold increase in
deer mice, which carries the virus, made it more likely that
infected mice and humans would come in contact. A more
recent outbreak of hantavirus occurred among campers at
Yosemite National Park in 2012.

Climate Change Influences
Emerging Diseases

The world’s climate has been changing slowly but significantly over the last 50 years—largely as a result of humans
pumping enormous amounts of greenhouse gases, such as
carbon dioxide and methane, into the atmosphere. Greenhouse gases trapping heat in the atmosphere have caused the
world’s average yearly temperature to rise over 1.5°F since
1970. Effects of global warming on climate, depending on
where you live, are evident as disappearing glaciers, increasing sea levels, mounting ferocity of hurricanes and tornadoes,
extended droughts, increased rainfall (floods), dust storms,
and heat waves. These climate changes are bad enough, but
they can also affect the epidemiology of infectious disease.
Rising air temperatures, for example, can extend the habitat of mosquito and tick vectors to higher mountain elevations and wider latitudes. The result is that Zika virus,
dengue virus, and Plasmodium (the protozoan cause of
malaria), among other infectious agents, have increased their
geographic range. Mathematical simulations predict that
the area populated by Anopheles mosquito vectors that carry
malaria will increase between 16% and 49% by 2030, depending on the vector. Extending a pathogen’s range can bring it
into contact with novel groups of hosts, possibly establishing
new vector-pathogen transmission cycles or a situation that
promotes pathogen evolution (such as influenza). Warmer
temperatures can also accelerate host-parasite cycles that will
further increase the incidence and prevalence of infections.
Increased rain and flooding promote the breeding of
mosquito vectors that transmit disease—a situation that
will worsen with climate change. Floods can also accelerate
the spread of diarrheal diseases such as cholera when sanitation systems fail. As these events increase, so, too, will
infectious disease.
The Arctic is particularly sensitive to climate change.
It is home to diverse populations of plants, animals, and
people. Approximately 10 million people live within the
Arctic circle, a geographic area that encompasses parts of
nine countries, including Canada and the United States.
The Arctic has warmed twice as much as the global average of other parts of the world and is becoming increasingly fragile. The associated health risks for humans and
animals include potential changes in pathogen and vector

CHAPTER 28

demographics that can affect disease patterns, degradation
in the quality and availability of both drinking water and
food, and changes in animal and plant species health.
Climate change will continue to create opportunities for
some pathogens and may even limit the transmission of others. To stay ahead of these evolving infections, surveillance
programs capable of detecting pathogen or disease emergence
are essential. Make no mistake: Together, the effect of climate
change on infectious diseases and the rise in antibiotic-resistant microbes pose a serious threat to the living world.

The One Health Initiative

We have provided numerous examples of how the natural
environment can harbor pathogens and foster the emergence of new ones. Knowledge that pathogens have reservoirs in animals, arthropods, and plants has given rise to a
new collaborative effort among clinicians, scientists, veterinarians, and ecologists called the One Health Initiative. The
goal of the One Health Initiative is to control human health
through animal health, and vice versa. For example, vaccinating wild rodents could decrease Lyme disease in humans.
The initiative includes plant pathology because some bacteria
are pathogens of both plants and humans (for example, Pantoea agglomerans, formerly Enterobacter agglomerans). In
addition, some enteric bacteria can live within a plant vascular system (for example, E. coli, Klebsiella, and Salmonella).

■

CLINICAL MICROBIOLOGY AND EPIDEMIOLOGY

■

1171

ditches close to the spinach fields in the area. Scientists
pondering these facts within the One Health framework
deduced that cattle harboring the E. coli had defecated in
a field, thereby contaminating wild hogs. The wild hogs,
by running through the spinach fields, had contaminated
those fields with their feces, and the irrigation water had
then swept the pathogen into the plant vasculature.
Only by integrating our knowledge of the environment
and ecology could this investigation be completely understood and appropriate intervention and prevention strategies implemented. This outbreak exemplifies the fact that
human health and animal health are inextricably linked
and that a holistic approach is needed to understand, protect, and promote the health of all species.
Stopping zoonotic diseases. A more recent example of

the One Health approach is being carried out in the Ruaha
region of Tanzania, Africa—a sprawling, wild area with scattered small villages and a rich wildlife. Thousands of children
and adults in underdeveloped countries such as Tanzania die
every day from diseases arising from the human-animal-environment interface. People in these areas often live in close
contact with wild and domestic animals and are brought
even closer as water becomes scarcer (Fig. 28.29). Sharing
the same water sources for drinking, washing, and swimming facilitates zoonotic disease transmission to humans.

ciplinary collaboration resulted in better understanding of
an infectious outbreak occurred in 2006 when approximately 200 people in 26 states were diagnosed with a particularly virulent case of E. coli O157:H7. Nearly half of
the cases were hospitalized, and many suffered from hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS, kidney failure described in
Section 26.4). The source of the infection was contaminated spinach traced to the Salinas Valley of California. It
turned out the organisms were contained within the vascular system of the spinach, so washing the spinach would
not remove the pathogen. Had this outbreak been viewed
through only the narrow lens of human health, efforts
would have focused on morbidity, mortality, outbreak
investigation, laboratory diagnosis, and clinical treatment.
The origin of the disease would have remained a mystery.
Working together, epidemiologists and veterinarians
found a genetically identical organism in cattle close to
where the spinach was produced and in wild hogs that ran
through the same fields. Ecologists and hydrologists understood that the groundwater and surface water in this region
were being mixed because of a drought followed by heavy
rains, and that irrigation systems were strained in the effort
to keep up with intensified agricultural production. Eventually, the same E. coli strain was found in one of the water

THE ONE HEALTH INITIATIVE

Solving a mystery. An excellent example of how multidis-

FIGURE 28.29 ■ The One Health Initiative. This photograph
illustrates the close relationship that some residents of Tanzania
have with their livestock, and the opportunities by which zoonotic
infections can be transmitted to humans.

