Microbes grow in frozen Antarctica, and every- where else. A human body contains many more microbes than it does human cells,
including 100 trillion bacteria in the digestive tract. Throughout history, humans had a hidden partnership with microbes ranging from food production to min- ing minerals. Microscopes revealed the tiny organisms at work in our bodies and in our environment. In the twentieth century, microbial genetics led to recombi- nant DNA and sequenced genomes. Today, microbes lead discoveries in medicine and global ecology.
Life began early in the history of planet Earth, with micro- scopic organisms, or “microbes.” Over the eons, those microbes evolved to shape our atmosphere, our geology, and the energy cycles of all ecosystems. For the first 2 bil- lion years, all life was microbial. What did it look like? To imagine it, we can look at the parts of the world that still support only microscopic life, such as the McMurdo Dry Valleys of Antarctica (Fig. 1.1). In summer, the tempera- ture rarely rises above freezing, while in winter it plunges below –60°C. The only native life-forms are bacteria, lichens and protists, and tiny invertebrates such as nema- todes. Cyanobacteria form thick mats below the ice of frozen lakes, where they support microscopic ecosystems (see the Current Research Highlight). Remarkably, some cyanobacterial mats can survive for years trapped in ice, to emerge when dry winds sublime the surface (Fig. 1.1 inset). The emerging microbes blow away and colonize new habitats.
Could Antarctic microbiology help us find life on other planets? The Dry Valleys are the closest model we have to what life might look like on Mars (see Special Topic 1.1). As of this writing, the existence of microbial life on Mars is still unknown, but here on Earth, many terrestrial microbes remain as mysterious as Mars. Barely 0.1% of the microbes in our biosphere can be cultured in the laboratory; even the digestive tract of a newborn infant contains species of bac- teria unknown to science.

We find microbes throughout our biosphere, from the superheated black smoker vents at the ocean floor to the interiors of our own bodies. Bacteria such as Escherichia coli are among the 100 trillion inhabitants of our intes- tines, where they help digest our food. Alternatively, E. coli may colonize the plants we eat (Fig. 1.2A). Microbial eukaryotes (cells with nuclei) such as the voracious Sten- tor engulf aquatic prey (Fig. 1.2B). Archaea are a life- form distinct from both bacteria and eukaryotes. Some archaea grow in extreme environments, such as concen- trated salt (Fig. 1.2C). And all kinds of life host viruses. For example, herpes simplex virus infects human cells (Fig. 1.2D).
Yet before we devised microscopes in the seventeenth century, we humans were unaware of the unseen living organisms that surround us, that float in our air and water, and that inhabit our own bodies. Microbes generate the very air we breathe, including nitrogen gas and much of the oxygen and carbon dioxide. They fix nitrogen for plants, and they make vitamins, such as vitamin B12. In the ocean, microbes produce biomass for the food web that feeds the fish we eat, and microbes consume toxic wastes such as the oil from the Deepwater Horizon spill in the Gulf of Mex- ico in 2010. At the same time, virulent pathogens take our lives—and researchers risk their lives to study them. Work- ing with pathogens such as Ebola virus requires sealed suits and respiratory equipment (Fig. 1.3). Despite all our advances in medicine and public health, humans con- tinue to die of microbial diseases. Each year, millions of children succumb to waterborne pathogens and respiratory infections.
Today we discover surprising new kinds of microbes in places they were previously thought absent, such as 3 kilo- meters down in a South African gold mine, or within human breast milk. Microbes shape our biosphere and pro- vide new tools that impact human society. For example, the use of heat-stable bacterial DNA polymerase (a DNA- replicating enzyme) in a technique called the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) allows us to detect minute amounts of DNA in traces of blood or fossil bone. Microbial tech- nologies led us from the discovery of the double helix to the sequence of the human genome, the total genetic infor- mation that defines our species.
In Chapter 1 we introduce the concept of a microbe, and we survey the history of human discovery. We explain how to show which pathogen causes a disease.
If all life on Earth shares descent from a microbial ancestor, how did the  rst microbe arise? The earliest fossil evidence of cells in the geological record appears in sedimentary rock that formed as long ago as 3.8 billion years. Although the nature of the earliest reported fossils remains controversial, it is generally accepted that “microfossils” from over 2 bil- lion years ago were formed by living cells. Moreover, the living cells that formed these microfossils looked remarkably simi- lar to bacterial cells today, forming chains of simple rods or spheres (Fig. 1).

The exact composition of the first environment for life is controversial. The components of the first living cells may have formed from spontaneous reactions sparked by ultra- violet absorption or electrical discharge. American chemists Stanley Miller (1930–2007) and Harold C. Urey (1893–1981) argued that the environment of early Earth contained mainly reduced compounds—compounds that have a strong ten- dency to donate electrons, such as ferrous iron, methane, and ammonia. More recent evidence has modified this view, but it is agreed that the strong electron acceptor oxygen gas (O2) was absent until the first photosynthetic microbes produced it. Today, all our cells are composed of highly reduced molecules that are readily oxidized (lose electrons to O2). This seemingly hazardous composition may reflect our cellular origin in the chemically reduced environment of early Earth.
In 1953, Miller attempted to simulate the highly reduced conditions of early Earth to test whether ultraviolet absorp- tion or electrical discharge could cause reactions produc- ing the fundamental components of life (Fig. 2A). He boiled a solution of water containing hydrogen gas, methane, and ammonia and applied an electrical discharge (comparable to a lightning strike). The electrical discharge excites electrons in the molecules and causes them to react. Astonishingly, the reaction produced a number of amino acids, including gly- cine, alanine, and aspartic acid. A similar experiment in 1961 by Spanish-American researcher Juan Oró (1923–2004) (Fig. 2B) combined hydrogen cyanide and ammonia under electrical discharge to obtain adenine, a fundamental compo- nent of DNA and of the energy carrier adenosine triphosphate (ATP).
Molecules that spontaneously formed in Miller’s and Oró’s experiments are also found in meteorites and comets. This observation led Oró to propose that the first chemicals of life could have come from outer space, perhaps carried by comets. Furthermore, at the time life arose on Earth, Earth’s geochemistry resembled that of other planets, such as Mars. Could Mars, too, have originated life?
In 2012, to seek evidence for life on Mars, NASA landed the Mars Science Laboratory, or Curiosity rover, near the base of a mountain on the planet Mars. The car-sized rover had a laser to drill into rock, X-ray and fluorescence analyzers, and cam- era microscopes. It began its mission to test the Martian soil or water, organic compounds, and other potential evidence of microbial life.
Among the most fascinating bits of evidence to come back from Mars were the photographs of rock formations dating to 3.7 billion years ago, near the time we believe life began on Earth (Fig. 3). Geologist Nora Noffke, at Old Dominion Uni- versity, examined these photographs using the same criteria geologists use to define microfossils of early life on Earth. She observed many features of Martian rock that resemble ancient terrestrial fossils of microbial mats—possibly cyano- bacteria similar to those of Antarctic lakes. For example, flat stretches of sediment show layers that appear folded or even rolled up, as if a flexible mat of living cells had torn and rolled back onto itself. Noffke compiled such a large group of fea- tures that ultimately, she argues, if such forms indicate fossil life on Earth, they must also indicate fossil life on Mars.
f microbial life once existed on Mars, could some forms live on, perhaps under the rock strata where pockets of water remain? As of this writing, Curiosity’s quest for data rolls on.

A microbe is commonly defined as a living organism that requires a microscope to be seen. Microbial cells range in size from millimeters (mm) down to 0.2 micrometer (μm), and viruses may be tenfold smaller (Table 1.1). Some microbes consist of a single cell, the smallest unit of life, a membrane-enclosed compartment of water solution con- taining molecules that carry out metabolism. Each microbe contains a genome used to reproduce its own kind. Micro- bial cells acquire food, gain energy to build themselves, and respond to environmental change. Microbes evolve at rapid rates—often fast enough to observe in the laboratory (dis- cussed in Chapter 17).

Most single-celled organisms require a microscope to render them visible, and thus they fit the definition of a microbe. Nevertheless, some species of protists, such as giant amebas, grow to sizes large enough to see with the unaided eye. The marine sulfur bacterium Thiomargarita namibiensis, called the “sulfur pearl of Namibia,” grows to 0.7 mm, larger than the eye of a fruit fly (Fig. 1.4). Even more surprising, a single cell of the “killer alga” Caulerpa taxifolia cov- ers acres beneath the coastal waters of California. The alga expands and forms leaflike extensions without cell division.

Many microbes form complex multicellular assemblages, such as mushrooms, kelps, and biofilms. In these structures, cells are differentiated into distinct types that complement each other’s func- tions, as in multicellular organisms. And yet, some mul- ticellular worms and arthropods require a microscope for us to see but are not considered microbes.

A virus is a noncellular particle containing genetic material that takes over the metabolism of a cell to generate more virus particles. Some viruses consist of only a short chromosome packed in protein. Other kinds of viruses, such as pandoraviruses that infect amebas, show the size and complexity of a cell. Although viruses are not fully functional cells, some viral genomes may have evolved from cells.

A key tool is the study of microbial genomes. A genome is the total genetic information contained in an organism’s chromosomal DNA. The genes in a microbe’s genome and the sequence of DNA tell us a lot about how that microbe grows and associates with other species. For example, if a microbe’s genome includes genes for nitrogenase, a nitrogen-fixing enzyme, that microbe probably can fix nitrogen from the atmosphere into proteins—its own proteins and those of associated plants. And by comparing DNA sequences of different microbes, we can figure out how closely related they are and how they evolved.
The first method of DNA sequencing that was fast enough to sequence large genomes was developed by Fred Sanger (1918–2013) at the University of Cambridge (Fig. 1.5). This achievement—which jump-started the study of molecular biology—earned Sanger the 1980 Nobel Prize in Chemistry, together with Walter Gilbert and Paul Berg. Sanger and colleagues used the new method to sequence DNA containing tens of thousands of base pairs, such as the DNA of the human mitochondrion. In Figure 1.5, Sanger inspects a “DNA ladder,” an X-ray exposure of radiolabeled DNA fragments in a classic sequencing reaction.
But most genomes of cells contain millions, or even bil- lions, of base pairs. In 1995, scientists completed the first genome sequence of a cellular microbe, the bacterium.

Today we sequence new bacterial genomes daily. In addition to sequencing individual genomes, computational strategies are used to sequence thousands of genomes of microbes sampled from a natural environment, such as the acid drainage from an iron mine. The collection of sequences taken directly from the environment is called a metagenome. The first metagenome of an acid mine was sequenced by Jill Banfield and co-workers at UC Berkeley in 2004. Now, metagenomes are sequenced for microbial communities of medical interest, such as that of the human colon. Human gut microbes contain 100 times more genes in their metagenomes than the human genome contains— and many of these microbial genes contribute to our health!
Comparing genomes has revealed a set of core genes shared by all organisms. These core genes add further evi- dence that all life on Earth, including humans, shares a common ancestry. Genomes are discussed further in Chap- ter 7, and the evolution of genomes and metagenomes is discussed in Chapters 17 and 21.

Today our knowledge of microbes is enormous, and it keeps growing. Yet throughout most of human history we were unaware of how microbes shaped our culture. Yeasts and bac- teria made foods such as bread and cheese (Fig. 1.8A), as well as alcoholic beverages (discussed in Chapter 16). “Rock- eating” bacteria, known as “lithotrophs,” leached copper and other metals from ores exposed by mining, enabling ancient human miners to obtain these metals. The lithotrophic oxida- tion of minerals for energy generates strong acids, which accel- erate breakdown of the ore. Today about 20% of the world’s copper, as well as some uranium and zinc, is produced by bacterial leaching. Unfortunately, microbial acidification also consumes the stone of ancient monuments (Fig. 1.8B)—a process intensified by airborne acidic pollution.
How did people find out about microbes? (Table 1.2, pages 10–11). Microscopists in the seventeenth and eigh- teenth centuries formulated key concepts about microbes and their existence, including their means of reproduction and death. In the nineteenth century, the “golden age” of microbiology, scientists established the fundamental prin- ciples of disease pathology and microbial ecology that are still in use today. This period laid the foundation for modern biology, in which genetics and molecular biology provide powerful tools for scientists to manipulate microor- ganisms for medicine, research, and industry.

Microbial diseases such as bubonic plague and AIDS have profoundly affected human history (Fig. 1.9). The plague, which wiped out a third of Europe’s population in the four- teenth century, was caused by Yersinia pestis, a bacterium spread by rat fleas. Ironically, the plague-induced popula- tion decline enabled the social transformation that led to the Renaissance, a period of unprecedented cultural advance- ment. In the nineteenth century, the bacterium Mycobacte- rium tuberculosis stalked overcrowded cities, and tuberculosis was so common that the pallid appearance of tubercular patients became a symbol of tragic youth in European arts, such as Puccini’s opera La Bohème. Today, societies through- out the world are devastated by the epidemic of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), caused by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). The United Nations esti- mates that 35 million people are living with HIV infection today, and this year 1.2 million will die of AIDS.
Historians traditionally emphasize the role of warfare in shaping human destiny, and the brilliance of leaders, or the advantage of new technology, in determining which civili- zations rise or fall. Yet the fate of human societies is often determined by microbes. For example, much of the native population of North America was exterminated by small- pox introduced by European invaders. Throughout his- tory, more soldiers have died of microbial infections than of wounds in battle.
The significance of disease in warfare was first recog- nized by the British nurse and statistician Florence Night- ingale (1820–1910) (Fig. 1.10A). Better known as the founder of professional nursing, Nightingale also founded the science of medical statistics. She used methods invented by French statisticians to demonstrate the high mortal- ity rate due to disease among British soldiers during the Crimean War. To show the deaths of soldiers due to various causes, she devised the “polar area chart” (Fig. 1.10B). In this chart, blue wedges represent deaths due to infectious disease, red wedges represent deaths due to wounds, and black wedges represent all other causes of death. Infectious disease accounts for more than half of all mortality.
Before Nightingale, no one understood the impact of disease on armies, or on other crowded populations, such as in cities. Nightingale’s statistics convinced the Brit- ish government to improve army living conditions and to upgrade the standards of army hospitals. In modern epide- miology, statistical analysis continues to be a crucial tool in determining the causes of disease.

The seventeenth century was a time of growing inquiry and excitement about the “natural magic” of science and patterns of our world, such as the laws of gravitation and motion formulated by Isaac Newton (1642–1727). Robert Boyle (1627–1691) performed the first controlled experi- ments on the chemical conversion of matter. Physicians attempted new treatments for disease involving the appli- cation of “stone and minerals” (that is, chemicals)—what today we would call “chemotherapy.” Minds were open to consider the astounding possibility that our surroundings, indeed our very bodies, were inhabited by tiny living beings.

The first microscopist
to publish a systematic study of the
world as seen under a microscope was
Robert Hooke (1635–1703). As cura-
tor of experiments for the Royal Society
of London, Hooke built the first
compound microscope—a magni-
fying instrument containing two or
more lenses that multiply their mag-
nification in series. With his micro-
scope, Hooke observed biological
materials such as nematode “vinegar
eels,” mites, and mold filaments. Hooke published drawings of these microbes in Micrographia (1665), the first publica- tion of objects observed under a microscope (Fig. 1.11).
Hooke was the first to observe distinct units of living material, which he called “cells.” Hooke first named the units cells because the shape of hollow cell walls in a slice of cork reminded him of the shape of monks’ cells in a mon- astery. But his crude lenses achieved at best 30-fold power (30×), and he never observed single-celled bacteria.

Hooke’s Micrographia inspired other microsco- pists, including Antonie van Leeuwenhoek (1632–1723), who became the first individual to observe sin- gle-celled microbes (Fig. 1.12A). As a young man, Leeuwenhoek lived in the Dutch city of Delft, where he worked as a cloth draper, a profession that introduced him to magnifying glasses. The magnifying glasses were used to inspect the qual- ity of the cloth, enabling the worker to count the number of threads. Later in life, Leeuwenhoek took up the hobby of grinding ever-stronger lenses to see into
Robert Hooke observes the micro-
scopic world. The first microscopist
to publish a systematic study of the
world as seen under a microscope was
Robert Hooke (1635–1703). As cura-
tor of experiments for the Royal Society
of London, Hooke built the first
compound microscope—a magni-
fying instrument containing two or
more lenses that multiply their mag-
nification in series. With his micro-
scope, Hooke observed biological
materials such as nematode “vinegar
eels,” mites, and mold filaments. Hooke published drawings of these microbes in Micrographia (1665), the first publica- tion of objects observed under a microscope (Fig. 1.11).
Hooke was the first to observe distinct units of living material, which he called “cells.” Hooke first named the units cells because the shape of hollow cell walls in a slice of cork reminded him of the shape of monks’ cells in a mon- astery. But his crude lenses achieved at best 30-fold power (30×), and he never observed single-celled bacteria.
Antonie van Leeuwenhoek observes bacteria with a sin- gle lens. Hooke’s Micrographia inspired other microsco- pists, including Antonie van Leeuwenhoek (1632–1723),
the world of the unseen.

Leeuwenhoek ground lenses stron-
ger than Hooke’s, which he used to build single-lens magnifiers, complete with sample holder and focus adjustment (Fig. 1.12B). First he observed insects, including lice and fleas; then the relatively
large single cells of protists and algae; then, ultimately, bac- teria. One day he applied his microscope to observe matter extracted from between his teeth. He wrote, “To my great surprise [I] perceived that the aforesaid matter contained very many small living Animals, which moved themselves very extravagantly.”
Over the rest of his life, Leeuwenhoek recorded page after page on the movement of microbes, reporting their size and shape so accurately that in many cases we can determine the species he observed (Fig. 1.12C). He per- formed experiments, comparing, for example, the appear- ance of “small animals” from his teeth before and after drinking hot coffee. The disappearance of microbes from his teeth after drinking a hot beverage suggested that heat killed microbes—a profoundly important principle for the study and control of microbes ever since.

Leeuwenhoek is believed to have died, ironically, of a dis- ease contracted from sheep whose bacteria he had observed. Historians have often wondered why it took so many cen- turies for Leeuwenhoek and his successors to determine the link between microbes and disease. Although observers such as Agostino Bassi de Lodi (1773–1856) noted cases of microbes associated with pathology (see Table 1.2), the very ubiquity of microbes—most of them actually harmless—may have obscured their more deadly roles. In addition, it was hard to distinguish between microbes and the single-celled components of the human body, such as blood cells and sperm. It was not until the nineteenth century that human tissues could be distinguished from microbial cells by the application of differential chemical stains (discussed in Chapter 2).

The observation of microscopic organisms led priests and philosophers to wonder where these tiny beings came from. In the eighteenth century, scientists and church leaders intensely debated the question of spontaneous generation. Spontaneous generation is the concept that living crea- tures such as maggots could arise spontaneously, without parental organisms. Chemists of the day tended to support spontaneous generation, as it appeared similar to the way chemicals changed during reaction. Christian church lead- ers, however, supported the biblical view that all organisms have “parents” going back to the first week of creation.
The Italian priest Francesco Redi (1626–1697) showed that maggots in decaying meat were the offspring of flies. Meat kept in a sealed container, excluding flies, did not produce maggots. Thus, Redi’s experiment argued against spontaneous generation for macroscopic organisms. The meat still putrefied, however, producing microbes that seemed to arise “without parents.”
To disprove spontaneous generation of microbes, another Italian priest, Lazzaro Spallanzani (1729–1799), showed that a sealed flask of meat broth sterilized by boiling failed to grow microbes. Spallanzani also noticed that microbes often appeared in pairs. Were these two parental microbes coupling to produce offspring, or did one microbe become two? Through long and tenacious observation, Spallanzani watched a single microbe grow in size until it split in two. Thus he demonstrated cell fission, the process by which cells arise by the splitting of preexisting cells.
Even Spallanzani’s experiments, however, did not put the matter to rest. Proponents of spontaneous generation argued that the microbes in the priest’s flask lacked access to oxygen and therefore could not grow. The pursuit of this question was left to future microbiologists, including the famous French microbiologist Louis Pasteur (1822–1895) (Fig. 1.13A). In addressing spontaneous generation and related questions, Pasteur and his contemporaries laid the foundations for modern microbiology.

Pasteur began his scientific career as a chemist and wrote his doctoral thesis on the structure of organic crys- tals. He discovered the fundamental chemical property of chirality, the fact that some organic molecules exist in two forms that differ only by mirror symmetry. In other words, the two structures are mirror images of one another, like the right and left hands. Pasteur found that when microbes were cultured on a nutrient substance containing both mirror forms, only one mirror form was consumed.
He concluded that the metabolic preference for one mir- ror form was a fundamental property of life. Subsequent research has confirmed that most molecules of organisms, such as DNA and proteins, are found in only one of their mirror forms.
As a chemist, Pasteur was asked to help with a widespread problem encountered by French manufacturers of wine and beer. The alcohol in beverages comes from fermentation, a process by which microbes gain energy by converting sug- ars into alcohol. In the time of Pasteur, however, the con- version of grapes or grain to alcohol was believed to be a spontaneous chemical process. No one could explain why some fermentation mixtures produced vinegar (acetic acid) instead of alcohol. Pasteur discovered that fermentation is actually caused by living yeast, a single-celled fungus. In the absence of oxygen, yeast produces alcohol as a terminal waste product. But when the yeast culture is contaminated with bacteria, the bacteria outgrow the yeast and produce acetic acid instead of alcohol. (Fermentative metabolism is discussed in Chapter 13.)
Pasteur’s work on fermentation led him to test a key claim made by proponents of spontaneous generation. The proponents claimed that Spallanzani’s failure to find spon- taneous appearance of microbes was due to lack of oxygen. From his studies of yeast fermentation, Pasteur knew that some microbial species do not require oxygen for growth. So he devised an unsealed flask with a long, bent “swan neck” that admitted air but kept the boiled contents free of dust that carried microbes (Fig. 1.13B). The famous swan- necked flasks remained free of microbial growth for many years, but when a flask was tilted to enable contact of broth with dust, microbes grew immediately. Thus, Pasteur dis- proved that lack of oxygen was the reason for the failure of spontaneous generation in Spallanzani’s flasks.
But even Pasteur’s work did not prove that microbial growth requires preexisting microbes. The Irish scientist John Tyndall (1820–1893) attempted the same experiment as Pasteur but sometimes found the opposite result. Tyndall found that the broth sometimes gave rise to microbes no matter how long it was sterilized by boiling. The microbes appear because some kinds of organic matter, particularly hay infusion, are contaminated with a heat-resistant form of bacteria called “endospores” (or “spores”). The spore form can be eliminated only by repeated cycles of boiling and resting, in which the spores germinate to the growing, vegetative form that is killed at 100°C.
It was later discovered that endospores could be killed by boiling under pressure, as in a pressure cooker, which generates higher temperatures than can be obtained at atmospheric pressure. The steam pressure device called the autoclave became the standard way to sterilize materials for the controlled study of microbes. (Microbial control and antisepsis are discussed further in Chapter 5.)

Over the centuries, thoughtful observers such as Fracastoro and Bassi (see Table 1.2) noted a connection between microbes and disease. Ultimately, researchers developed the germ theory of disease, the theory that many diseases are caused by microbes. Research today pursues the secrets of many microbial diseases, such as cholera, the focus of Rita Colwell, first microbiologist to direct the National Science Foundation (eTopic 1.1).

As a college student, Koch con-
ducted biochemical experiments on his own
digestive system. Koch’s curiosity about
the natural world led him to develop prin-
ciples and methods crucial to microbial
investigation, including the pure-culture
technique and the famous Koch’s postu-
lates for identifying the causative agent of
a disease. He applied his methods to numer-
ous lethal diseases around the world, includ-
ing anthrax and tuberculosis in Europe, bubonic plague in India, and malaria in New Guinea (Fig. 1.15).

Anthrax interested Koch because its epidemics in sheep and cattle caused economic hardship among local farmers. Today, anthrax is no longer a major problem for agricul- ture, because its transmission is prevented by effective envi- ronmental controls and vaccination. It has, however, gained notoriety as a bioterror agent because anthrax bacteria can survive for long periods in the dormant desiccated form of an endospore. In 2001, anthrax spores sent through the mail contaminated post offices as well as an office building of the U.S. Senate, causing several deaths.
To investigate whether anthrax was a transmissible dis- ease, Koch used blood from an anthrax-infected cow car- cass to inoculate a rabbit. When the rabbit died, he used its blood to inoculate a second rabbit, which then died in turn. The blood of the unfortunate animal had turned black with long, rod-shaped bacilli. Upon introduction of these bacilli into healthy animals, the animals became ill with anthrax. Thus, Koch demonstrated an important principle of epidemiology: the chain of infection, or trans- mission of a disease. In retrospect, his choice of anthrax was fortunate, because anthrax microbes generate disease very quickly, multiply in the blood to high numbers, and remain infective outside the body for long periods.
Koch and his colleagues then applied their experimental logic and culture methods to a more challenging disease: tuberculosis. In Koch’s day, tuberculosis caused one- seventh of all reported deaths in Europe; today, tuberculo- sis bacteria continue to infect millions of people worldwide. Koch’s approach to anthrax, however, was less applicable to tuberculosis, a disease that develops slowly after many years of dormancy. Furthermore, the causative bacterium, Myco- bacterium tuberculosis, is small and difficult to distinguish from human tissue or from different bacteria of similar appearance associated with the human body. How could Koch prove that a particular bacterium caused a particular disease?
What was needed was to isolate a pure culture of micro- organisms, a culture grown from a single “parental” cell. Previous researchers had achieved pure cultures by a labo- rious process of serially diluting suspended bacteria until a culture tube contained only a single cell. Alternatively, inoculating a solid surface such as a sliced potato could pro- duce isolated colonies—distinct populations of bacteria, each grown from a single cell. For M. tuberculosis, Koch inoculated serum, which then formed a solid gel after heat- ing. Later he refined the solid-substrate technique by add- ing gelatin to a defined liquid medium, which could then be chilled to form a solid medium in a glass dish. A covered version called the petri dish (or “petri plate”) was invented by a colleague, Julius Richard Petri (1852–1921). The petri dish is a round dish with vertical walls covered by an inverted dish of slightly larger diameter. Today the petri dish, generally made of disposable plastic, remains an indis- pensable part of the microbiological laboratory.
Another improvement in solid-substrate culture was the replacement of gelatin with materials that remain solid at higher temperatures, such as the gelling agent agar (a poly- mer of the sugar galactose). The use of agar was recom- mended by Angelina Hesse (1850–1934), a microscopist and illustrator, to her husband, Walther Hesse (1846– 1911), a young medical colleague of Koch (Fig. 1.16). Agar comes from red algae (seaweed), which is used by East Indian birds to build nests; it is the main ingredient in the delicacy “bird’s nest soup.” Dutch colonists used agar to make jellies and preserves, and a Dutch colonist from Java introduced it to Angelina Hesse. The Hesses used agar to develop the first effective growth medium for tuberculosis bacteria. Pure culture and growth conditions are discussed further in Chapters 4 and 5.

Note that some kinds of microbes cannot be grown in pure culture—that is, without other organisms. For exam- ple, the marine cyanobacterium Prochlorococcus, a major source of Earth’s oxygen, requires heterotrophic bacteria to remove toxic oxygen radicals. And all viruses can be cul- tured only within their host cells (see Chapter 6). The dis- covery of viruses is explored at the end of this section.

For his successful determination of the bacterium that causes tuberculosis, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Koch was awarded the 1905 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine. Koch formulated his famous set of criteria for establish- ing a causative link between an infectious agent and a dis- ease (Fig. 1.17). These four criteria are known as Koch’s postulates:
The microbe is found in all cases of the disease but is absent from healthy individuals.
The microbe is isolated from the diseased host and grown in pure culture.
When the microbe is introduced into a healthy, suscep- tible host (or animal model), the host shows the same disease.
The same strain of microbe is obtained from the newly diseased host. When cultured, the strain shows the same characteristics as before.

Koch’s postulates continue to be used to determine whether a given strain of microbe causes a disease. An example is Lyme disease (borreliosis), a tick-borne infec- tion first described in New England, and shown in 1981 to be caused by the bacterium Borrelia burgdorferi. Neverthe- less, the postulates remain only a guide; individual diseases and pathogens may confound one or more of the criteria. For example, tuberculosis bacteria are now known to cause symptoms in only 10% of the people infected. If Koch had been able to detect these silent bacilli, they would not have fulfilled his first criterion. In the case of AIDS, the concen- tration of HIV virus is so low that initially no virus could be detected in patients with fully active symptoms. It took the invention of the polymerase chain reaction (PCR), a method of producing any number of copies of DNA or RNA sequences, to detect the presence of HIV. Modern research on microbial disease is presented in Chapter 25.
Another difficulty with AIDS and many other human diseases is the absence of an animal host that exhibits the same disease. For AIDS, even chimpanzees (our closest rel- atives) are not susceptible, although they acquire a simi- lar disease from related retroviruses. For diseases without a cure, experimental inoculation of humans is banned by law. Curable or self-limiting diseases may be tested on vol- unteers in clinical trials. In rare cases, researchers have vol- untarily exposed themselves to a proposed pathogen. For example, Australian researcher Barry Marshall ingested Helicobacter pylori to convince skeptical colleagues that this organism could colonize the extremely acidic stomach. H. pylori turned out to be the causative agent of gastritis and stomach ulcers, conditions that had long been thought to be caused by stress rather than infection. For the dis- covery of H. pylori and its role in gastritis, Marshall and
colleague J. Robin Warren won the 2005 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine.

Identifying the cause of a disease is, of course, only the first step in developing an effective therapy and prevent- ing further transmission. Early microbiologists achieved some remarkable insights on how to control pathogens (see Table 1.2).
The first clue of how to protect an individual from a deadly disease came from the dreaded smallpox. In the eighteenth century, smallpox infected a large fraction of the European population, killing or disfiguring many peo- ple. In countries of Asia and Africa, however, the incidence of smallpox was decreased by the practice of deliberately inoculating children with material from smallpox pustules. Inoculated children usually developed a mild case of the disease and were protected from smallpox thereafter.
The practice of smallpox inoculation was introduced from Turkey to Europe in 1717 by Lady Mary Montagu, a small- pox survivor (Fig. 1.18A). While traveling in Turkey, Lady Montagu learned that many elderly women there had per- fected the art of inoculation: “The old woman comes with a nut-shell full of the matter of the best sort of small-pox, and asks what vein you please to have opened.” During a period outside the host, the virus becomes “attenuated”— that is, loses some of its molecular structure required for infection. The attenuated virus stimulates the immune sys- tem with much lower mortality than does the fully virulent virus. Lady Montagu arranged for the procedure on her own son and then brought the practice back to England. A simi- lar practice of smallpox inoculation was introduced to the American colonies by a slave, Onesimus, from the Coroman- tee people of Africa. Onesimus convinced his master, Rever- end Dr. Cotton Mather, to promote smallpox inoculation as a defense against an epidemic that was devastating Boston.

Preventive inoculation with smallpox was dangerous, however, because some infected individuals still contracted serious disease and were contagious. Thus, doctors con- tinued to seek a better method of prevention. In England, milkmaids claimed that they were protected from small- pox after they contracted cowpox (caused by vaccinia virus), a related but much milder disease. English physi- cian Edward Jenner (1749–1823) confirmed this claim by deliberately infecting patients with matter from cowpox lesions (Fig. 1.18B). The practice of cowpox inoculation was called vaccination, after the Latin word vacca, mean- ing “cow.” At the time, the practice was highly controver- sial, as people feared they would somehow turn into cows (Fig. 1.18C). Today, unfortunately, modern immuniza- tions still raise irrational concerns. Failure to accept immu- nization leads to outbreaks of preventable disease, such as the Disneyland measles outbreak in 2015.
Pasteur was aware of vaccination as he studied the course of various diseases in experimental animals. In the spring of 1879, he was studying fowl cholera, a transmissible disease of chickens with a high death rate. He had isolated and cultured the bacteria that had killed the chickens, but he left his work during the summer for a long vacation. No refrigeration was available to preserve cultures, and when he returned to work, the aged bacteria failed to cause disease in his chickens. Pas- teur then obtained fresh bacteria from an outbreak of disease elsewhere, as well as some new chickens. But the fresh bacte- ria failed to make the original chickens sick (those that had been exposed to the aged bacteria). All of the new chickens, exposed only to the fresh bacteria, contracted the disease. Grasping the clue from his mistake, Pasteur had the insight to recognize that an attenuated strain of microbe, altered some- how to eliminate its potency to cause disease, could still con- fer immunity to the virulent disease-causing form.

Pasteur was the first to recognize the significance of atten- uation and extend the principle to other pathogens. We now know that the molecular components of pathogens generate immunity, the resistance to a specific disease, by stimulat- ing the immune system, an organism’s exceedingly complex cellular mechanisms of defense (see Chapters 23 and 24). Understanding the immune system awaited the techniques of molecular biology a century later, but nineteenth-century physicians developed several effective examples of immuni- zation, the stimulation of an immune response by deliberate inoculation with an attenuated pathogen.
The way to attenuate a strain depends on the pathogen. Heat treatment or aging for various periods often turns out to be the most effective approach. The original success of prophylactic smallpox inoculation was due to natural atten- uation of the virus during the time between acquisition of smallpox matter from a diseased individual and inoculation of the healthy patient. A far more elaborate treatment was required to combat the most famous disease for which Pas- teur devised a vaccine: rabies.
The rabid dog loomed large in folklore, and rabies was dreaded for its particularly horrible and inevitable course of death. Pasteur’s vaccine for rabies required a highly com- plex series of heat treatments and repeated inoculations. Its success led to his instant fame (Fig. 1.19). Grateful sur- vivors of rabies founded the Pasteur Institute for medical research, one of the world’s greatest medical research insti- tutions, whose scientists in the twentieth century discov- ered the virus HIV, which causes AIDS.

In 1847, Hungarian physician Ignaz Semmelweis (1818– 1865) noticed that the death rate of women in childbirth due to puerperal fever was much higher in his own hospi- tal than in a birthing center run by midwives. He guessed that the doctors in his hospital were transmitting patho- gens from cadavers that they had dissected. So he ordered the doctors to wash their hands in chlorine, an antisep- tic agent (a chemical that kills microbes). The mortality rate fell, but this revelation displeased other doctors, who refused to accept Semmelweis’s findings.

In 1865, the British surgeon Joseph Lister (1827–1912) noted that half of his amputee patients died of sepsis. Lister knew from Pasteur that microbial contamination might be the cause. So he began experiments to develop the use of antiseptic agents, most successfully carbolic acid, to treat wounds and surgical instruments. After initial resistance, Lister’s work, with the support of Pasteur and Koch, drew widespread recognition. In the twentieth century, surgeons developed fully aseptic environments for surgery—that is, environments completely free of microbes.

The problem with most antiseptic chemicals that killed microbes was that if taken internally, they would also kill the patients. Researchers sought a “magic bullet,” an anti- biotic molecule that would kill only microbes, leaving their host unharmed.
An important step in the search for antibiotics was the realization that microbes themselves produce antibiotic compounds. This conclusion followed from the famous accidental discovery of penicillin by the Scottish medical researcher Alexander Fleming (1881–1955) (Fig. 1.20A). In 1929, Fleming was culturing Staphylococcus, which infects wounds. He found that one of his plates of Staphy- lococcus was contaminated with a mold, Penicillium nota- tum, which he noticed was surrounded by a clear region free of Staphylococcus colonies (Fig. 1.20B). Following up on this observation, Fleming showed that the mold pro- duced a substance that killed bacteria. We now know this substance as penicillin.

In 1941, biochemists Howard Florey (1898–1968) and Ernst Chain (1906–1979) purified the penicillin molecule, which we now know inhibits formation of the bacterial cell wall. Penicillin saved the lives of many Allied troops during World War II, the first war in which an antibiotic became available to soldiers.
The second half of the twentieth century saw the dis- covery of many new and powerful antibiotics. Most of the new antibiotics, however, were made by little-known bac- teria and fungi from endangered ecosystems—a circum- stance that focused attention on wilderness preservation. Furthermore, the widespread and often indiscriminate use of antibiotics selects for pathogens to evolve resistance to antibiotics. As a result, antibiotics have lost their effective- ness against certain strains of major pathogens. For example, multidrug-resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) are now serious threats to public health. To combat evolving drug resistance, we continually need to research and develop new antibiotics. Microbial biosynthesis of antibiotics is dis- cussed in Chapter 15, and the medical use of antibiotics is discussed in Chapter 27.

Viruses are much smaller than the host cells they infect; most are too small to be seen by a light microscope. So how were they discovered? In 1892, the Russian botanist Dmi- tri Ivanovsky (1864–1920) studied tobacco mosaic disease, a condition in which the leaves become mottled and the crop yield is decreased or destroyed altogether. Ivanovsky knew that some kind of microbe from the diseased plants transmitted the disease, and he wondered how small it was. He was surprised to find that the agent of transmission could pass through a porcelain filter having a pore size (0.1 μm) that blocked known microbes. Later, the Dutch plant microbiologist Martinus Beijerinck (1851–1931) con- ducted similar filtration experiments. Beijerinck concluded that because the agent of disease passed through a filter that retained bacteria, it could not be a bacterial cell.

The “filterable agent” of disease was ultimately purified by the American scientist Wendell Stanley (1904–1971), who processed 4,000 kilograms (kg) of infected tobacco leaves. Stanley obtained a sample of infective virus parti- cles pure enough to crystallize, in a 3D array comparable to crystals composed of inert chemicals. The crystal was analyzed by X-ray crystallography (discussed in Chapter 2) to reveal the molecular structure of tobacco mosaic virus (Fig. 1.21A)—a feat that earned Stanley the 1946 Nobel Prize in Chemistry. The fact that an object capable of bio- logical reproduction could be stable enough to be crystal- lized amazed scientists, ultimately leading to a new, more mechanical view of living organisms. Today, we consider viruses “subcellular organisms.” Even smaller subcellular entities that replicate within cells include plasmids and pri- ons (see Chapter 6).

The individual particle of tobacco mosaic virus consists of a helical tube of protein subunits containing its genetic material coiled within (Fig. 1.21B). Stanley thought the virus was a catalytic protein, but colleagues later deter- mined that it contained RNA as its genetic material. The structure of the coiled RNA was solved through X-ray crystallography by the British scientist Rosalind Frank- lin (1920–1958). Other viruses that have RNA genomes include influenza and HIV (AIDS); viruses with DNA genomes include polio and herpes viruses. We now know that all kinds of animals, plants, and microbial cells can be infected by viruses—and carry endogenous viruses that may benefit their hosts.

Robert Koch devised techniques of pure culture to study a single species of microbe in isolation. A key tech- nique is culture on solid medium using agar, as devel- oped by Angelina and Walther Hesse, in a double-dish container devised by Julius Petri.

Koch’s postulates provide a set of criteria to establish a causative link between an infectious agent and a disease.

Edward Jenner established the practice of vaccination, inoculation with cowpox to prevent smallpox. Jenner’s discovery was based on earlier observations by Lady Mary Montagu and others that a mild case of smallpox could prevent future cases.

Louis Pasteur developed the first vaccines based on attenuated strains, such as the rabies vaccine.

Ignaz Semmelweis and Joseph Lister showed that antiseptics could prevent transmission of pathogens from doctor to patient.

Alexander Fleming discovered that the Penicillium mold generates a substance that kills bacteria.

Howard Florey and Ernst Chain purified the sub- stance penicillin, the first commercial antibiotic to save human lives.

Dmitri Ivanovsky and Martinus Beijerinck discovered viruses as filterable infective particles. Viruses, which may be harmful or beneficial, infect all kinds of cells.

Koch’s growth of microbes in pure culture was a major advance, enabling the systematic study of microbial physiol- ogy and biochemistry. But how does pure culture relate to “natural” environments, such as a forest or a human intes- tine, where countless kinds of microbes interact?

In hindsight, the invention of pure culture eclipsed the equally important study of microbial ecology (discussed in Chapters 21 and 22). Microbes cycle the many minerals essential for all life, including all atmospheric nitrogen gas and much of the oxygen. Yet less than 0.1% of all microbial species can be cultured in the laboratory. Indeed, uncul- turable microbes make up the majority of Earth’s entire biosphere. Only the outer skin of Earth supports complex multicellular life. The depths of Earth’s crust, to at least 3 kilometers (km) down, as well as the atmosphere 15 km out into the stratosphere, remain the domain of microbes. So, to a first approximation, Earth’s ecology is microbial ecology.

The first microbiologists to culture microbes in the labo- ratory selected the kinds of nutrients that feed humans, such as beef broth or potatoes. Some of Koch’s contem- poraries, however, suspected that other kinds of microbes living in soil or wetlands consume more exotic fare. Soil samples were known to oxidize hydrogen gas, and this activity was eliminated by treatment with heat or acid, suggesting microbial origin. Ammonia in sewage was oxi- dized by donating electrons to oxygen, forming nitrate. Nitrate formation was eliminated by antibacterial treat- ment. These findings suggested the existence of microbes that “eat” hydrogen gas or ammonia instead of beef or potatoes, but no one could isolate these microbes in culture.

Among the first to study microbes in natural habitats was the Russian scientist Sergei Win- ogradsky (1856–1953). Wino- gradsky waded through marshes to discover microbes with metab- olisms quite alien from human digestion. For example, he discov- ered that species of the bacterium Beggiatoa oxidize hydrogen sulfide (H2S) to sulfuric acid (H2SO4). Beggiatoa fixes carbon dioxide into biomass without consuming any organic food. Organisms that feed solely on inorganic minerals are known as chemolithotrophs, or lithotrophs (discussed fur- ther in Chapters 4 and 14).

The lithotrophs studied by Winogradsky could not be grown on Koch’s plate media containing agar or gelatin. The bacteria that Winogradsky isolated can grow only on inorganic minerals; in fact, some species are actually poi- soned by organic food. For example, nitrifiers convert ammonia to nitrate, forming a crucial part of the nitrogen cycle in natural ecosystems. Winogradsky cultured nitri- fiers on a totally inorganic solution containing ammonia and silica gel, which supported no other kind of organism. This experiment was an early example of enrichment cul- ture, the use of selective growth media that support certain classes of microbial metabolism while excluding others.

Instead of isolating pure colonies, Winogradsky built a model wetland ecosystem containing regions of enrich- ment for microbes of diverse metabolism. This model is called the Winogradsky column (Fig. 1.22). The model consists of a glass tube containing mud (a source of wetland bacteria) mixed with shredded newsprint (an organic car- bon source) and calcium salts of sulfate and carbonate (an inorganic carbon source for autotrophs). After exposure to light for several weeks, several zones of color develop, full of mineral-metabolizing bacteria. At the top, cyanobacteria conduct photosynthesis, using light energy to split water and produce molecular oxygen. Below, purple sulfur bacte- ria use photosynthesis to split hydrogen sulfide, producing sulfur. At the bottom, with O2 exhausted, bacteria reduce (donate electrons to) alternative electron acceptors such as sulfate. Sulfate-reducing bacteria produce hydrogen sulfide and precipitate iron.

Like a battery cell, the gradient from oxygen-rich con- ditions at the surface to highly reduced conditions below generates a voltage potential. We now know that the entire Earth’s surface acts as a battery—for humans, a potential source of renewable energy. A fuel cell to generate electric- ity is described in Chapter 14.

Winogradsky and later microbial ecolo- gists showed that bacteria perform unique roles in geochemical cycling, the global interconversion of inorganic and organic forms of nitrogen, sulfur, phosphorus, and other minerals. Without these essential conversions (nutrient cycles), no plants or animals could live. Bacteria and archaea fix nitrogen (N2) by reducing it to ammonia (NH3), the form of nitrogen assimilated by plants. This process is called nitrogen fixation (Fig. 1.23). Other bacterial spe- cies oxidize ammonium ions (NH +) in several stages back to nitrogen gas. Nitrogen fixation and geochemical cycling are discussed further in Chapters 21 and 22.

Today, microbes with unusual properties, such as the ability to digest toxic wastes or withstand extreme tem- peratures, have valuable applications in industry and biore- mediation. For this reason, microbial ecology is a priority for funding by the National Science Foundation (NSF). Microbial ecologist Rita Colwell (Fig. 1.24A) directed the NSF from 1998 to 2004 and founded the Biocomplexity Initiative to study complex interactions between microbes and other life in the environment. Such research includes discovery of extremophiles, microbes from environments with extreme heat, salinity, acidity, or other factors. One such extremophile microbe is the archaeon Geogemma, which reduces rust (iron oxide, Fe2O3) to the magnetic mineral magnetite (Fe3O4) while growing in an auto- clave at 121°C, a temperature high enough to kill all other known organisms (Fig. 1.24B). Microbiologist Kazem Kashefi uses a magnet to show that Geogemma converts nonmagnetic iron oxide (rust, Fe2O3) to the magnetic min- eral magnetite (Fe3O4) (Fig. 1.24C).

Within plant cells, certain bacteria fix nitrogen as endosym- bionts, organisms living symbiotically inside larger organ- isms. Endosymbiotic bacteria known as rhizobia induce the roots of legumes to form special nodules to facilitate bac- terial nitrogen fixation. Rhizobial endosymbiosis was first observed by Martinus Beijerinck. Microbial endosymbio- sis, in a variety of diverse forms, is widespread in all eco- systems. Many interesting cases involve animal or human hosts. Endosymbiotic microbes make essential nutritional contributions to host animals. Ruminant animals such as cattle, as well as insects such as termites, require digestive bacteria to break down cellulose and other plant polymers. Even humans obtain about 15% of their nutrition from colonic bacteria (Fig. 1.25). Intestinal bacteria such as E. coli and Bacteroides species grow as biofilms, organized multispecies communities adhering to a surface. Biofilms play major roles in all ecosystems and within parts of the human body (discussed in Chapters 4 and 21). The bio- film shown in Figure 1.25B is attached to the surface of a digested food particle. Most kinds of plant fibers that we consume actually require microbial enzymes to digest (see Chapter 21).

Many invertebrates, such as hydras and corals, harbor endosymbiotic phototrophs that provide products of photo- synthesis in return for protection and nutrients. Other kinds of endosymbiosis involve more than nutrition. In the light organs of squid, luminescent bacteria, such as Aliivibrio fischeri, produce light (bioluminescence) that helps the host evade nocturnal predators. The host squid controls the amount and direction of light that leaves the organ so that it matches the illumination from the moon, rendering the squid nearly invisible. Bacteria that normally inhabit the human intestine and skin protect our bodies from infection by pathogens. Gut bacteria regulate development of our immune system, and even send signals to the brain.

The human microbiota or microbiome is the collection of all microbes associated with the human body. Physicians increasingly consider the human microbiome to be a part of the body, as essential as a limb or an organ. In 2016, the U.S. government announced the National Microbiome Ini- tiative to advance understanding of how microbiomes con- tribute to our health and the environment. Microbiomes are discussed further in Chapter 21.

Sergei Winogradsky developed the first system of enrichment culture, called the Winogradsky column, to grow microbes from natural environments.

Chemolithotrophs (or lithotrophs) metabolize inor- ganic minerals, such as ammonia, instead of the organic nutrients used by the microbes isolated by Koch.

Geochemical cycling depends on bacteria and archaea that cycle nitrogen, phosphorus, and other minerals throughout the biosphere.

Endosymbionts are microbes that live within host organisms and provide essential functions for their hosts, such as nitrogen fixation for legume plants, or digestion of complex food molecules for humans and other animals.

Martinus Beijerinck was the first to demonstrate that nitrogen-fixing rhizobia grow as endosymbionts within leguminous plants.

The bewildering diversity of microbial life-forms presented nineteenth-century microbiologists with a seemingly impos- sible task of classification. So little was known about life under the lens that natural scientists despaired of ever learn- ing how to distinguish microbial species. The famous clas- sifier of species, Swedish botanist Carl von Linné (Carolus Linnaeus, 1707–1778), called the microbial world “chaos.”


Early taxonomists faced two challenges as they attempted to classify microbes. First, the resolution of the light micro- scope visualized little more than the outward shape of microbial cells, and vastly different kinds of microbes looked more or less alike (discussed in Chapter 2). This challenge was overcome as advances in biochemistry and microscopy made it possible to distinguish microbes by metabolism and cell structure, and ultimately by DNA sequence.
Second, microbes do not readily fit the classic defini- tion of a species—that is, a group of organisms that inter- breed. Unlike multicellular eukaryotes, microbes generally reproduce asexually. When they do exchange genes, they may do so with related strains or with distantly related spe- cies (discussed in Chapter 9). Nevertheless, microbiolo- gists have devised working definitions of microbial species that enable us to usefully describe populations while being flexible enough to accommodate continual revision and change (discussed in Chapter 17). The most useful defini- tions are based on genetic similarity. For example, two dis- tinct species generally share no more than 95% similarity of DNA sequence.

In the nineteenth century, taxonomists had no DNA infor- mation. As they tried to incorporate microbes into the tree of life, they faced a conceptual dilemma because microbes could not be categorized as either animals or plants, which since ancient times had been considered the two “king- doms” or major categories of life. Taxonomists attempted to apply these categories to microbes—for example, by including algae and fungi with plants. But German natu- ralist Ernst Haeckel (1834–1919) recognized that microbes differed from both plants and animals in fundamental aspects of their lifestyle, cellular structure, and biochem- istry. Haeckel proposed that microscopic organisms consti- tuted a third kind of life—neither animal nor plant—which he called Monera.

In the twentieth century, biochemical studies revealed profound distinctions even within the Monera. In particu- lar, microbes such as protists and algae contain a nucleus enclosed by a nuclear membrane, whereas bacteria do not. Herbert Copeland (1902–1968) proposed a system of clas- sification that divided Monera into two groups: the eukary- otic protists (protozoa and algae) and the prokaryotic bacteria. Copeland’s four-kingdom classification (plants, animals, eukaryotic protists, and prokaryotic bacteria) was later modified by Robert Whittaker (1920–1980) to include fungi as another kingdom of eukaryotic microbes. Whittaker’s system thus generated five kingdoms: bacteria, protists, fungi, and the multicellular plants and animals.

The endosymbiosis theory was highly controversial because it implied a polyphyletic, or multiple, ancestry of living species, inconsistent with the long-held assump- tion that species evolve only by divergence from a com- mon ancestor (monophyletic ancestry). Ultimately, DNA sequence analysis produced compelling evidence of the bacterial origin of mitochondria and chloroplasts. Both of these classes of organelles contain circular molecules of DNA, whose sequences show unmistakable homology (similarity) to those of bacteria. DNA sequences and other evidence established the common ancestry between mito- chondria and respiring bacteria, and between chloroplasts and cyanobacteria. The symbiotic origins and evolution of mitochondria and chloroplasts are discussed further in Chapter 17.

Are there cellular microbes that differ from both bacteria and eukaryotes? Gene sequence analysis led to another star- tling advance in our understanding of how cells evolved. In 1977, Carl Woese (1928–2012), at the University of Illi- nois, was studying a group of recently discovered prokary- otes that live in seemingly hostile environments, such as the boiling sulfur springs of Yellowstone, or that conduct unusual kinds of metabolism, such as production of meth- ane (methanogenesis). Woese used the sequence of the gene for 16S ribosomal RNA (16S rRNA) as a “molecu- lar clock,” a gene whose sequence differences can be used to measure the time since the divergence of two species (discussed in Chapter 17). The divergence of rRNA genes showed that the newly discovered prokaryotes were a dis- tinct form of life: archaea (Fig. 1.27).

The archaea resemble bacteria in their relatively simple cell structure, in their lack of a nucleus, and in their abil- ity to grow in a wide range of environments. In fact, many archaea grow along with bacteria within the human colon, or in common soil or water. But certain types of archaea, such as the autoclave-cultured archaeon Geogemma, grow in environments more extreme than any that support bac- teria. The genetic sequences of archaea differ as much from those of bacteria as from those of eukaryotes; in fact, their gene expression machinery is more similar to that of eukaryotes.

Woese’s discovery replaced the classification scheme of five kingdoms with three equally distinct groups, now called the three “domains”: Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya (Fig. 1.28). In the three-domain model, the bacterial ancestor of mitochondria derives from ancient proteobacteria (shaded pink in the figure), whereas chlo- roplasts derive from ancient cyanobacteria (shaded green).

Classifying microbes was a challenge historically because of the difficulties in observing distinguishing characteristics of different categories.
During the twentieth century, amid world wars and societal transformations, the field of microbiology exploded with new knowledge (see Table 1.2). More than 99% of what we know about microbes today was discovered after 1900 by scientists too numerous to cite in this book. Advances in biochemistry and microscopy revealed the fundamen- tal structure and function of cell membranes and proteins. The revelation of the structures of DNA and RNA led to the discovery of the genetic programs of model bacte- ria, such as E. coli, and the lambda bacteriophage. Beyond microbiology, these advances produced the technology of “recombinant DNA,” or genetic engineering, the construc- tion of molecules that combine DNA sequences from unre- lated species. These microbial tools offered unprecedented applications for human medicine and industry (discussed in Chapters 7–12)

In 1900, the study of cell structure was still limited by the limited resolution of the light microscope and by the absence of tools that could take apart cells to isolate their components. Both of these limitations were overcome by the invention of powerful instruments. Just as society was being transformed by machines ranging from jet airplanes to vacuum cleaners, the study of microbiology was also being transformed by machines. Two instruments had exceptionalimpact:Theelectronmicroscoperevealedthe internal structure of cells (Chapter 2), and the ultracentri- fuge enabled isolation of subcellular parts (Chapter 3).

In the 1920s, at the Technical University in Berlin, student Ernst Ruska (1906–1988) was invited to develop an instrument for focusing rays of electrons. Ruska recalled, from his childhood, that his father’s microscope could magnify fascinating specimens of plants and animals, but that its resolution was limited by the wavelength of light. He was eager to devise lenses that could focus beams of electrons, with wavelengths far smaller than that of light, to reveal living details never seen before. Ultimately, Ruska built lenses to focus electrons using specially designed electromagnets. Magnetic lenses were used to complete the first electron microscope in 1933 (Fig. 1.29). Early transmission electron microscopes achieved about tenfold greater magnification than the light microscope, revealing details such as the ridged shell of a diatom. Further development steadily increased magnifica- tion, to as high as a millionfold.

For the first time, cells were seen to be composed of a cytoplasm containing macromolecules and bounded by a phospholipid membrane. For example, the electron micro- graph in Figure 1.30 shows a “thin section” of the pho- tosynthetic bacterium Chlorobium, including its nucleoid (DNA) and its light-harvesting chlorosomes. Electron microscopy is discussed further in Chapter 2.

Subcellular structures, however, raised many questions about cell function that visualization alone could not answer. Biochemists showed that cell function involves numerous chemi-
cal transformations mediated by enzymes.
A milestone in the study of metabolism was
the elucidation by German biochemist Hans
Krebs (1900–1981) of the tricarboxylic acid
cycle (TCA cycle, or Krebs cycle), by which
the products of sugar digestion are converted
to carbon dioxide. The TCA cycle provides
energy for many bacteria and for the mitochon-
dria of eukaryotes. But even Krebs understood
little of how metabolism is organized within a cell;
he and his contemporaries considered the cell a “bag
of enzymes.” The full understanding of cell structure required experiments on isolated parts of cells.

Centrifugation can separate whole cells from the fluid in which they are suspended. The first centrifuges spun samples in a rotor with centrifugal force of a few thousand times that of gravity. In the nineteenth century, biochemists proposed that even greater centrifugal forces could separate components of lysed cells, even mac- romolecules such as proteins. The Swedish chemist The- odor Svedberg (1884–1971), at the University of Uppsala, built such a machine: the ultracentrifuge. By the twentieth century, ultracentrifuges achieved rates so high that they required a vacuum to avoid burning up like a space reentry vehicle. Ultracentrifuges isolated protein complexes such as ribosomes, and DNA molecules such as plasmids.

Experiments combining electron microscopy and ultra- centrifugation revealed how membranes govern energy transduction within bacteria and within organelles such as mitochondria and chloroplasts. In the 1960s, English bio- chemists Peter Mitchell (1920–1992) and Jennifer Moyle proposed and tested a revolutionary idea called the chemi- osmotic theory. The chemiosmotic theory states that the reduction-oxidation (redox) reactions of the electron trans- port system store energy in the form of a gradient of protons (hydrogen ions) across a membrane, such as the bacterial cell membrane or the inner membrane of the mitochon- drion. The energy stored in the proton gradient, in turn, drives the synthesis of ATP (discussed in Chapter 14).

As the form and function of living cells emerged in the early twentieth century, a largely separate line of research revealed patterns of heredity of cell traits. In eukaryotes, the Mendelian rules of inheritance were rediscovered and connected to the behavior of subcellular structures called chromosomes. Frederick Griffith (1879–1941) showed in 1928 that an unknown substance from dead bacteria could carry genetic information into living cells, transforming harmless bacteria into a strain capable of killing mice— a process called transformation. Some kind of “genetic material” must be inherited to direct the expression of inherited traits, but no one knew what that material was or how its information was expressed.

Then, in 1944, Oswald Avery (1877–1955) and col- leagues showed that the genetic material for transforma- tion is deoxyribonucleic acid, or DNA. An obscure acidic polymer, DNA had been previously thought too uniform in structure to carry information; its precise structure was unknown. As World War II raged among nations, scientists embarked on an epic struggle: the quest for the structure of DNA.

The tool of choice to discover the struc- ture of molecules was X-ray crystallography, a method developed by British physicists in the early 1900s. The field of X-ray analysis included an unusual number of women, including Dorothy Hodgkin (1910–1994), who later won a Nobel Prize for the structures of penicillin and vitamin B12. In 1953, crystallographer Rosalind Franklin joined a laboratory at King’s College London to study the structure of DNA (Fig. 1.31A). As a woman and as a Jew who sup- ported relief work in Palestine, Franklin felt socially isolated at the male-dominated Protestant university; her work was disparagingly called “witchcraft.” Nevertheless, her excep- tional X-ray micrographs (Fig. 1.31B) revealed for the first time that the standard B-form DNA was a double helix.

Without Franklin’s knowledge, her colleague Maurice Wilkins showed her data to a competitor, James Watson at the University of Cambridge. The pattern led Watson and Francis Crick (1916–2004) to guess that the four bases of the DNA “alphabet” were paired in the interior of Franklin’s double helix (Fig. 1.31C). They published their model in the journal Nature, while denying that they had used Franklin’s data. The discovery of the double helix earned Watson, Crick, and Wilkins the 1962 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine. Franklin died of ovarian cancer before the prize was awarded. Before her death, however, she had turned her efforts to the structure of ribonucleic acid (RNA). She determined the helical form of the RNA chromosome within tobacco mosaic virus, the first viral RNA to be characterized.

Modern X-ray crystallography (discussed in Chapter 2) reveals with atomic precision the structure of DNA, includ- ing its complementary base pairs (Fig. 1.32A). The com- plementary pairing of DNA bases led to the development of techniques for DNA sequencing, the reading of a sequence of DNA base pairs. Figure 1.32B shows a portion of the DNA sequence from bacterial DNA isolated by an under- graduate student. (The sequencing process is described in Chapter 7.) In the data, each color represents a fluorescent signal from one of the four bases (adenine, guanine, cyto- sine, or thymine). Each peak represents a DNA fragment terminating in that particular base. The order of fragment lengths yields the sequence of bases in one strand. Reading the DNA sequence enabled microbiologists to determine the beginning and endpoint of microbial genes, and ulti- mately entire genomes, as discussed in Section 1.1.

Reading the genomes enabled microbiologists to see the history of microbial evolution, reaching back to a time even before the advent of DNA—to a pre-DNA world when the cell’s chromosomes were actually composed of ribonucleic acid, RNA. This hypothetical world without DNA is called the RNA world. How did life function in the RNA world? We hypothesize that cells used RNA for all the functions of DNA and protein, including information storage and rep- lication, and biochemical catalysis. RNA molecules capable of catalysis, called ribozymes, were discovered in 1982 by Thomas Cech at the University of Colorado, and Sidney Altman at Harvard University, who earned the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1989. That same year, Jennifer Doudna and Jack Szostak at Harvard showed how an RNA mol- ecule, a self-splicing intron from Tetrahymena, could cata- lyze its own replication (Fig. 1.33). In 2009, Gerald Joyce and Tracey Lincoln at the Scripps Research Institute con- structed the first self-replicating ribozyme, an RNA that can catalyze reactions and copy itself indefinitely. These achievements support the theory that early organisms were composed primarily of R NA.
How do DNA and RNA sequences convey information in the cell? To read the DNA language required decipher- ing the genetic code—how triplets of DNA “letters” spec- ify the amino acid units of proteins. This story is discussed in Chapter 8.

What amazed the world about DNA was that such a simple substance, composed of only four types of subunits, is the genetic material that determines all the different organisms on Earth. The promise of this insight was first fulfilled in bac- teria and bacteriophages, whose small genomes and short generation times made key experiments possible (see Chap- ters 7–9). Bacterial tools were later extended to animals and plants; for example:

Bacteria readily recombine DNA from unrelated organisms. The mechanisms of bacterial recombination led to construction of artificially recombinant DNA, or “gene cloning.” Recombinant DNA ultimately enabled us to transfer genes between the genomes of virtually all types of organisms.

Bacterial DNA polymerases are used for polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification of DNA. A hot spring in Yellowstone National Park yielded the bacterium Thermus aquaticus, whose DNA polymerase could sur- vive many rounds of cycling to near-boiling temperature.

Gene regulation discovered in bacteria provided models for animals and plants. The first key discover- ies of gene expression were made in bacteria and bac- teriophages. Regulatory DNA-binding proteins were discovered in bacteria and then subsequently found in all classes of living organisms.

In the 1970s, when the DNA revolution began, its implications drew public concern. The use of recombinant DNA to make hybrid organisms—organisms combining DNA from more than one species—seemed “unnatural.” We now know that in natural environments, genes fre- quently move between species. Furthermore, recombinant DNA technology raised the specter of placing deadly genes that produce toxins such as botulin into innocuous human- associated bacteria such as E. coli.

The unknown consequences of recombinant DNA so concerned molecular biologists that in 1975 they held a conference to assess the dangers and restrict experimen- tation on recombinant DNA. The conference, led by Paul Berg and Maxine Singer at Asilomar (Pacific Grove, Cali- fornia) was possibly the first time in history that a group of scientists organized and agreed to regulate and restrict their own field.

On the positive side, the emerging world of molecu- lar biology excited the imagination of young scientists and entrepreneurs. The pioneering biotechnology com- pany Genentech was founded in 1976 by Robert Swan- son and bacterial geneticist Robert Boyer, from UC San Francisco. Growing numbers of students entered the field of molecular biology, seeking to invent medical cures—or even to clone dinosaurs, as in Michael Crichton’s novel and film Jurassic Park (1993). While the idea of cloning a dino- saur remains science fiction, the tools of microbial genetics opened a window into the past by letting us read the DNA of long-dead organisms preserved in museums.

Twentieth-century microbiology transformed the practice of medicine and generated entire new industries of bio- technology and bioremediation. Following the discovery of penicillin, Americans poured millions of dollars of pri- vate and public funds into medical research. The March of Dimes campaign for private donations to prevent polio led to the successful development of a vaccine that has nearly eliminated the disease. Since then, research on microbes and other aspects of biology has grown with support from U.S. government agencies, such as the National Institutes of Health and the National Science Foundation, as well as from governments of other countries, particularly the European nations and Japan. Further support comes from private foundations, such as the Pasteur Institute, the Well- come Trust, and the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. Medical research generates astonishing advances, such as the use of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV, of AIDS) to devise gene therapy agents that cure cancer (discussed in Chapter 11).

Research in microbiology includes fields as diverse as medicine and space science (Table 1.3). (A scien- tist whose career combines medicine and space science is profiled in eTopic 1.2). These fields all recruit microbi- ologists (Fig. 1.34). Industrial and applied biology (see Chapter 16) use bacteria to clone and produce therapeu- tic proteins, such as insulin for diabetics. Recombinant viruses make safer vaccines. At the frontiers of science, we use microbes for “synthetic biology,” the construction of novel organisms with useful functions (see Chapter 12). For example, synthetic biology may design bacteria with an on/off switch to report the presence of arsenic in environ- mental samples. On a global level, the management of our planet’s biosphere, with the challenges of pollution and global warming, increasingly depends on our understand-
   FIGURE 1.34 ■ Microbiologists at work. Students at Kenyon College conduct research on bacterial gene expression.
of AIDS) to devise gene therapy agents that cure cancer (discussed in Chapter 11).
Research in microbiology includes fields as diverse as medicine and space science (Table 1.3). (A scien- tist whose career combines medicine and space science is profiled in eTopic 1.2). These fields all recruit microbi- ologists (Fig. 1.34). Industrial and applied biology (see Chapter 16) use bacteria to clone and produce therapeu- tic proteins, such as insulin for diabetics. Recombinant viruses make safer vaccines. At the frontiers of science, we use microbes for “synthetic biology,” the construction of novel organisms with useful functions (see Chapter 12). For example, synthetic biology may design bacteria with an on/off switch to report the presence of arsenic in environ- mental samples. On a global level, the management of our planet’s biosphere, with the challenges of pollution and
ing of microbial populations (see Chapter 22).

Microscopy reveals the vast realm of micro- organisms invisible to the unaided eye. The microscope enables us to count the number
of microbes in the human bloodstream or in dilute natural environments such as the ocean. It shows us how microbes swim and respond to signals such as a new food source. Fluorescence microscopy captures single molecules within a living cell. Electron micros- copy explores the cell’s interior and models viruses, even catching a virus in the act of infection.

How did people first see microbes? As we saw in Chapter 1, the microscope of Antonie van Leeuwenhoek first revealed the tiny life-forms on his teeth; his superior lenses were key to his success. Since the time of Leeuwenhoek, micros- copists have devised ever-more-powerful instruments to search for microbes in familiar and unexpected habitats.
An example of such a habitat is the interior of a human cell exploited by Chlamydia trachomatis, an obligate intracellu- lar pathogen (Fig. 2.1). C. trachomatis causes sexually trans- mitted infections that may escape the patient’s notice until they cause infertility. Intracellular chlamydias also escape the immune response—but electron microscopy catches them in the act. The scanning electron micrograph of Figure 2.1 images an infected cell sliced open. There, the chlamydias multiply within a membrane vesicle that takes up much of the human host cell. Protected from cell defenses, chlamyd- ias fission and form “elementary bodies” that are inactive but carry infection to a new cell. The electron micrograph shows numerous progeny chlamydias protected by the vesicle.
What does this protective compartment look like, and how does it form? In the Current Research Highlight, we saw how Grant Jensen’s advanced technique of cryo- EM tomography reveals the contours of an environmental chlamydia (Simkania species) infecting an ameba. In tomography, a number of digital “slices” through the sam- ple are assembled by computer to form a 3D model. The ameba provides clues to the process of human chlamyd- ial infection. The computer-generated model shows how Simkania’s own envelope (inner and outer membranes) is enclosed by host cell membranes. The pathogen remodels the host intracellular membranes to protect itself from host defenses. To investigate the function of environmental and medical microbes, we present scanning electron micros- copy (SEM) and cryo-EM tomography in Section 2.6.
First in Chapter 2, we present light microscopy, and the theory and practice of observing microbes, which are essen- tial for every student and professional in the field or clinic. We then explore exciting advanced tools for research. Fluo- rescence and super-resolution imaging, electron micros- copy, and scanning probe microscopy push ever farther the frontiers of the unseen. And we continue to invent new kinds of microscopy, such as chemical imaging microscopy, to reveal microbial metabolism at work.

What determines the smallest object we can see? The size at which objects become visible depends on the eye’s ability to resolve detail. Resolution is the smallest distance between two objects that allows us to see them as separate objects. The eyes of humans and other animals observe an object by focusing its image on a retina packed with light-absorbing photoreceptor cells (Fig. 2.2 ). The image appears sharp, in focus, if the eye’s lens and cornea bend all the light rays from each point of the object to converge at one point on the retina. Nearby points are then resolved as separate.
In the human eye, the finest resolution of two separate points is perceived by the fovea, the portion of the retina where the photoreceptors are packed at the highest den- sity. The foveal photoreceptors are cone cells, which detect primary colors (red, green, or blue) and finely resolved detail. A group of cones with their linked neurons forms one unit of detection, comparable to a pixel on a com- puter screen. The distance between two foveal “pixels” (groups of cones with neurons) limits our resolution to 100–200 micrometers (μm)—that is, one- or two-tenths of a millimeter. So, a tenth of a millimeter is about the smallest object that most of us can see (resolve distinctly) without a magnifier.
What if our eyes were formed differently? The reti- nas of eagles have cones packed more closely than ours, so an eagle can resolve objects eight times as small (or eight times as far away) as a human can; hence, the phrase “eagle-eyed” means “sharp-sighted.” On the other hand, insect compound eyes have photoreceptors farther apart than ours, so insect eyes have poorer resolution. The best they can do is resolve objects 100-fold larger than those we can resolve. If a science-fictional giant ameba had eyes with photoreceptors 2 meters apart, it would perceive humans as “microscopic.”

Can we detect the presence of objects whose size we can- not resolve? Yes, we can detect their presence as a group. For example, our eyes can detect a large population of microbes, such as a spot of mold on a piece of bread (about a million cells) or a cloudy tube of bacteria in liquid culture (a million cells per milliliter) (Fig. 2.3A). Detection, the ability to determine the presence of an object, differs from resolution. When the unaided eye detects the presence of mold or bacteria, it cannot resolve distinct cells.
To resolve most kinds of microbial cells, our eyes need assistance—that is, magnification. Magnification reveals the shapes of individual bacteria such as the wetland photo- troph Rhodospirillum rubrum (Fig. 2.3B). Magnifying an object means increasing the object’s apparent dimensions. As the distance increases between points of detail, our eyes can now resolve the object’s shape as a magnified image.

Different kinds of microbes differ in size, over a range of several orders of magnitude, or powers of ten (Fig. 2.4). Eukaryotic microbes are found across the full range of cell size, from photosynthetic picoeukaryotes abundant in the oceans (0.2–2.0 μm) to giant amebas that reach nearly a centimeter (discussed in Chapter 20). Within a eukaryotic cell larger than 5 μm, a typical student’s light microscope may resolve intracellular compartments such as the nucleus and vacuoles containing digested food (Fig. 2.5). Pro- tists show complex shapes and appendages. For example, an ameba from an aquatic ecosystem shows a large nucleus and pseudopods to engulf prey (Fig. 2.5A). Pseudopods can be seen moving by the streaming of their cytoplasm. Another protist readily observed by light microscopy is Try- panosoma brucei, an insect-borne blood parasite that causes African sleeping sickness (Fig. 2.5B). In the trypanosome, we observe a nucleus and a flagellum. Eukaryotic flagella propel the cell by a whiplike action. For more on microbial eukaryotes, see Chapter 20.
The most commonly studied prokaryotes (bacteria and archaea) are smaller than 10 μm. Their overall shape can be seen, but most of their internal structures (discussed in Chapter 3) are too small to resolve by light microscopy. Figure 2.6 shows some common cell shapes of bacteria, as visualized by light microscopy or by scanning electron microscopy. Note that with bright-field light microscopy, the cell shape is just discernible under the highest power. With scanning electron microscopy, cell shapes appear in greater detail (higher resolution).
Certain shapes of bacteria are common to many taxo- nomic groups. For example, both bacteria and archaea form similarly shaped rods, or bacilli (singular, bacillus), and cocci (spheres; singular, coccus), as shown in Figure 2.6. Thus, rods and spherical shapes evolved independently within different taxa. In contrast, a unique bacterial shape
that evolved in only one taxon is the spirochete, a tightly coiled spiral. Species of spirochetes cause diseases such as syphilis and Lyme disease. The spiral form of the cell is maintained by internal axial filaments and flagella, as well as an outer sheath. (For more on spirochetes, see
Section 18.6.) A different, unrelated spiral form is the “spirillum” (plural, spirilla), a wide, rigid spi-
ral cell that is similar to a rod-shaped bacillus.

A new class of imaging techniques known as chemical imaging microscopy goes beyond size and shape to reveal the chemical composition of the microbial object. These techniques apply mass spectroscopy to a microscopic object. The object, such as a microbe, is bombarded with a beam of ions that vaporizes organic molecules from the object’s sur- face. The molecular fragments that come off are identified through mass analysis. The microbe may be cultured with heavy isotopes of an element such as carbon or nitrogen, whose incorporation into biomass alters the mass spectra. These imaging techniques show where in the cell different nutrients are fixed into biomass. Special Topic 2.1 presents an example of chemical imaging of intestinal bacteria. Another example of chemical imaging, showing nitrogen- fixing cyanobacteria, is presented in eTopic 2.1.

PAge 82 stoped, Part 1
