CHAPTER 1

for water, organic compounds, and other potential evidence
of microbial life.
Among the most fascinating bits of evidence to come back
from Mars were the photographs of rock formations dating
to 3.7 billion years ago, near the time we believe life began on
Earth (Fig. 3). Geologist Nora Noffke, at Old Dominion University, examined these photographs using the same criteria
geologists use to define microfossils of early life on Earth.
She observed many features of Martian rock that resemble
ancient terrestrial fossils of microbial mats—possibly cyanobacteria similar to those of Antarctic lakes. For example, flat
stretches of sediment show layers that appear folded or even
rolled up, as if a flexible mat of living cells had torn and rolled
back onto itself. Noffke compiled such a large group of features that ultimately, she argues, if such forms indicate fossil
life on Earth, they must also indicate fossil life on Mars.



MICROBIAL LIFE: ORIGIN AND DISCOVERY



If microbial life once existed on Mars, could some forms
live on, perhaps under the rock strata where pockets of water
remain? As of this writing, Curiosity’s quest for data rolls on.

RESEARCH QUESTION
How can we be sure that a fossil formation arose biogenically—that is, from a life-form? Could you define quantitative
criteria for microbial fossils?
Noffke, Nora. 2015. Ancient sedimentary structures in the
<3.7 Ga Gillespie Lake Member, Mars, that resemble macroscopic morphology, spatial associations, and temporal succession in terrestrial microbialites. Astrobiology 15:169–192.

COURTESY OF OLD DOMINION UNIVERSITY

NASA/JPL-CALTECH/MSSS

B.

NASA/JPL-CALTECH/MSSS

A.

FIGURE 3

 Mars fossil life. A. Sedimentary formations on Mars resemble those of fossil cyanobacterial mats on Earth. Inset: Curiosity
rover (shown in this artist’s depiction) took the photograph. B. Nora Noffke argues that the Mars formations are microbially induced
sedimentary structures, comparable to those found on Earth.

5

6



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

Finally, we address the exciting century of molecular
microbiology, in which microbial genetics, genomics, and
evolution have transformed the practice of medicine and
our understanding of the natural world.

1.1

species of protists, such as giant amebas, grow to sizes
large enough to see with the unaided eye. The marine
sulfur bacterium Thiomargarita namibiensis, called the
“sulfur pearl of Namibia,” grows to 0.7 mm, larger than
the eye of a fruit fly (Fig. 1.4). Even more surprising,
a single cell of the “killer alga” Caulerpa taxifolia covers acres beneath the coastal waters of California. The
alga expands and forms leafl ike extensions without cell
division.

From Germ to Genome:
What Is a Microbe?

From early childhood, we hear that we are surrounded by
microscopic organisms, or “germs,” which we cannot see.
What are these microbes? Our modern concept of a microbe
has deepened through the use of two major research tools:
advanced microscopy and the sequencing of genomic DNA.
Microscopy is covered in Chapter 2, and genome sequencing is presented in Chapter 7. Exciting tools of “synthetic
biology,” to engineer new kinds of microbes, are described
in Chapter 12.



Microbial communities. Many microbes form complex
multicellular assemblages, such as mushrooms, kelps,
and biofilms. In these structures, cells are differentiated
into distinct types that complement each other’s functions, as in multicellular organisms. And yet, some multicellular worms and arthropods require a microscope
for us to see but are not considered microbes.



Viruses. A virus is a noncellular particle containing
genetic material that takes over the metabolism of a cell
to generate more virus particles. Some viruses consist of
only a short chromosome packed in protein. Other kinds
of viruses, such as pandoraviruses that infect amebas,
show the size and complexity of a cell. Although viruses
are not fully functional cells, some viral genomes may
have evolved from cells.

A Microbe Is a Microscopic Organism

A microbe is commonly defined as a living organism that
requires a microscope to be seen. Microbial cells range in
size from millimeters (mm) down to 0.2 micrometer (µm),
and viruses may be tenfold smaller (Table 1.1). Some
microbes consist of a single cell, the smallest unit of life,
a membrane-enclosed compartment of water solution containing molecules that carry out metabolism. Each microbe
contains a genome used to reproduce its own kind. Microbial cells acquire food, gain energy to build themselves, and
respond to environmental change. Microbes evolve at rapid
rates—often fast enough to observe in the laboratory (discussed in Chapter 17).
Our simple definition of a microbe, however, leaves us
with contradictions:


Super-size microbial cells. Most single-celled organisms
require a microscope to render them visible, and thus
they fit the defi nition of a microbe. Nevertheless, some

Note:

Each section of text contains Thought Questions that
may have various answers. Possible responses are provided at the
back of the book.

Thought Questions

1.1 The minimum size of known microbial cells is about

0.2 µm. Could even smaller cells be discovered? What factors
may determine the minimum size of a cell?

1.2 If viruses are not functional cells, are they “alive”?

TABLE 1.1'Sizes of Some Microbes
Microbe

Description

Approximate size

Varicella-zoster virus 1

Virus that causes chickenpox and shingles

100 nanometers (nm) = 10–7 meter (m)

Prochlorococcus

Photosynthetic marine bacteria

500 nm = 5 × 10–7 m

Escherichia coli

Bacteria growing within human intestine

1 micrometer (µm) = 10–6 m

Spirogyra

Aquatic algae that form long filaments of cells

40 µm = 4 × 10–5 m (cell width)

Pelomyxa

Ameba (a protist) that consumes bacteria in soil or water

5 millimeters (mm)

CHAPTER 1
A.



MICROBIAL LIFE: ORIGIN AND DISCOVERY

Fruit fly eye

Microbial Genomes Are Sequenced

ANDREAS TESKE/WOODS HOLE OCEANOGRAPHIC INSTITUTION

7

Note: The formal names of the three domains are Bacteria,
Archaea, and Eukarya. Members of these domains are called
bacteria (singular, bacterium), archaea (singular, archaeon), and
eukaryotes (singular, eukaryote), respectively. The microbiology
literature includes alternative spellings for some of these terms,
such as “archaean” and “eucaryote.”

Thiomargarita
namibiensis

0.2 mm

MAX PLANCK INSTITUTE FOR MARINE MICROBIOLOGY

B.

FIGURE 1.4



A giant microbial cell: Thiomargarita
namibiensis. A. T. namibiensis, a marine sulfur bacterium (light

How have we learned how microbes work? A key tool is the
study of microbial genomes. A genome is the total genetic
information contained in an organism’s chromosomal
DNA. The genes in a microbe’s genome and the sequence
of DNA tell us a lot about how that microbe grows and
associates with other species. For example, if a microbe’s
genome includes genes for nitrogenase, a nitrogen-fixing
enzyme, that microbe probably can fix nitrogen from the
atmosphere into proteins—its own proteins and those of
associated plants. And by comparing DNA sequences of
different microbes, we can figure out how closely related
they are and how they evolved.
The first method of DNA sequencing that was fast
enough to sequence large genomes was developed by
Fred Sanger (1918–2013) at the University of Cambridge
(Fig. 1.5). This achievement—which jump-started the study
of molecular biology—earned Sanger the 1980 Nobel Prize
in Chemistry, together with Walter Gilbert and Paul Berg.
Sanger and colleagues used the new method to sequence
DNA containing tens of thousands of base pairs, such as the
DNA of the human mitochondrion. In Figure 1.5, Sanger
inspects a “DNA ladder,” an X-ray exposure of radiolabeled
DNA fragments in a classic sequencing reaction.
But most genomes of cells contain millions, or even billions, of base pairs. In 1995, scientists completed the first
genome sequence of a cellular microbe, the bacterium



In practice, our definition of a microbe derives from tradition as well as genetic considerations. In this book we
consider microbes to include prokaryotes (cells lacking a
nucleus, including bacteria and archaea) as well as certain
classes of eukaryotes (cells with a nucleus), such as algae,
fungi, and protists (discussed in Chapter 20). The bacteria,
archaea, and eukaryotes—known as the three “domains”—
evolved from a common ancestral cell (see Section 1.5 and
Chapter 21). Viruses and even smaller infectious particles
are discussed in Chapters 6 and 11.

MRC LABORATORY OF MOLECULAR BIOLOGY

microscopy). B. Heide Schulz-Vogt, Max Planck Institute for Marine
Microbiology (holding the flask), examines a culture of the sulfur
bacteria with a colleague.

FIGURE 1.5

 Fred Sanger devised the method of DNA
sequence analysis used to sequence the first genomes.

8



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL
Colored bars indicate
gene sequences.

Genome of Haemophilus influenzae
1,800,000

1

1,700,000

100,000
200,000

1,600,000

300,000

1,500,000
Haemophilus influenzae

400,000

1,300,000

CNRI/SCIENCE SOURCE

1,400,000

1 µm

500,000

Gene classification based on functional categories
Translation
Transcription
Replication
Regulatory functions
Cell envelope
Cellular processes
Transport/binding proteins
Central intermediary metabolism
Amino acid biosynthesis
Purines, pyrimidines, nucleosides, and nucleotides
Energy metabolism
Lipid metabolism
Secondary metabolite biosynthesis, transport
Other categories
General function prediction only
Function unknown

600,000
1,200,000
700,000

1,100,000
Numbers represent
base pairs on the
chromosome.

1,000,000

800,000
900,000

FIGURE 1.6

THE INSTITUTE FOR GENOMIC RESEARCH

 The first sequenced genome. The genome of Haemophilus influenzae, a bacterium that causes ear infections and
meningitis, was the first DNA sequence completed for a cellular organism. Inset: Colorized electron micrograph.

Haemophilus influenzae
(Fig. 1.6). H. influenzae causes meningitis in
children, a disease now
prevented by the Hib vaccine. The H. influenzae
genome has nearly 2 million base pairs, which
specify about 1,700 genes.
The sequence was determined by a large team
of scientists led by
Craig Venter, Hamilton

FIGURE 1.7 Claire Fraser,
Smith, and Claire Fraser
past president of The Insti(Fig. 1.7) at The Institute
tute for Genomic Research
for Genomic Research
(TIGR), sequenced numerous
(TIGR). The TIGR team
microbial genomes.
devised a special computational strategy for assembling large amounts of sequence
data—a strategy later used to sequence the human genome.
Today we sequence new bacterial genomes daily. In
addition to sequencing individual genomes, computational
strategies are used to sequence thousands of genomes of
microbes sampled from a natural environment, such as
the acid drainage from an iron mine. The collection of
sequences taken directly from the environment is called a

metagenome. The first metagenome of an acid mine was
sequenced by Jill Banfield and co-workers at UC Berkeley
in 2004. Now, metagenomes are sequenced for microbial
communities of medical interest, such as that of the human
colon. Human gut microbes contain 100 times more genes
in their metagenomes than the human genome contains—
and many of these microbial genes contribute to our health!
Comparing genomes has revealed a set of core genes
shared by all organisms. These core genes add further evidence that all life on Earth, including humans, shares a
common ancestry. Genomes are discussed further in Chapter 7, and the evolution of genomes and metagenomes is
discussed in Chapters 17 and 21.

To Summarize






A microbe is a living organism that requires a microscope to be seen. Some organisms exist in both microbial and macroscopic forms.
Microbes grow in communities. A community may
include both microbial and macroscopic species.
Microbial capabilities are defined by their genome
sequences.

CHAPTER 1

1.2



MICROBIAL LIFE: ORIGIN AND DISCOVERY



microbiology, scientists established the fundamental principles of disease pathology and microbial ecology that
are still in use today. This period laid the foundation for
modern biology, in which genetics and molecular biology
provide powerful tools for scientists to manipulate microorganisms for medicine, research, and industry.

Microbes Shape
Human History

Today our knowledge of microbes is enormous, and it keeps
growing. Yet throughout most of human history we were
unaware of how microbes shaped our culture. Yeasts and bacteria made foods such as bread and cheese (Fig. 1.8A), as
well as alcoholic beverages (discussed in Chapter 16). “Rockeating” bacteria, known as “lithotrophs,” leached copper and
other metals from ores exposed by mining, enabling ancient
human miners to obtain these metals. The lithotrophic oxidation of minerals for energy generates strong acids, which accelerate breakdown of the ore. Today about 20% of the world’s
copper, as well as some uranium and zinc, is produced by
bacterial leaching. Unfortunately, microbial acidification also
consumes the stone of ancient monuments (Fig. 1.8B)—a
process intensified by airborne acidic pollution.
How did people find out about microbes? (Table 1.2,
pages 10–11). Microscopists in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries formulated key concepts about microbes
and their existence, including their means of reproduction
and death. In the nineteenth century, the “golden age” of

Microbial Disease Devastates
Human Populations

Microbial diseases such as bubonic plague and AIDS have
profoundly affected human history (Fig. 1.9). The plague,
FIGURE 1.9



Microbial disease in history and culture.

A. Medieval church procession to ward off the Black Death (bubonic
plague). B. The AIDS Memorial Quilt spread before the Washington
Monument for display in 1992. Each panel of the quilt memorializes
an individual who died of AIDS.

CHRONICLE OF AEGIDIUS LI MUISIS/PRIVATE COLLECTION/
BRIDGEMAN IMAGES

A.

A.

BOYER/ROGER VIOLLET/GETTY IMAGES

B.

B.

FIGURE 1.8



VANESSA VICK/GETTY IMAGES

JOHNER IMAGES/GETTY IMAGES

Production and
destruction by
microbes. A. Roque-

fort cheeses ripening in
France. B. Statue at the
cathedral of Cologne,
Germany, decaying from
the action of lithotrophic
microbes. The process is
accelerated by acid rain.

9

12



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

which wiped out a third of Europe’s population in the fourteenth century, was caused by Yersinia pestis, a bacterium
spread by rat fleas. Ironically, the plague-induced population decline enabled the social transformation that led to the
Renaissance, a period of unprecedented cultural advancement. In the nineteenth century, the bacterium Mycobacterium tuberculosis stalked overcrowded cities, and tuberculosis
was so common that the pallid appearance of tubercular
patients became a symbol of tragic youth in European arts,
such as Puccini’s opera La Bohème. Today, societies throughout the world are devastated by the epidemic of acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), caused by the human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV). The United Nations estimates that 35 million people are living with HIV infection
today, and this year 1.2 million will die of AIDS.
Historians traditionally emphasize the role of warfare in
shaping human destiny, and the brilliance of leaders, or the
advantage of new technology, in determining which civilizations rise or fall. Yet the fate of human societies is often
determined by microbes. For example, much of the native
population of North America was exterminated by smallpox introduced by European invaders. Throughout history, more soldiers have died of microbial infections than
of wounds in battle.
The significance of disease in warfare was first recognized by the British nurse and statistician Florence Nightingale (1820–1910) (Fig. 1.10A). Better known as the
founder of professional nursing, Nightingale also founded

the science of medical statistics. She used methods invented
by French statisticians to demonstrate the high mortality rate due to disease among British soldiers during the
Crimean War. To show the deaths of soldiers due to various
causes, she devised the “polar area chart” (Fig. 1.10B). In
this chart, blue wedges represent deaths due to infectious
disease, red wedges represent deaths due to wounds, and
black wedges represent all other causes of death. Infectious
disease accounts for more than half of all mortality.
Before Nightingale, no one understood the impact of
disease on armies, or on other crowded populations, such
as in cities. Nightingale’s statistics convinced the British government to improve army living conditions and to
upgrade the standards of army hospitals. In modern epidemiology, statistical analysis continues to be a crucial tool in
determining the causes of disease.

Microscopes Reveal the Microbial World

The seventeenth century was a time of growing inquiry
and excitement about the “natural magic” of science and
patterns of our world, such as the laws of gravitation and
motion formulated by Isaac Newton (1642–1727). Robert
Boyle (1627–1691) performed the first controlled experiments on the chemical conversion of matter. Physicians
attempted new treatments for disease involving the application of “stone and minerals” (that is, chemicals)—what
today we would call “chemotherapy.” Minds were open to

A.

B.

Infectious disease
Battle wounds

FIGURE 1.10  Florence Nightingale, founder of medical statistics. A. Florence Nightingale was the first to use medical statistics to
demonstrate the significance of mortality due to disease. B. Nightingale’s polar area chart of mortality data during the Crimean War.

THE FLORENCE NIGHTINGALE MUSEUM TRUST, LONDON

EVERETT HISTORICAL/SHUTTER STOCK

Other
who became the first individual to observe single-celled microbes (Fig. 1.12A). As a young
man, Leeuwenhoek lived in the Dutch
city of Delft, where he worked as a cloth
draper, a profession that introduced him
Robert Hooke observes the microto magnifying glasses. The magnifying
scopic world. The first microscop ist
glasses were used to inspect the qual to publish a systematic study of the
ity of the cloth, enabling the worker to
world as seen under a microscope was
count the number of threads. Later in
Robert Hooke (1635–1703). As cura life, Leeuwenhoek took up the hobby of
tor of experiments for the Royal Society
grinding ever-stronger lenses to see into
of London, Hooke built the first
the world of the unseen.
compound microscope—a magniLeeuwenhoek ground lenses stronFIGURE 1.11  Robert Hooke’s
fying instrument containing two or
ger than Hooke’s, which he used to
Micrographia. Mold sporangia, drawn
more lenses that multiply their magbuild single-lens magnifiers, complete
by Hooke in 1665 from his observations
nification in series. With his microwith sample holder and focus adjustment
of objects using a compound microscope.
scope, Hooke observed biological
(Fig. 1.12B). First he observed insects,
materials such as nematode “vinegar
including lice and fleas; then the relatively
eels,” mites, and mold filaments. Hooke published drawings
large single cells of protists and algae; then, ultimately, bacof these microbes in Micrographia (1665), the first publicateria. One day he applied his microscope to observe matter
tion of objects observed under a microscope (Fig. 1.11).
extracted from between his teeth. He wrote, “To my great
Hooke was the first to observe distinct units of living
surprise [I] perceived that the aforesaid matter contained
material, which he called “cells.” Hooke first named the
very many small living Animals, which moved themselves
units cells because the shape of hollow cell walls in a slice of
very extravagantly.”
cork reminded him of the shape of monks’ cells in a monOver the rest of his life, Leeuwenhoek recorded page
astery. But his crude lenses achieved at best 30-fold power
after page on the movement of microbes, reporting their
(30×), and he never observed single-celled bacteria.
size and shape so accurately that in many cases we can
determine the species he observed (Fig. 1.12C). He perAntonie van Leeuwenhoek observes bacteria with a sinformed experiments, comparing, for example, the appeargle lens. Hooke’s Micrographia inspired other microscoance of “small animals” from his teeth before and after
pists, including Antonie van Leeuwenhoek (1632–1723),
drinking hot coffee. The disappearance of microbes from
MILTON S. EISENHOWER LIBRARY

consider the astounding possibility that
our surroundings, indeed our very
bodies, were inhabited by tiny living
beings.

B.

A.

C.

Lens
Sample
holder
BRIAN J. FORD

Focus knob

BETTMANN/GETTY IMAGES

Sample mover

Leeuwenhoek
microscope
(circa late 1600s)

FIGURE 1.12  Antonie van Leeuwenhoek. A. A portrait of
Leeuwenhoek, the first person to observe individual microbes.
B. “Microscope” (magnifying glass) used by Leeuwenhoek. C. Spiral
bacteria viewed through a replica of Leeuwenhoek’s instrument.



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

his teeth after drinking a hot beverage suggested that heat
killed microbes—a profoundly important principle for the
study and control of microbes ever since.
Leeuwenhoek is believed to have died, ironically, of a disease contracted from sheep whose bacteria he had observed.
Historians have often wondered why it took so many centuries for Leeuwenhoek and his successors to determine
the link between microbes and disease. Although observers
such as Agostino Bassi de Lodi (1773–1856) noted cases
of microbes associated with pathology (see Table 1.2),
the very ubiquity of microbes—most of them actually
harmless—may have obscured their more deadly roles. In
addition, it was hard to distinguish between microbes and
the single-celled components of the human body, such
as blood cells and sperm. It was not until the nineteenth
century that human tissues could be distinguished from
microbial cells by the application of differential chemical
stains (discussed in Chapter 2).
Thought Question

1.3 Why do you think it took so long for humans to connect
microbes with infectious disease?

Spontaneous Generation:
Do Microbes Have Parents?

The observation of microscopic organisms led priests and
philosophers to wonder where these tiny beings came from.
In the eighteenth century, scientists and church leaders
intensely debated the question of spontaneous generation.
Spontaneous generation is the concept that living creatures such as maggots could arise spontaneously, without
parental organisms. Chemists of the day tended to support
spontaneous generation, as it appeared similar to the way
chemicals changed during reaction. Christian church leaders, however, supported the biblical view that all organisms
have “parents” going back to the first week of creation.
The Italian priest Francesco Redi (1626–1697) showed
that maggots in decaying meat were the offspring of flies.
Meat kept in a sealed container, excluding flies, did not
produce maggots. Thus, Redi’s experiment argued against
spontaneous generation for macroscopic organisms. The
meat still putrefied, however, producing microbes that
seemed to arise “without parents.”
To disprove spontaneous generation of microbes, another
Italian priest, Lazzaro Spallanzani (1729–1799), showed
that a sealed flask of meat broth sterilized by boiling failed
to grow microbes. Spallanzani also noticed that microbes
often appeared in pairs. Were these two parental microbes
coupling to produce offspring, or did one microbe become
two? Through long and tenacious observation, Spallanzani

watched a single microbe grow in size until it split in two.
Thus he demonstrated cell fission, the process by which
cells arise by the splitting of preexisting cells.
Even Spallanzani’s experiments, however, did not put
the matter to rest. Proponents of spontaneous generation
argued that the microbes in the priest’s flask lacked access
to oxygen and therefore could not grow. The pursuit of this
question was left to future microbiologists, including the
famous French microbiologist Louis Pasteur (1822–1895)
(Fig. 1.13A). In addressing spontaneous generation and
related questions, Pasteur and his contemporaries laid the
foundations for modern microbiology.
Louis Pasteur reveals the biochemical basis of microbial
growth. Pasteur began his scientific career as a chemist and

wrote his doctoral thesis on the structure of organic crystals. He discovered the fundamental chemical property of
chirality, the fact that some organic molecules exist in two
forms that differ only by mirror symmetry. In other words,
the two structures are mirror images of one another,
like the right and left hands. Pasteur found that when
microbes were cultured on a nutrient substance containing
both mirror forms, only one mirror form was consumed.

A.
PASTEUR INSTITUTE

14

Open to air

B.
S curve excludes
dust and microbes
Growth medium

FIGURE 1.13

 Louis Pasteur, founder of medical microbiology and immunology. A. Pasteur’s contributions to the science of

microbiology and immunology earned him lasting fame. B. Swannecked flask. Pasteur showed that, after boiling, the contents in
such a flask remain free of microbial growth, despite access to air.

CHAPTER 1

He concluded that the metabolic preference for one mirror form was a fundamental property of life. Subsequent
research has confi rmed that most molecules of organisms,
such as DNA and proteins, are found in only one of their
mirror forms.
As a chemist, Pasteur was asked to help with a widespread
problem encountered by French manufacturers of wine and
beer. The alcohol in beverages comes from fermentation, a
process by which microbes gain energy by converting sugars into alcohol. In the time of Pasteur, however, the conversion of grapes or grain to alcohol was believed to be a
spontaneous chemical process. No one could explain why
some fermentation mixtures produced vinegar (acetic acid)
instead of alcohol. Pasteur discovered that fermentation is
actually caused by living yeast, a single-celled fungus. In
the absence of oxygen, yeast produces alcohol as a terminal
waste product. But when the yeast culture is contaminated
with bacteria, the bacteria outgrow the yeast and produce
acetic acid instead of alcohol. (Fermentative metabolism is
discussed in Chapter 13.)
Pasteur’s work on fermentation led him to test a key
claim made by proponents of spontaneous generation. The
proponents claimed that Spallanzani’s failure to find spontaneous appearance of microbes was due to lack of oxygen.
From his studies of yeast fermentation, Pasteur knew that
some microbial species do not require oxygen for growth.
So he devised an unsealed flask with a long, bent “swan
neck” that admitted air but kept the boiled contents free of
dust that carried microbes (Fig. 1.13B). The famous swannecked flasks remained free of microbial growth for many
years, but when a flask was tilted to enable contact of broth
with dust, microbes grew immediately. Thus, Pasteur disproved that lack of oxygen was the reason for the failure of
spontaneous generation in Spallanzani’s flasks.
But even Pasteur’s work did not prove that microbial
growth requires preexisting microbes. The Irish scientist
John Tyndall (1820–1893) attempted the same experiment
as Pasteur but sometimes found the opposite result. Tyndall
found that the broth sometimes gave rise to microbes no
matter how long it was sterilized by boiling. The microbes
appear because some kinds of organic matter, particularly
hay infusion, are contaminated with a heat-resistant form
of bacteria called “endospores” (or “spores”). The spore
form can be eliminated only by repeated cycles of boiling
and resting, in which the spores germinate to the growing,
vegetative form that is killed at 100°C.
It was later discovered that endospores could be killed
by boiling under pressure, as in a pressure cooker, which
generates higher temperatures than can be obtained at
atmospheric pressure. The steam pressure device called the
autoclave became the standard way to sterilize materials
for the controlled study of microbes. (Microbial control
and antisepsis are discussed further in Chapter 5.)



MICROBIAL LIFE: ORIGIN AND DISCOVERY



15

Although spontaneous generation was discredited as a
continual source of microbes, at some point in the past the
first living organisms must have originated from nonliving
materials. How did the first microbes arise? Experiments
that aim to replicate the conditions of early Earth yield
simple amino acids and bases of DNA and RNA (see Special Topic 1.1). The earliest fossil evidence of cells appears
in sedimentary rock that formed more than 2 billion years
ago, and amazingly similar formations are found on Mars.
The experimental basis for the origin of life and evolution is discussed in detail in Chapter 17.

To Summarize












Microbes affected human civilization for centuries
before humans guessed at their existence through their
contributions to our environment, food and drink production, and infectious diseases.
Florence Nightingale statistically quantified the impact
of infectious disease on human populations.
Robert Hooke and Antonie van Leeuwenhoek were
the first to record observations of microbes through
simple microscopes.
Spontaneous generation is the theory that microbes
arise spontaneously, without parental organisms. Lazzaro Spallanzani showed that microbes arise from
preexisting microbes and demonstrated that heat sterilization can prevent microbial growth.
Louis Pasteur discovered the microbial basis of fermentation. He also showed that providing oxygen does not
enable spontaneous generation.
John Tyndall showed that repeated cycles of heat were
necessary to eliminate spores formed by certain kinds of
bacteria.

1.3

Medical Microbiology

Over the centuries, thoughtful observers such as Fracastoro
and Bassi (see Table 1.2) noted a connection between
microbes and disease. Ultimately, researchers developed the
germ theory of disease, the theory that many diseases are
caused by microbes. Research today pursues the secrets of
many microbial diseases, such as cholera, the focus of Rita
Colwell, first microbiologist to direct the National Science
Foundation (eTopic 1.1).
The first scientific basis for determining that a specific microbe causes a disease was devised by the

PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

German physician Robert Koch (1843–1910) A.
(Fig. 1.14). As a college student, Koch conducted biochemical experiments on his own
digestive system. Koch’s curiosity about
the natural world led him to develop principles and methods crucial to microbial
investigation, including the pure-culture
technique and the famous Koch’s postulates for identifying the causative agent of
a disease. He applied his methods to numerMUSEUM IN THE ROBERT
ous lethal diseases around the world, includ- KOCH-INSTITUT BERLIN
ing anthrax and tuberculosis in Europe, bubonic
plague in India, and malaria in New Guinea (Fig. 1.15).

Growth of Microbes in Pure Culture

Unlike Pasteur, who was a university professor, Koch took
up a medical practice in a small Polish-German town. To
make space in his home for a laboratory to study anthrax
and other deadly diseases, his wife curtained off part of his
patient examination room.
Anthrax interested Koch because its epidemics in sheep
and cattle caused economic hardship among local farmers.
Today, anthrax is no longer a major problem for agriculture, because its transmission is prevented by effective environmental controls and vaccination. It has, however, gained
notoriety as a bioterror agent because anthrax bacteria can
survive for long periods in the dormant desiccated form of
an endospore. In 2001, anthrax spores sent through the
mail contaminated post offices as well as an office building
of the U.S. Senate, causing several deaths.
To investigate whether anthrax was a transmissible disease, Koch used blood from an anthrax-infected cow carcass to inoculate a rabbit. When the rabbit died, he used
its blood to inoculate a second rabbit, which then died in
turn. The blood of the unfortunate animal had turned
black with long, rod-shaped bacilli. Upon introduction
of these bacilli into healthy animals, the animals became
ill with anthrax. Thus, Koch demonstrated an important
principle of epidemiology: the chain of infection, or transmission of a disease. In retrospect, his choice of anthrax
was fortunate, because anthrax microbes generate disease
very quickly, multiply in the blood to high numbers, and
remain infective outside the body for long periods.
Koch and his colleagues then applied their experimental
logic and culture methods to a more challenging disease:
tuberculosis. In Koch’s day, tuberculosis caused oneseventh of all reported deaths in Europe; today, tuberculosis bacteria continue to infect millions of people worldwide.
Koch’s approach to anthrax, however, was less applicable to
tuberculosis, a disease that develops slowly after many years
of dormancy. Furthermore, the causative bacterium, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, is small and difficult to distinguish

B.

MUSEUM IN THE ROBERT KOCH-INSTITUT BERLIN



FIGURE 1.14

Robert Koch, founder of the scientific method of microbiology. A. Koch as a university student. B. Koch’s


sketch of anthrax bacilli in mouse blood.

MUSEUM IN THE ROBERT KOCH INSTITUTE, BERLIN

16

FIGURE 1.15



Robert Koch visits New Guinea. Koch (second

from left) investigating malaria in 1899.

from human tissue or from different bacteria of similar
appearance associated with the human body. How could
Koch prove that a particular bacterium caused a particular
disease?
What was needed was to isolate a pure culture of microorganisms, a culture grown from a single “parental” cell.
Previous researchers had achieved pure cultures by a laborious process of serially diluting suspended bacteria until
a culture tube contained only a single cell. Alternatively,
inoculating a solid surface such as a sliced potato could produce isolated colonies—distinct populations of bacteria,
each grown from a single cell. For M. tuberculosis, Koch
inoculated serum, which then formed a solid gel after heating. Later he refined the solid-substrate technique by adding gelatin to a defined liquid medium, which could then
be chilled to form a solid medium in a glass dish. A covered

CHAPTER 1



MICROBIAL LIFE: ORIGIN AND DISCOVERY



17

Koch’s Postulates

A.
THE NATIONAL LIBRARY OF MEDICINE

For his successful determination of the bacterium that
causes tuberculosis, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Koch was
awarded the 1905 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine.
Koch formulated his famous set of criteria for establishing a causative link between an infectious agent and a disease (Fig. 1.17). These four criteria are known as Koch’s
postulates:

CYTOGRAPHICS/VISUALS UNLIMITED

B.

1. The microbe is found in all cases of the disease but is
absent from healthy individuals.
2. The microbe is isolated from the diseased host and
grown in pure culture.
3. When the microbe is introduced into a healthy, susceptible host (or animal model), the host shows the same
disease.
4. The same strain of microbe is obtained from the newly
diseased host. When cultured, the strain shows the
same characteristics as before.

FIGURE 1.16

 Angelina and Walther Hesse. A. Portrait of
the Hesses, who first used agar to make solid-substrate media for
bacterial growth. B. Colonies from a streaked agar plate.

version called the petri dish (or “petri plate”) was invented
by a colleague, Julius Richard Petri (1852–1921). The
petri dish is a round dish with vertical walls covered by an
inverted dish of slightly larger diameter. Today the petri
dish, generally made of disposable plastic, remains an indispensable part of the microbiological laboratory.
Another improvement in solid-substrate culture was the
replacement of gelatin with materials that remain solid at
higher temperatures, such as the gelling agent agar (a polymer of the sugar galactose). The use of agar was recommended by Angelina Hesse (1850–1934), a microscopist
and illustrator, to her husband, Walther Hesse (1846–
1911), a young medical colleague of Koch (Fig. 1.16).
Agar comes from red algae (seaweed), which is used by East
Indian birds to build nests; it is the main ingredient in the
delicacy “bird’s nest soup.” Dutch colonists used agar to
make jellies and preserves, and a Dutch colonist from Java
introduced it to Angelina Hesse. The Hesses used agar to
develop the first effective growth medium for tuberculosis
bacteria. Pure culture and growth conditions are discussed
further in Chapters 4 and 5.
Note that some kinds of microbes cannot be grown in
pure culture—that is, without other organisms. For example, the marine cyanobacterium Prochlorococcus, a major
source of Earth’s oxygen, requires heterotrophic bacteria
to remove toxic oxygen radicals. And all viruses can be cultured only within their host cells (see Chapter 6). The discovery of viruses is explored at the end of this section.

1. The microbe is found in all cases of the
disease but is absent from healthy individuals.

No microbe

2. The microbe is isolated from the
diseased host and grown in pure culture.

3. When the microbe is introduced into a healthy,
susceptible host, the same disease occurs.

4. The same strain of microbe is
obtained from the newly diseased host.

FIGURE 1.17  Koch’s postulates defining the causative
agent of a disease.

18



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

Koch’s postulates continue to be used to determine
whether a given strain of microbe causes a disease. An
example is Lyme disease (borreliosis), a tick-borne infection first described in New England, and shown in 1981 to
be caused by the bacterium Borrelia burgdorferi. Nevertheless, the postulates remain only a guide; individual diseases
and pathogens may confound one or more of the criteria.
For example, tuberculosis bacteria are now known to cause
symptoms in only 10% of the people infected. If Koch had
been able to detect these silent bacilli, they would not have
fulfilled his first criterion. In the case of AIDS, the concentration of HIV virus is so low that initially no virus could
be detected in patients with fully active symptoms. It took
the invention of the polymerase chain reaction (PCR), a
method of producing any number of copies of DNA or
RNA sequences, to detect the presence of HIV. Modern
research on microbial disease is presented in Chapter 25.
Another difficulty with AIDS and many other human
diseases is the absence of an animal host that exhibits the
same disease. For AIDS, even chimpanzees (our closest relatives) are not susceptible, although they acquire a similar disease from related retroviruses. For diseases without
a cure, experimental inoculation of humans is banned by
law. Curable or self-limiting diseases may be tested on volunteers in clinical trials. In rare cases, researchers have voluntarily exposed themselves to a proposed pathogen. For
example, Australian researcher Barry Marshall ingested
Helicobacter pylori to convince skeptical colleagues that
this organism could colonize the extremely acidic stomach.
H. pylori turned out to be the causative agent of gastritis
and stomach ulcers, conditions that had long been thought
to be caused by stress rather than infection. For the discovery of H. pylori and its role in gastritis, Marshall and

colleague J. Robin Warren won the 2005 Nobel Prize in
Physiology or Medicine.

Thought Question

1.4 How could you use Koch’s postulates (Fig. 1.17) to
demonstrate the causative agent of influenza? What problems
not encountered with anthrax would you need to overcome?

Immunization Prevents Disease

Identifying the cause of a disease is, of course, only the
first step in developing an effective therapy and preventing further transmission. Early microbiologists achieved
some remarkable insights on how to control pathogens
(see Table 1.2).
The first clue of how to protect an individual from a
deadly disease came from the dreaded smallpox. In the
eighteenth century, smallpox infected a large fraction of
the European population, killing or disfiguring many people. In countries of Asia and Africa, however, the incidence
of smallpox was decreased by the practice of deliberately
inoculating children with material from smallpox pustules.
Inoculated children usually developed a mild case of the
disease and were protected from smallpox thereafter.
The practice of smallpox inoculation was introduced from
Turkey to Europe in 1717 by Lady Mary Montagu, a smallpox survivor (Fig. 1.18A). While traveling in Turkey, Lady
Montagu learned that many elderly women there had perfected the art of inoculation: “The old woman comes with
a nut-shell full of the matter of the best sort of small-pox,
and asks what vein you please to have opened.” During a

C.
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS/WIKIMEDIA COMMONS

HULTON ARCHIVE/GETTY IMAGES

FIGURE 1.18

POPPERFOTO/GETTY IMAGES

B.

A.

 Smallpox vaccination. A. Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, shown in Turkish dress. The artist avoided showing Montagu’s
facial disfigurement from smallpox. B. Dr. Edward Jenner, depicted vaccinating 8-year-old James Phipps with cowpox matter from the hand
of milkmaid Sarah Nelmes, who had caught the disease from a cow. C. Eighteenth-century newspaper cartoon depicting public reaction to
cowpox vaccination.

CHAPTER 1

MICROBIAL LIFE: ORIGIN AND DISCOVERY



19

physicians developed several effective examples of immunization, the stimulation of an immune response by deliberate
inoculation with an attenuated pathogen.
The way to attenuate a strain depends on the pathogen.
Heat treatment or aging for various periods often turns out
to be the most effective approach. The original success of
prophylactic smallpox inoculation was due to natural attenuation of the virus during the time between acquisition of
smallpox matter from a diseased individual and inoculation
of the healthy patient. A far more elaborate treatment was
required to combat the most famous disease for which Pasteur devised a vaccine: rabies.
The rabid dog loomed large in folklore, and rabies was
dreaded for its particularly horrible and inevitable course of
death. Pasteur’s vaccine for rabies required a highly complex series of heat treatments and repeated inoculations. Its
success led to his instant fame (Fig. 1.19). Grateful survivors of rabies founded the Pasteur Institute for medical
research, one of the world’s greatest medical research institutions, whose scientists in the twentieth century discovered the virus HIV, which causes AIDS.

Antiseptics and Antibiotics

Before the work of Koch and Pasteur, many patients died
of infections transmitted unwittingly by their own doctors.

INSTITUT PASTEUR

period outside the host, the virus becomes “attenuated”—
that is, loses some of its molecular structure required for
infection. The attenuated virus stimulates the immune system with much lower mortality than does the fully virulent
virus. Lady Montagu arranged for the procedure on her own
son and then brought the practice back to England. A similar practice of smallpox inoculation was introduced to the
American colonies by a slave, Onesimus, from the Coromantee people of Africa. Onesimus convinced his master, Reverend Dr. Cotton Mather, to promote smallpox inoculation as
a defense against an epidemic that was devastating Boston.
Preventive inoculation with smallpox was dangerous,
however, because some infected individuals still contracted
serious disease and were contagious. Thus, doctors continued to seek a better method of prevention. In England,
milkmaids claimed that they were protected from smallpox after they contracted cowpox (caused by vaccinia
virus), a related but much milder disease. English physician Edward Jenner (1749–1823) confirmed this claim by
deliberately infecting patients with matter from cowpox
lesions (Fig. 1.18B). The practice of cowpox inoculation
was called vaccination, after the Latin word vacca, meaning “cow.” At the time, the practice was highly controversial, as people feared they would somehow turn into cows
(Fig. 1.18C). Today, unfortunately, modern immunizations still raise irrational concerns. Failure to accept immunization leads to outbreaks of preventable disease, such as
the Disneyland measles outbreak in 2015.
Pasteur was aware of vaccination as he studied the course
of various diseases in experimental animals. In the spring of
1879, he was studying fowl cholera, a transmissible disease of
chickens with a high death rate. He had isolated and cultured
the bacteria that had killed the chickens, but he left his work
during the summer for a long vacation. No refrigeration was
available to preserve cultures, and when he returned to work,
the aged bacteria failed to cause disease in his chickens. Pasteur then obtained fresh bacteria from an outbreak of disease
elsewhere, as well as some new chickens. But the fresh bacteria failed to make the original chickens sick (those that had
been exposed to the aged bacteria). All of the new chickens,
exposed only to the fresh bacteria, contracted the disease.
Grasping the clue from his mistake, Pasteur had the insight to
recognize that an attenuated strain of microbe, altered somehow to eliminate its potency to cause disease, could still confer immunity to the virulent disease-causing form.
Pasteur was the first to recognize the significance of attenuation and extend the principle to other pathogens. We now
know that the molecular components of pathogens generate
immunity, the resistance to a specific disease, by stimulating the immune system, an organism’s exceedingly complex
cellular mechanisms of defense (see Chapters 23 and 24).
Understanding the immune system awaited the techniques
of molecular biology a century later, but nineteenth-century



FIGURE 1.19

Pasteur cures rabies. This cartoon in a French
newspaper depicts Louis Pasteur protecting children from rabid
dogs.


PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

In 1847, Hungarian physician Ignaz Semmelweis (1818–
1865) noticed that the death rate of women in childbirth
due to puerperal fever was much higher in his own hospital than in a birthing center run by midwives. He guessed
that the doctors in his hospital were transmitting pathogens from cadavers that they had dissected. So he ordered
the doctors to wash their hands in chlorine, an antiseptic agent (a chemical that kills microbes). The mortality
rate fell, but this revelation displeased other doctors, who
refused to accept Semmelweis’s findings.
In 1865, the British surgeon Joseph Lister (1827–1912)
noted that half of his amputee patients died of sepsis. Lister
knew from Pasteur that microbial contamination might be
the cause. So he began experiments to develop the use of
antiseptic agents, most successfully carbolic acid, to treat
wounds and surgical instruments. After initial resistance,
Lister’s work, with the support of Pasteur and Koch, drew
widespread recognition. In the twentieth century, surgeons
developed fully aseptic environments for surgery—that is,
environments completely free of microbes.
The problem with most antiseptic chemicals that killed
microbes was that if taken internally, they would also kill
the patients. Researchers sought a “magic bullet,” an antibiotic molecule that would kill only microbes, leaving their
host unharmed.
An important step in the search for antibiotics was the
realization that microbes themselves produce antibiotic
compounds. This conclusion followed from the famous
accidental discovery of penicillin by the Scottish medical
researcher Alexander Fleming (1881–1955) (Fig. 1.20A).
In 1929, Fleming was culturing Staphylococcus, which
infects wounds. He found that one of his plates of Staphylococcus was contaminated with a mold, Penicillium notatum, which he noticed was surrounded by a clear region
free of Staphylococcus colonies (Fig. 1.20B). Following up
on this observation, Fleming showed that the mold produced a substance that killed bacteria. We now know this
substance as penicillin.
In 1941, biochemists Howard Florey (1898–1968) and
Ernst Chain (1906–1979) purified the penicillin molecule,
which we now know inhibits formation of the bacterial cell
wall. Penicillin saved the lives of many Allied troops during
World War II, the first war in which an antibiotic became
available to soldiers.
The second half of the twentieth century saw the discovery of many new and powerful antibiotics. Most of the
new antibiotics, however, were made by little-known bacteria and fungi from endangered ecosystems—a circumstance that focused attention on wilderness preservation.
Furthermore, the widespread and often indiscriminate use
of antibiotics selects for pathogens to evolve resistance to
antibiotics. As a result, antibiotics have lost their effectiveness against certain strains of major pathogens. For example, multidrug-resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis and

A.

DAVIES/GETTY IMAGES



B.

Penicillium
mold

FIGURE 1.20



MEDISCAN/VISUALS UNLIMITED

20

Alexander Fleming, discoverer of penicillin.

A. Fleming in his laboratory. B. Fleming’s original plate of bacteria
with Penicillium mold inhibiting the growth of bacterial colonies.

methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) are now
serious threats to public health. To combat evolving drug
resistance, we continually need to research and develop
new antibiotics. Microbial biosynthesis of antibiotics is discussed in Chapter 15, and the medical use of antibiotics is
discussed in Chapter 27.

Thought Questions

1.5 Why do you think some pathogens generate immunity
readily, whereas others evade the immune system?
1.6 How do you think microbes protect themselves from the
antibiotics they produce?

The Discovery of Viruses

Viruses are much smaller than the host cells they infect;
most are too small to be seen by a light microscope. So how
were they discovered? In 1892, the Russian botanist Dmitri Ivanovsky (1864–1920) studied tobacco mosaic disease,
a condition in which the leaves become mottled and the
crop yield is decreased or destroyed altogether. Ivanovsky
knew that some kind of microbe from the diseased plants
transmitted the disease, and he wondered how small it was.
He was surprised to find that the agent of transmission
could pass through a porcelain filter having a pore size
(0.1 µm) that blocked known microbes. Later, the Dutch
plant microbiologist Martinus Beijerinck (1851–1931) conducted similar filtration experiments. Beijerinck concluded
that because the agent of disease passed through a filter
that retained bacteria, it could not be a bacterial cell.
The “filterable agent” of disease was ultimately purified
by the American scientist Wendell Stanley (1904–1971),
who processed 4,000 kilograms (kg) of infected tobacco
leaves. Stanley obtained a sample of infective virus particles pure enough to crystallize, in a 3D array comparable
to crystals composed of inert chemicals. The crystal was
analyzed by X-ray crystallography (discussed in Chapter 2)
to reveal the molecular structure of tobacco mosaic virus
(Fig. 1.21A)—a feat that earned Stanley the 1946 Nobel
Prize in Chemistry. The fact that an object capable of biological reproduction could be stable enough to be crystallized amazed scientists, ultimately leading to a new, more
mechanical view of living organisms. Today, we consider
viruses “subcellular organisms.” Even smaller subcellular
entities that replicate within cells include plasmids and prions (see Chapter 6).
The individual particle of tobacco mosaic virus consists
of a helical tube of protein subunits containing its genetic
material coiled within (Fig. 1.21B). Stanley thought the
virus was a catalytic protein, but colleagues later determined that it contained RNA as its genetic material. The
structure of the coiled RNA was solved through X-ray
crystallography by the British scientist Rosalind Franklin (1920–1958). Other viruses that have RNA genomes
include influenza and HIV (AIDS); viruses with DNA
genomes include polio and herpes viruses. We now know
that all kinds of animals, plants, and microbial cells can
be infected by viruses—and carry endogenous viruses that



MICROBIAL LIFE: ORIGIN AND DISCOVERY

21

may benefit their hosts. Viral function and disease are discussed in Chapters 6, 11, and 26.

To Summarize
















Robert Koch devised techniques of pure culture to
study a single species of microbe in isolation. A key technique is culture on solid medium using agar, as developed by Angelina and Walther Hesse, in a double-dish
container devised by Julius Petri.
Koch’s postulates provide a set of criteria to establish a
causative link between an infectious agent and a disease.
Edward Jenner established the practice of vaccination,
inoculation with cowpox to prevent smallpox. Jenner’s
discovery was based on earlier observations by Lady
Mary Montagu and others that a mild case of smallpox
could prevent future cases.
Louis Pasteur developed the first vaccines based on
attenuated strains, such as the rabies vaccine.
Ignaz Semmelweis and Joseph Lister showed that
antiseptics could prevent transmission of pathogens
from doctor to patient.
Alexander Fleming discovered that the Penicillium
mold generates a substance that kills bacteria.
Howard Florey and Ernst Chain purified the substance penicillin, the first commercial antibiotic to save
human lives.
Dmitri Ivanovsky and Martinus Beijerinck discovered
viruses as filterable infective particles. Viruses, which
may be harmful or beneficial, infect all kinds of cells.

A.

DENNIS KUNKEL/VISUALS UNLIMITED

B.

100 nm



RNA

Capsid
proteins

FIGURE 1.21



Tobacco mosaic virus (TMV).

A. Particles of tobacco mosaic virus (colorized
transmission electron micrograph). B. In TMV, a
protein capsid surrounds an RNA chromosome.

22



PART 1

1.4



THE MICROBIAL CELL

known as chemolithotrophs, or lithotrophs (discussed further in Chapters 4 and 14).
The lithotrophs studied by Winogradsky could not be
Koch’s growth of microbes in pure culture was a major
grown on Koch’s plate media containing agar or gelatin.
advance, enabling the systematic study of microbial physiolThe bacteria that Winogradsky isolated can grow only on
ogy and biochemistry. But how does pure culture relate to
inorganic minerals; in fact, some species are actually poi“natural” environments, such as a forest or a human intessoned by organic food. For example, nitrifiers convert
tine, where countless kinds of microbes interact?
ammonia to nitrate, forming a crucial part of the nitrogen
In hindsight, the invention of pure culture eclipsed the
cycle in natural ecosystems. Winogradsky cultured nitriequally important study of microbial ecology (discussed in
fiers on a totally inorganic solution containing ammonia
Chapters 21 and 22). Microbes cycle the many minerals
and silica gel, which supported no other kind of organism.
essential for all life, including all atmospheric nitrogen gas
This experiment was an early example of enrichment culand much of the oxygen. Yet less than 0.1% of all microbial
ture, the use of selective growth media that support certain
species can be cultured in the laboratory. Indeed, unculclasses of microbial metabolism while excluding others.
turable microbes make up the majority of Earth’s entire
Instead of isolating pure colonies, Winogradsky built
biosphere. Only the outer skin of Earth supports complex
a model wetland ecosystem containing regions of enrichmulticellular life. The depths of Earth’s crust, to at least
ment for microbes of diverse metabolism. This model is
3 kilometers (km) down, as well as the atmosphere 15 km
called the Winogradsky column (Fig. 1.22). The model
out into the stratosphere, remain the domain of microbes.
consists of a glass tube containing mud (a source of wetland
So, to a first approximation, Earth’s ecology is microbial
bacteria) mixed with shredded newsprint (an organic carecology.
bon source) and calcium salts of sulfate and carbonate (an
inorganic carbon source for autotrophs). After exposure to
light for several weeks, several zones of color develop, full
Microbes Support Natural Ecosystems
of mineral-metabolizing bacteria. At the top, cyanobacteria
The first microbiologists to culture microbes in the laboconduct photosynthesis, using light energy to split water
ratory selected the kinds of nutrients that feed humans,
and produce molecular oxygen. Below, purple sulfur bactesuch as beef broth or potatoes. Some of Koch’s contemria use photosynthesis to split hydrogen sulfide, producing
poraries, however, suspected that other kinds of microbes
sulfur. At the bottom, with O2 exhausted, bacteria reduce
living in soil or wetlands consume more exotic fare. Soil
(donate electrons to) alternative electron acceptors such as
samples were known to oxidize hydrogen gas, and this
sulfate. Sulfate-reducing bacteria produce hydrogen sulfide
activity was eliminated by treatment with heat or acid,
and precipitate iron.
suggesting microbial origin. Ammonia in sewage was oxiLike a battery cell, the gradient from oxygen-rich condized by donating electrons to oxygen, forming nitrate.
ditions at the surface to highly reduced conditions below
Nitrate formation was eliminated by antibacterial treatgenerates a voltage potential. We now know that the entire
ment. These findings suggested the existence of microbes
Earth’s surface acts as a battery—for humans, a potential
that “eat” hydrogen gas or ammonia instead of beef or
source of renewable energy. A fuel cell to generate electricpotatoes, but no one could isolate these microbes in
ity is described in Chapter 14.
culture.
Winogradsky and later microbial ecoloAmong the first to study
gists showed that bacteria perform unique
microbes in natural habitats was
roles in geochemical cycling, the global
the Russian scientist Sergei Wininterconversion of inorganic and organic
Cyanobacteria
ogradsky (1856–1953). Winoforms of nitrogen, sulfur, phosphorus, and
gradsky waded through marshes
other minerals. Without these essential
to discover microbes with metabconversions (nutrient cycles), no plants or
Purple sulfur
olisms quite alien from human
animals could live. Bacteria and archaea fix
bacteria
digestion. For example, he discovnitrogen (N2) by reducing it to ammonia
Green sulfur
ered that species of the bacterium
bacteria
(NH3), the form of nitrogen assimilated
Beggiatoa oxidize hydrogen sulfide
Sulfate-reducing
by plants. This process is called nitrogen
bacteria
(H 2S) to sulfuric acid (H 2SO 4).
fixation (Fig. 1.23). Other bacterial speBeggiatoa fixes carbon dioxide into
cies oxidize ammonium ions (NH4+) in
biomass without consuming any
several stages back to nitrogen gas. NitroFIGURE 1.22  Winogradsky
organic food. Organisms that feed
gen fixation and geochemical cycling are
column. A wetland model ecosystem
solely on inorganic minerals are
designed by Sergei Winogradsky.
discussed further in Chapters 21 and 22.
JOSEPH VALLINO/MARINE BIOLOGICAL LABORATORY

Microbial Ecology

Atmospheric
nitrogen (N2)

Industrial
fixation
(commercial
fertilizers)

Animals
consume
plants.

Soil bacteria
fix N2 to NH4+.

Bacterial symbionts of
legumes fix nitrogen.

Plant
uptake

Bacteria

Bacteria
Bacteria

Bacteria

Nitrate
(NO3–)

Nitrite
(NO2–)

Ammonium
(NH4+)

Bacteria

FIGURE 1.23



The global nitrogen cycle. All life depends on these oxidative and reductive conversions of nitrogen—most of which are

performed only by microbes.

Thought Question

1.7 Why don’t all living organisms fix their own nitrogen?

Today, microbes with unusual properties, such as the
ability to digest toxic wastes or withstand extreme temperatures, have valuable applications in industry and bioremediation. For this reason, microbial ecology is a priority

Geogemma (strain 121)

C.

1 µm

KAZEM KASHEFI/UMASS, AMHERST

OAR/NURP/NOAA

Iron oxide

FIGURE 1.24  An extreme thermophile reduces iron oxide to magnetite. A. Rita Colwell, director of the National Science Foundation from 1998 to 2004, promoted the study of environmental microbiology. See eTopic 1.1 for an interview with her. B. Geogemma is a round
archaeon with a tuft of flagella (transmission electron micrograph). C. Kazem Kashefi, now at Michigan State University, pulls a live culture of
“strain 121” (Geogemma) out of an autoclave generally used to kill all living organisms at 121°C (250°F).

G. REGUERA/UMASS, AMHERST

B.

A.

for funding by the National Science Foundation (NSF).
Microbial ecologist Rita Colwell (Fig. 1.24A) directed the
NSF from 1998 to 2004 and founded the Biocomplexity
Initiative to study complex interactions between microbes
and other life in the environment. Such research includes
discovery of extremophiles, microbes from environments
with extreme heat, salinity, acidity, or other factors. One
such extremophile microbe is the archaeon Geogemma,
which reduces rust (iron oxide, Fe2O3) to the magnetic



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

mineral magnetite (Fe3O4) while growing in an autoclave at 121°C, a temperature high enough to kill all other
known organisms (Fig. 1.24B). Microbiologist Kazem
Kashefi uses a magnet to show that Geogemma converts
nonmagnetic iron oxide (rust, Fe2O3) to the magnetic mineral magnetite (Fe3O4) (Fig. 1.24C).

Bacterial Endosymbiosis
with Plants and Animals

AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR MICROBIOLOGY.

Within plant cells, certain bacteria fix nitrogen as endosymbionts, organisms living symbiotically inside larger organisms. Endosymbiotic bacteria known as rhizobia induce the
roots of legumes to form special nodules to facilitate bacterial nitrogen fixation. Rhizobial endosymbiosis was first
observed by Martinus Beijerinck. Microbial endosymbiosis, in a variety of diverse forms, is widespread in all ecosystems. Many interesting cases involve animal or human
hosts. Endosymbiotic microbes make essential nutritional
contributions to host animals. Ruminant animals such as
cattle, as well as insects such as termites, require digestive
bacteria to break down cellulose and other plant polymers.
Even humans obtain about 15% of their nutrition from
colonic bacteria (Fig. 1.25). Intestinal bacteria such as
E. coli and Bacteroides species grow as biofilms, organized
multispecies communities adhering to a surface. Biofilms
play major roles in all ecosystems and within parts of the
human body (discussed in Chapters 4 and 21). The biofilm shown in Figure 1.25B is attached to the surface of a
digested food particle. Most kinds of plant fibers that we

consume actually require microbial enzymes to digest (see
Chapter 21).
Many invertebrates, such as hydras and corals, harbor
endosymbiotic phototrophs that provide products of photosynthesis in return for protection and nutrients. Other kinds
of endosymbiosis involve more than nutrition. In the light
organs of squid, luminescent bacteria, such as Aliivibrio
fischeri, produce light (bioluminescence) that helps the
host evade nocturnal predators. The host squid controls
the amount and direction of light that leaves the organ so
that it matches the illumination from the moon, rendering
the squid nearly invisible. Bacteria that normally inhabit the
human intestine and skin protect our bodies from infection
by pathogens. Gut bacteria regulate development of our
immune system, and even send signals to the brain.
The human microbiota or microbiome is the collection
of all microbes associated with the human body. Physicians
increasingly consider the human microbiome to be a part
of the body, as essential as a limb or an organ. In 2016, the
U.S. government announced the National Microbiome Initiative to advance understanding of how microbiomes contribute to our health and the environment. Microbiomes
are discussed further in Chapter 21.

Note: The terms microbiota and microbiome have similar meaning. “Microbiota” refers to the ecological community of
microbes living within or upon the human body. “Microbiome”
refers to the community of microbes associated with a human
organ, or with a different defined habitat such as soil or plants.
Another term, metagenome, refers to the collective genetic
sequences found in all the microbes of a microbiome.

100 µm

FIGURE 1.25



Intestines contain biofilms. Bacteria growing on the surface of a residual food particle aid human digestion.

© 2006 AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR MICROBIO LOGY . ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.

24

CHAPTER 1

To Summarize










Sergei Winogradsky developed the first system of
enrichment culture, called the Winogradsky column, to
grow microbes from natural environments.
Chemolithotrophs (or lithotrophs) metabolize inorganic minerals, such as ammonia, instead of the organic
nutrients used by the microbes isolated by Koch.
Geochemical cycling depends on bacteria and archaea
that cycle nitrogen, phosphorus, and other minerals
throughout the biosphere.
Endosymbionts are microbes that live within host
organisms and provide essential functions for their
hosts, such as nitrogen fixation for legume plants, or
digestion of complex food molecules for humans and
other animals.
Martinus Beijerinck was the first to demonstrate that
nitrogen-fixing rhizobia grow as endosymbionts within
leguminous plants.

1.5

The Microbial Family Tree

The bewildering diversity of microbial life-forms presented
nineteenth-century microbiologists with a seemingly impossible task of classification. So little was known about life
under the lens that natural scientists despaired of ever learning how to distinguish microbial species. The famous classifier of species, Swedish botanist Carl von Linné (Carolus
Linnaeus, 1707–1778), called the microbial world “chaos.”

Microbes Are a Challenge to Classify

Early taxonomists faced two challenges as they attempted
to classify microbes. First, the resolution of the light microscope visualized little more than the outward shape of
microbial cells, and vastly different kinds of microbes looked
more or less alike (discussed in Chapter 2). This challenge
was overcome as advances in biochemistry and microscopy
made it possible to distinguish microbes by metabolism and
cell structure, and ultimately by DNA sequence.
Second, microbes do not readily fit the classic definition of a species—that is, a group of organisms that interbreed. Unlike multicellular eukaryotes, microbes generally
reproduce asexually. When they do exchange genes, they
may do so with related strains or with distantly related species (discussed in Chapter 9). Nevertheless, microbiologists have devised working definitions of microbial species
that enable us to usefully describe populations while being



MICROBIAL LIFE: ORIGIN AND DISCOVERY



25

flexible enough to accommodate continual revision and
change (discussed in Chapter 17). The most useful definitions are based on genetic similarity. For example, two distinct species generally share no more than 95% similarity of
DNA sequence.

Note:

The names of microbial species are occasionally changed
to reflect new understanding of genetic relationships. For example,
the causative agent of bubonic plague was formerly called Bacterium pestis (1896), Bacillus pestis (1900), and Pasteurella pestis
(1923), but it is now called Yersinia pestis (1944). The older names,
however, still appear in the literature—a point to remember when
carrying out research. Names of bacteria and archaea are compiled
in the List of Prokaryotic Names with Standing in Nomenclature
(LPSN).

Microbes Include Eukaryotes
and Prokaryotes

In the nineteenth century, taxonomists had no DNA information. As they tried to incorporate microbes into the tree
of life, they faced a conceptual dilemma because microbes
could not be categorized as either animals or plants, which
since ancient times had been considered the two “kingdoms” or major categories of life. Taxonomists attempted
to apply these categories to microbes—for example, by
including algae and fungi with plants. But German naturalist Ernst Haeckel (1834–1919) recognized that microbes
differed from both plants and animals in fundamental
aspects of their lifestyle, cellular structure, and biochemistry. Haeckel proposed that microscopic organisms constituted a third kind of life—neither animal nor plant—which
he called Monera.
In the twentieth century, biochemical studies revealed
profound distinctions even within the Monera. In particular, microbes such as protists and algae contain a nucleus
enclosed by a nuclear membrane, whereas bacteria do not.
Herbert Copeland (1902–1968) proposed a system of classification that divided Monera into two groups: the eukaryotic protists (protozoa and algae) and the prokaryotic
bacteria. Copeland’s four-kingdom classification (plants,
animals, eukaryotic protists, and prokaryotic bacteria)
was later modified by Robert Whittaker (1920–1980) to
include fungi as another kingdom of eukaryotic microbes.
Whittaker’s system thus generated five kingdoms: bacteria,
protists, fungi, and the multicellular plants and animals.

Eukaryotes Evolved through
Endosymbiosis

The five-kingdom system was modified dramatically by Lynn
Margulis (1938–2011) at the University of Massachusetts

26



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL
FIGURE 1.26

 Lynn Margulis and the serial endosymbiosis theory. A. Five-kingdom

A.

scheme, modified by the endosymbiosis theory.
B. Margulis proposed that organelles evolve
through endosymbiosis.

Plants
Plants and algae

Animals

Fungi

Chloroplasts

Protists

Prokaryotes

B.

LYNN MARGULIS, UMASS, AMHERST

Protoctists
Protists and slime molds

Mitochondria

Pre-eukaryote

Cyanobacteria
(phototrophic)

Proteobacteria
(respiring)

Prokaryotes

Bacteria were incorporated by
pre-eukaryotes as eukaryotic
organelles.

A.

(Fig. 1.26). Margulis tried to explain how it is
that eukaryotic cells contain mitochondria and
chloroplasts, membranous organelles that possess their own chromosomes. She proposed
that eukaryotes evolved by merging with bacteria to form composite cells by intracellular
endosymbiosis, in which one cell internalizes
another that grows within it. The endosymbiosis may ultimately generate a single organism
whose formerly independent members are now
incapable of independent existence.
Margulis proposed that early in the history
of life, respiring bacteria similar to E. coli were
engulfed by pre-eukaryotic cells, where they
evolved into mitochondria, the eukaryote’s respiratory organelles. Similarly, she proposed that a
phototroph related to cyanobacteria was taken up by
a eukaryote, giving rise to the chloroplasts of phototrophic algae and plants.

B.

OAR/NURP/NOAA

© REINHARD RACHEL/1997

100ºC

FIGURE 1.27  Archaea include extremophiles such as
Pyrodictium abyssi. A. Thermal vents of superheated water and

sulfides rise from the ocean floor. B. The vent sulfides feed P. abyssi
networks of interconnected cells, at temperatures above 100°C
(scanning electron micrograph).

CHAPTER 1

Archaea Differ from Bacteria
and Eukaryotes

Are there cellular microbes that differ from both bacteria
and eukaryotes? Gene sequence analysis led to another startling advance in our understanding of how cells evolved. In
1977, Carl Woese (1928–2012), at the University of Illinois, was studying a group of recently discovered prokaryotes that live in seemingly hostile environments, such as
the boiling sulfur springs of Yellowstone, or that conduct
unusual kinds of metabolism, such as production of methane (methanogenesis). Woese used the sequence of the
gene for 16S ribosomal RNA (16S rRNA) as a “molecular clock,” a gene whose sequence differences can be used
to measure the time since the divergence of two species
(discussed in Chapter 17). The divergence of rRNA genes
showed that the newly discovered prokaryotes were a distinct form of life: archaea (Fig. 1.27).
The archaea resemble bacteria in their relatively simple
cell structure, in their lack of a nucleus, and in their ability to grow in a wide range of environments. In fact, many
archaea grow along with bacteria within the human colon,
or in common soil or water. But certain types of archaea,
such as the autoclave-cultured archaeon Geogemma, grow
in environments more extreme than any that support bacteria. The genetic sequences of archaea differ as much
from those of bacteria as from those of eukaryotes; in fact,
their gene expression machinery is more similar to that of
eukaryotes.
Woese’s discovery replaced the classification scheme
of five kingdoms with three equally distinct groups,
now called the three “domains”: Bacteria, Archaea, and
Eukarya (Fig. 1.28). In the three-domain model, the
bacterial ancestor of mitochondria derives from ancient
proteobacteria (shaded pink in the figure), whereas chloroplasts derive from ancient cyanobacteria (shaded green).

MICROBIAL LIFE: ORIGIN AND DISCOVERY



27

A.

CARL WOESE

The endosymbiosis theory was highly controversial
because it implied a polyphyletic, or multiple, ancestry
of living species, inconsistent with the long-held assumption that species evolve only by divergence from a common ancestor (monophyletic ancestry). Ultimately, DNA
sequence analysis produced compelling evidence of the
bacterial origin of mitochondria and chloroplasts. Both
of these classes of organelles contain circular molecules
of DNA, whose sequences show unmistakable homology
(similarity) to those of bacteria. DNA sequences and other
evidence established the common ancestry between mitochondria and respiring bacteria, and between chloroplasts
and cyanobacteria. The symbiotic origins and evolution
of mitochondria and chloroplasts are discussed further in
Chapter 17.



B.

Archaea

Small-subunit rRNA
sequences reveal
three deeply branching
domains of life.

Crenarchaeota Thaumarchaeota
Hyperthermophiles
Euryarchaeota
Sulfur
Halophiles
oxidizers
Methanogens

Bacteria
Green nonsulfur
bacteria
Gram-positive
bacteria

Last
common
ancestor

Proteobacteria
Root

Cyanobacteria

Entamebas
Slime molds
Animals
Fungi
Plants
Microsporidians
Ciliates
Flagellates
Trichomonads
Diplomonads

Spirochetes
Thermotogales

Eukarya
FIGURE 1.28



Carl Woese and the three domains of life.

A. Woese proposed that archaea constitute a third domain of life.
B. Three domains form a monophyletic tree based on small-subunit
rRNA sequences. The length of each branch approximates the time
of divergence from the last common ancestor. For a more detailed
tree, see Chapter 17.

The three-domain classification is largely supported by
the sequences of microbial genomes, although some genes
are transferred both within and between the domains
(discussed in Chapter 17).
Thought Question

1.8 What arguments support the classification of Archaea as
a third domain of life? What arguments support the classification of archaea and bacteria together, as prokaryotes, distinct
from eukaryotes?



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

To Summarize










Classifying microbes was a challenge historically
because of the difficulties in observing distinguishing
characteristics of different categories.
Ernst Haeckel recognized that microbes constitute a
form of life distinct from animals and plants.
Herbert Copeland and Robert Whittaker classified
prokaryotes as a form of microbial life distinct from
eukaryotic microbes such as protists.
Lynn Margulis proposed that eukaryotic organelles such as mitochondria and chloroplasts evolved
by endosymbiosis from prokaryotic cells engulfed by
pre-eukaryotes.
Carl Woese discovered a domain of prokaryotes, Archaea,
whose genetic sequences diverge equally from those of
bacteria and those of eukaryotes. Archaea grow in a wide
range of environments; some species grow under conditions that exclude bacteria and eukaryotes.

1.6

Cell Biology and the
DNA Revolution

During the twentieth century, amid world wars and societal
transformations, the field of microbiology exploded with
new knowledge (see Table 1.2). More than 99% of what
we know about microbes today was discovered after 1900
by scientists too numerous to cite in this book. Advances
in biochemistry and microscopy revealed the fundamental structure and function of cell membranes and proteins.
The revelation of the structures of DNA and RNA led
to the discovery of the genetic programs of model bacteria, such as E. coli, and the lambda bacteriophage. Beyond
microbiology, these advances produced the technology of
“recombinant DNA,” or genetic engineering, the construction of molecules that combine DNA sequences from unrelated species. These microbial tools offered unprecedented
applications for human medicine and industry (discussed in
Chapters 7–12).

to vacuum cleaners, the study of microbiology was also
being transformed by machines. Two instruments had
exceptional impact: The electron microscope revealed the
internal structure of cells (Chapter 2), and the ultracentrifuge enabled isolation of subcellular parts (Chapter 3).
The electron microscope. In the 1920s, at the Technical
University in Berlin, student Ernst Ruska (1906–1988)
was invited to develop an instrument for focusing rays of
electrons. Ruska recalled, from his childhood, that his
father’s microscope could magnify fascinating specimens
of plants and animals, but that its resolution was limited
by the wavelength of light. He was eager to devise lenses
that could focus beams of electrons, with wavelengths far
smaller than that of light, to reveal living details never seen
before. Ultimately, Ruska built lenses to focus electrons
using specially designed electromagnets. Magnetic lenses
were used to complete the fi rst electron microscope in
1933 (Fig. 1.29). Early transmission electron microscopes
achieved about tenfold greater magnification than the light
microscope, revealing details such as the ridged shell of a
diatom. Further development steadily increased magnification, to as high as a millionfold.
For the first time, cells were seen to be composed of a
cytoplasm containing macromolecules and bounded by a
phospholipid membrane. For example, the electron micrograph in Figure 1.30 shows a “thin section” of the photosynthetic bacterium Chlorobium, including its nucleoid

Column contains
magnetic lenses.

MARINE BIOLOGICAL LABORATORY/WHOI

28

Cell Membranes and Macromolecules

In 1900, the study of cell structure was still limited by
the limited resolution of the light microscope and by the
absence of tools that could take apart cells to isolate their
components. Both of these limitations were overcome by
the invention of powerful instruments. Just as society was
being transformed by machines ranging from jet airplanes

FIGURE 1.29



An early transmission electron microscope.

(DNA) and its light-harvesting chlorosomes. Electron
microscopy is discussed further in Chapter 2.
Subcellular structures, however, raised many
questions about cell function that visualization
alone could not answer. Biochemists showed
that cell function involves numerous chemical transformations mediated by enzymes.
A milestone in the study of metabolism was
the elucidation by German biochemist Hans
Krebs (1900–1981) of the tricarboxylic acid
cycle (TCA cycle, or Krebs cycle), by which
the products of sugar digestion are converted
to carbon dioxide. The TCA cycle provides
energy for many bacteria and for the mitochondria of eukaryotes. But even Krebs understood
little of how metabolism is organized within a cell;
he and his contemporaries considered the cell a “bag
of enzymes.” The full understanding of cell structure
required experiments on isolated parts of cells.
The ultracentrifuge. Centrifugation can separate whole

cells from the fluid in which they are suspended. The fi rst
centrifuges spun samples in a rotor with centrifugal force
of a few thousand times that of gravity. In the nineteenth
century, biochemists proposed that even greater centrifugal
forces could separate components of lysed cells, even macromolecules such as proteins. The Swedish chemist Theodor Svedberg (1884–1971), at the University of Uppsala,
built such a machine: the ultracentrifuge. By the twentieth
century, ultracentrifuges achieved rates so high that they
required a vacuum to avoid burning up like a space reentry
vehicle. Ultracentrifuges isolated protein complexes such as
ribosomes, and DNA molecules such as plasmids.
Experiments combining electron microscopy and ultracentrifugation revealed how membranes govern energy
transduction within bacteria and within organelles such as
mitochondria and chloroplasts. In the 1960s, English biochemists Peter Mitchell (1920–1992) and Jennifer Moyle
proposed and tested a revolutionary idea called the chemiosmotic theory. The chemiosmotic theory states that the
reduction-oxidation (redox) reactions of the electron transport system store energy in the form of a gradient of protons
(hydrogen ions) across a membrane, such as the bacterial
cell membrane or the inner membrane of the mitochondrion. The energy stored in the proton gradient, in turn,
drives the synthesis of ATP (discussed in Chapter 14).

Microbial Genetics Leads
the DNA Revolution

As the form and function of living cells emerged in the
early twentieth century, a largely separate line of research



MICROBIAL LIFE: ORIGIN AND DISCOVERY



29

NIELS-ULRIK FRIGAARD, ET AL.
2002 J. BACTERIOL.184:3368.

CHAPTER 1

Nucleoid

Chlorosome
100 nm

FIGURE 1.30  Electron micrograph of Chlorobium species, a photosynthetic bacterium. The thin section reveals the

nucleoid (containing DNA), the light-harvesting chlorosomes, and
envelope membranes.

revealed patterns of heredity of cell traits. In eukaryotes,
the Mendelian rules of inheritance were rediscovered and
connected to the behavior of subcellular structures called
chromosomes. Frederick Griffith (1879–1941) showed in
1928 that an unknown substance from dead bacteria could
carry genetic information into living cells, transforming
harmless bacteria into a strain capable of killing mice—
a process called transformation. Some kind of “genetic
material” must be inherited to direct the expression of
inherited traits, but no one knew what that material was or
how its information was expressed.
Then, in 1944, Oswald Avery (1877–1955) and colleagues showed that the genetic material for transformation is deoxyribonucleic acid, or DNA. An obscure acidic
polymer, DNA had been previously thought too uniform
in structure to carry information; its precise structure was
unknown. As World War II raged among nations, scientists
embarked on an epic struggle: the quest for the structure
of DNA.
The double helix. The tool of choice to discover the structure of molecules was X-ray crystallography, a method
developed by British physicists in the early 1900s. The field
of X-ray analysis included an unusual number of women,
including Dorothy Hodgkin (1910–1994), who later won
a Nobel Prize for the structures of penicillin and vitamin
B12. In 1953, crystallographer Rosalind Franklin joined a
laboratory at King’s College London to study the structure



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

C.

B.

SCIENCE SOURCE

SCIENCE SOURCE, INC.

A.

A. BARRINGTON BROWN/SCIENCE SOURCE

30

FIGURE 1.31  The DNA double helix. A. Rosalind Franklin discovered that DNA forms a double helix. B. X-ray diffraction pattern
of DNA, obtained by Franklin. C. James Watson (left) and Francis
Crick discovered the complementary pairing between bases of DNA
and the antiparallel form of the double helix.

of DNA (Fig. 1.31A). As a woman and as a Jew who supported relief work in Palestine, Franklin felt socially isolated
at the male-dominated Protestant university; her work was
disparagingly called “witchcraft.” Nevertheless, her exceptional X-ray micrographs (Fig. 1.31B) revealed for the fi rst
time that the standard B-form DNA was a double helix.
Without Franklin’s knowledge, her colleague Maurice
Wilkins showed her data to a competitor, James Watson
at the University of Cambridge. The pattern led Watson
and Francis Crick (1916–2004) to guess that the four
A.

bases of the DNA “alphabet” were paired in the interior
of Franklin’s double helix (Fig. 1.31C). They published
their model in the journal Nature, while denying that they
had used Franklin’s data. The discovery of the double helix
earned Watson, Crick, and Wilkins the 1962 Nobel Prize
in Physiology or Medicine. Franklin died of ovarian cancer
before the prize was awarded. Before her death, however,
she had turned her efforts to the structure of ribonucleic
acid (RNA). She determined the helical form of the RNA
chromosome within tobacco mosaic virus, the first viral
RNA to be characterized.
Modern X-ray crystallography (discussed in Chapter 2)
reveals with atomic precision the structure of DNA, including its complementary base pairs (Fig. 1.32A). The complementary pairing of DNA bases led to the development of
techniques for DNA sequencing, the reading of a sequence
of DNA base pairs. Figure 1.32B shows a portion of the

Thymine
Cytosine
Guanine
Adenine
B.
C T C T T A G T G G C G C A G C T A A C G C A T T A A G T T G A C C G
300
0

FIGURE 1.32

310

320

330

DNA. A. The structure of DNA, based on modern X-ray crystallography. B. A DNA sequence fluorogram obtained from
bacterial genomic DNA. Each colored trace represents the fluorescence of one of the four bases terminating a chain of DNA. Units represent
number of DNA bases.


CHAPTER 1

DNA sequence from bacterial DNA isolated by an undergraduate student. (The sequencing process is described in
Chapter 7.) In the data, each color represents a fluorescent
signal from one of the four bases (adenine, guanine, cytosine, or thymine). Each peak represents a DNA fragment
terminating in that particular base. The order of fragment
lengths yields the sequence of bases in one strand. Reading
the DNA sequence enabled microbiologists to determine
the beginning and endpoint of microbial genes, and ultimately entire genomes, as discussed in Section 1.1.
Reading the genomes enabled microbiologists to see the
history of microbial evolution, reaching back to a time even
before the advent of DNA—to a pre-DNA world when the
cell’s chromosomes were actually composed of ribonucleic
acid, RNA. This hypothetical world without DNA is called
the RNA world. How did life function in the RNA world?
We hypothesize that cells used RNA for all the functions of
DNA and protein, including information storage and replication, and biochemical catalysis. RNA molecules capable
of catalysis, called ribozymes, were discovered in 1982 by
Thomas Cech at the University of Colorado, and Sidney
Altman at Harvard University, who earned the Nobel Prize
in Chemistry in 1989. That same year, Jennifer Doudna
and Jack Szostak at Harvard showed how an RNA molecule, a self-splicing intron from Tetrahymena, could catalyze its own replication (Fig. 1.33). In 2009, Gerald Joyce
and Tracey Lincoln at the Scripps Research Institute constructed the first self-replicating ribozyme, an RNA that
can catalyze reactions and copy itself indefinitely. These



MICROBIAL LIFE: ORIGIN AND DISCOVERY



31

achievements support the theory that early organisms were
composed primarily of RNA.
How do DNA and RNA sequences convey information
in the cell? To read the DNA language required deciphering the genetic code—how triplets of DNA “letters” specify the amino acid units of proteins. This story is discussed
in Chapter 8.
The DNA revolution began with bacteria. What amazed
the world about DNA was that such a simple substance,
composed of only four types of subunits, is the genetic
material that determines all the different organisms on
Earth. The promise of this insight was fi rst fulfi lled in bacteria and bacteriophages, whose small genomes and short
generation times made key experiments possible (see Chapters 7–9). Bacterial tools were later extended to animals and
plants; for example:


Bacteria readily recombine DNA from unrelated
organisms. The mechanisms of bacterial recombination
led to construction of artificially recombinant DNA, or
“gene cloning.” Recombinant DNA ultimately enabled
us to transfer genes between the genomes of virtually all
types of organisms.



Bacterial DNA polymerases are used for polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) amplification of DNA. A hot
spring in Yellowstone National Park yielded the bacterium
Thermus aquaticus, whose DNA polymerase could survive many rounds of cycling to near-boiling temperature.

PHOTO BY ROY KALTSCHMIDT/LAWRENCE BERKELEY NATIONAL LABORATORY

C.
GEOFFREY WHEELER FOR HOWARD HUGHES MEDICAL INSTITUTE

A.

B.
Cleavage is
catalyzed.

FIGURE 1.33

Discovery of catalytic RNA. A. Tom
Cech holds a flask containing protists that make catalytic
RNA, the kind of molecule that in early cells may have
served both genetic and catalytic functions. B. Diagram of a
catalytic RNA, where horizontal bars represent bases. The
RNA catalyzes cleavage of itself. C. Jennifer Doudna, now at
UC Berkeley, discovered a self-replicating catalytic RNA.


32



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

The Taq polymerase formed the basis of a multibilliondollar industry of PCR amplification of DNA, with
applications ranging from genome sequencing to forensic identification.


Gene regulation discovered in bacteria provided
models for animals and plants. The fi rst key discoveries of gene expression were made in bacteria and bacteriophages. Regulatory DNA-binding proteins were
discovered in bacteria and then subsequently found in all
classes of living organisms.

In the 1970s, when the DNA revolution began, its
implications drew public concern. The use of recombinant
DNA to make hybrid organisms—organisms combining
DNA from more than one species—seemed “unnatural.”
We now know that in natural environments, genes frequently move between species. Furthermore, recombinant
DNA technology raised the specter of placing deadly genes
that produce toxins such as botulin into innocuous humanassociated bacteria such as E. coli.
The unknown consequences of recombinant DNA so
concerned molecular biologists that in 1975 they held a
conference to assess the dangers and restrict experimentation on recombinant DNA. The conference, led by Paul
Berg and Maxine Singer at Asilomar (Pacific Grove, California) was possibly the first time in history that a group
of scientists organized and agreed to regulate and restrict
their own field.
On the positive side, the emerging world of molecular biology excited the imagination of young scientists
and entrepreneurs. The pioneering biotechnology company Genentech was founded in 1976 by Robert Swanson and bacterial geneticist Robert Boyer, from UC San
Francisco. Growing numbers of students entered the field

of molecular biology, seeking to invent medical cures—or
even to clone dinosaurs, as in Michael Crichton’s novel and
film Jurassic Park (1993). While the idea of cloning a dinosaur remains science fiction, the tools of microbial genetics
opened a window into the past by letting us read the DNA
of long-dead organisms preserved in museums.

Thought Question

1.9 Do you think engineered strains of bacteria should be
patentable? What about sequenced genes or genomes?

Microbial Discoveries Transform
Medicine and Industry

Twentieth-century microbiology transformed the practice
of medicine and generated entire new industries of biotechnology and bioremediation. Following the discovery
of penicillin, Americans poured millions of dollars of private and public funds into medical research. The March of
Dimes campaign for private donations to prevent polio led
to the successful development of a vaccine that has nearly
eliminated the disease. Since then, research on microbes
and other aspects of biology has grown with support from
U.S. government agencies, such as the National Institutes
of Health and the National Science Foundation, as well
as from governments of other countries, particularly the
European nations and Japan. Further support comes from
private foundations, such as the Pasteur Institute, the Wellcome Trust, and the Howard Hughes Medical Institute.
Medical research generates astonishing advances, such as
the use of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV, the cause

TABLE 1.3 'Fields of Research in Microbiology
Field

Subject of study

Experimental microbiology

Fundamental questions about microbial form and function, genetics, and ecology

Medical microbiology

The mechanism, diagnosis, and treatment of microbial disease

Epidemiology

Distribution and causes of disease in humans, animals, and plants

Immunology

The immune system and other host defenses against infectious disease

Food microbiology

Fermented foods and food preservation

Industrial microbiology

Production of drugs, cloned gene products, and biofuels

Environmental microbiology

Microbial diversity and microbial processes in natural and artificial environments

Bioremediation

The use of microbial metabolism to remediate human wastes and industrial pollutants

Forensic microbiology

Analysis of microbial strains as evidence in criminal investigations

Astrobiology

The origin of life in the universe and the possibility of life outside Earth

CHAPTER 1



MICROBIAL LIFE: ORIGIN AND DISCOVERY



33

global warming, increasingly depends on our understanding of microbial populations (see Chapter 22).

To Summarize








JOAN SLONCZEWSKI, KENYON COLLEGE



FIGURE 1.34



Microbiologists at work. Students at Kenyon

College conduct research on bacterial gene expression.

of AIDS) to devise gene therapy agents that cure cancer
(discussed in Chapter 11).
Research in microbiology includes fields as diverse
as medicine and space science (Table 1.3). (A scientist whose career combines medicine and space science
is profiled in eTopic 1.2). These fields all recruit microbiologists (Fig. 1.34). Industrial and applied biology (see
Chapter 16) use bacteria to clone and produce therapeutic proteins, such as insulin for diabetics. Recombinant
viruses make safer vaccines. At the frontiers of science, we
use microbes for “synthetic biology,” the construction of
novel organisms with useful functions (see Chapter 12).
For example, synthetic biology may design bacteria with an
on/off switch to report the presence of arsenic in environmental samples. On a global level, the management of our
planet’s biosphere, with the challenges of pollution and

Genetics of bacteria, bacteriophages, and fungi in the
early twentieth century revealed fundamental insights
about gene transmission that apply to all organisms.
Structure and function of the genetic material, DNA,
emerged from a series of experiments in the twentieth
century.
Molecular microbiology generated key advances,
such as the cloning of the first recombinant molecules
and the invention of DNA sequencing technology.
Genome sequence determination and bioinformatic
analysis became the tools that shape the study of biology in the twenty-first century.
Microbial discoveries transformed medicine and
industry. Biotechnology produces new kinds of pharmaceuticals and industrial products. Synthetic biology engineers new kinds of organisms with useful functions.

Concluding Thoughts
Advances in microbial science raise important questions for
society. How can medical research control emerging diseases? How do microbes contribute to global cycles of carbon and nitrogen? How can microbial metabolism clean
up polluted environments, such as the vast oil spill from
the explosion of the Deepwater Horizon wellhead in 2010?
How can we engineer viruses to treat human diseases?
This book explores the current explosion of knowledge
about microbial cells, genetics, and ecology. We introduce the applications of microbial science to human affairs,
from medical microbiology to environmental science. Most
important, we discuss research methods—how scientists
make the discoveries that will shape tomorrow’s view of
microbiology. Chapter 2 presents the imaging tools that
make possible our increasingly detailed view of the structures of cells (Chapter 3) and viruses (Chapter 6). Chapters 4 and 5 introduce microbial nutrition and growth in
diverse habitats, including what we discover from microbial
genomes. Throughout, we invite readers to share with us
the excitement of discovery in microbiology.

CHAPTER 2

Observing the Microbial Cell

2.2 Optics and Properties of Light
2.3 Bright-Field Microscopy
2.4 Fluorescence Microscopy and Super-Resolution

Imaging
2.5 Dark-Field and Phase-Contrast Microscopy
2.6 Electron Microscopy, Scanning Probe

Microscopy, and X-Ray Crystallography

C U R R E N T R E S E A RC H

highlight

3D cryotomography of a chlamydia. Chlamydias are obligate
intracellular pathogens, some of which cause trachoma and
sexually transmitted disease. The environmental chlamydia
Simkania propagates within an ameba, a model for human
infection. Grant Jensen at the California Institute of Technology visualized a Simkania cell within its host cell, using electron microscopy at supercold temperatures (cryo-electron
microscopy). Cryo-electron microscopy reveals how the intracellular chlamydia recruits host membranes to surround
itself. Thus, Simkania induces its host cell to remodel a compartment where the chlamydia can grow.
Source: Martin Pilhofer et al. 2014. Environ. Microbiol. 16:417.

Chlamydial
inner membrane
Chlamydial
outer membrane

M

icroscopy reveals the vast realm of microorganisms invisible to the unaided eye. The
microscope enables us to count the number
of microbes in the human bloodstream or in dilute
natural environments such as the ocean. It shows us
how microbes swim and respond to signals such as a
new food source. Fluorescence microscopy captures
single molecules within a living cell. Electron microscopy explores the cell’s interior and models viruses,
even catching a virus in the act of infection.

A N I N T E RV I E W W I T H
GRANT J. JENSEN, MICROSCOPIST, CALIFORNIA INSTITUTE
OF TECHNOLOGY

How has your 3D cryotomography
changed our view of the bacterial
cell?
We’ve pioneered the application of
3D electron cryotomography to intact
bacterial cells. Because the cells are
frozen-hydrated (rather than chemically fixed and dehydrated as in
traditional EM), authentic molecular details are preserved.
This allows us to visualize all the large macromolecular
complexes, such as cell walls, cytoskeletal filaments, DNA
aggregates, and flagellar motors, with unprecedented clarity. We have seen how bacterial cells are not simply “bags
of enzymes,” but rather highly organized and finely tuned
machines.
PHOTO BY BOB PAZ

2.1 Observing Microbes

What future developments in microscopy do you foresee?

Host cell
inclusion
membrane

Endoplasmic
reticulum

Ribosomes
200 nm

The biggest opportunity I see today is correlating light and
electron microscopy images of the same specimen. Correlation would allow us to tag an object of interest inside a cell
with a fluorophore, watch it move in real time during some
dynamic cellular event, and then, in a moment of interest,
quick-freeze the cell, transfer the specimen into an electron microscope, and record a 3D image of the same cell at
molecular resolution.
37

38



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

How did people first see microbes? As we saw in Chapter 1,
the microscope of Antonie van Leeuwenhoek first revealed
the tiny life-forms on his teeth; his superior lenses were
key to his success. Since the time of Leeuwenhoek, microscopists have devised ever-more-powerful instruments to
search for microbes in familiar and unexpected habitats.
An example of such a habitat is the interior of a human cell
exploited by Chlamydia trachomatis, an obligate intracellular pathogen (Fig. 2.1). C. trachomatis causes sexually transmitted infections that may escape the patient’s notice until
they cause infertility. Intracellular chlamydias also escape the
immune response—but electron microscopy catches them
in the act. The scanning electron micrograph of Figure 2.1
images an infected cell sliced open. There, the chlamydias
multiply within a membrane vesicle that takes up much of
the human host cell. Protected from cell defenses, chlamydias fission and form “elementary bodies” that are inactive but
carry infection to a new cell. The electron micrograph shows
numerous progeny chlamydias protected by the vesicle.
What does this protective compartment look like, and
how does it form? In the Current Research Highlight,
we saw how Grant Jensen’s advanced technique of cryoEM tomography reveals the contours of an environmental

2.1

Observing Microbes

Most microbes are too small to be seen; that is, they are microscopic, requiring the use of a microscope to be seen. But why
can’t we see microbes without magnification? The answer is
surprisingly complex. In fact, our definition of “microscopic”
is based on the properties of our eyes. We define what is visible and what is microscopic in terms of the human eye.

Chlamydias within
vesicle (cut open)

Resolution of Objects by Our Eyes

2 μm

FIGURE 2.1  Chlamydia trachomatis multiplying within a
human cell. Colorized scanning electron microscopy (SEM).

DAVID M. PHILLIPS/SCIENCE SOURCE/GETTY IMAGES

Human cell

chlamydia (Simkania species) infecting an ameba. In
tomography, a number of digital “slices” through the sample are assembled by computer to form a 3D model. The
ameba provides clues to the process of human chlamydial infection. The computer-generated model shows how
Simkania’s own envelope (inner and outer membranes) is
enclosed by host cell membranes. The pathogen remodels
the host intracellular membranes to protect itself from host
defenses. To investigate the function of environmental and
medical microbes, we present scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and cryo-EM tomography in Section 2.6.
First in Chapter 2, we present light microscopy, and the
theory and practice of observing microbes, which are essential for every student and professional in the field or clinic.
We then explore exciting advanced tools for research. Fluorescence and super-resolution imaging, electron microscopy, and scanning probe microscopy push ever farther the
frontiers of the unseen. And we continue to invent new
kinds of microscopy, such as chemical imaging microscopy,
to reveal microbial metabolism at work.

What determines the smallest object we can see? The size at
which objects become visible depends on the eye’s ability to
resolve detail. Resolution is the smallest distance between
two objects that allows us to see them as separate objects.
The eyes of humans and other animals observe an object by
focusing its image on a retina packed with light-absorbing
photoreceptor cells (Fig. 2.2 ). The image appears sharp,
in focus, if the eye’s lens and cornea bend all the light rays
from each point of the object to converge at one point on
the retina. Nearby points are then resolved as separate.
In the human eye, the finest resolution of two separate
points is perceived by the fovea, the portion of the retina
where the photoreceptors are packed at the highest density. The foveal photoreceptors are cone cells, which detect
primary colors (red, green, or blue) and finely resolved
detail. A group of cones with their linked neurons forms
one unit of detection, comparable to a pixel on a computer screen. The distance between two foveal “pixels”

CHAPTER 2



OBSERVING THE MICROBIAL CELL

39

Photoreceptors
Cone

Eye muscle

Cornea



Retina

Iris

Fovea:
Closely
spaced
cone
cells
Pupil
Optic
nerve

Lens

FIGURE 2.2



Rod

Defining the microscopic. Within the human eye, the lens focuses an image on the retina.

(groups of cones with neurons) limits our resolution to
100–200 micrometers (μm)—that is, one- or two-tenths
of a millimeter. So, a tenth of a millimeter is about the
smallest object that most of us can see (resolve distinctly)
without a magnifier.
What if our eyes were formed differently? The retinas of eagles have cones packed more closely than ours,
so an eagle can resolve objects eight times as small (or
eight times as far away) as a human can; hence, the phrase
“eagle-eyed” means “sharp-sighted.” On the other hand,
insect compound eyes have photoreceptors farther apart
than ours, so insect eyes have poorer resolution. The best
they can do is resolve objects 100-fold larger than those
we can resolve. If a science-fictional giant ameba had eyes
with photoreceptors 2 meters apart, it would perceive
humans as “microscopic.”

Resolution Differs from Detection

Can we detect the presence of objects whose size we cannot resolve? Yes, we can detect their presence as a group.
For example, our eyes can detect a large population of
microbes, such as a spot of mold on a piece of bread (about
a million cells) or a cloudy tube of bacteria in liquid culture
(a million cells per milliliter) (Fig. 2.3A). Detection, the
ability to determine the presence of an object, differs from
resolution. When the unaided eye detects the presence of
mold or bacteria, it cannot resolve distinct cells.
To resolve most kinds of microbial cells, our eyes need
assistance—that is, magnification. Magnification reveals
the shapes of individual bacteria such as the wetland phototroph Rhodospirillum rubrum (Fig. 2.3B). Magnifying an
object means increasing the object’s apparent dimensions.
As the distance increases between points of detail, our eyes
can now resolve the object’s shape as a magnified image.

Thought Question
B.

In this book, we use standard metric units for size:

1 millimeter (mm)

= one-thousandth of a meter (m) = 10 –3 m

1 micrometer (µm) = one-thousandth of a millimeter = 10 –6 m
1 nanometer (nm)

= one-thousandth of a micrometer = 10 –9 m

1 picometer (pm)

= one-thousandth of a nanometer = 10 –12 m

Some authors still use the traditional unit angstrom (Å), which
equals a tenth of a nanometer, or 10 –10 meter.

FIGURE 2.3

10 µm

Detecting and resolving bacteria. A. A tube of
bacterial culture, Rhodospirillum rubrum. The presence of bacteria is
detected, though individual cells are not resolved. B. Individual cells
of R. rubrum are resolved by light microscopy.


STEFFEN KLAMT, U. MAGDEBURG

Note:

A.

JOAN SLONCZEWSKI, KENYON COLLEGE

2.1 As shown in Figure 2.2, the image passing through your
cornea and lens is inverted on your retina. Why, therefore,
does the world appear right side up?

40

0



PART 1

2



4

THE MICROBIAL CELL

6

8

10

12 µm

Prochlorococcus marinus, 0.4 µm
Staphylococcus aureus, 0.9 µm
Escherichia coli, 2.5 µm
Bacillus megaterium, 4 µm

Red blood cell, 8 µm

Paramecium, 150 µm

as visualized by light microscopy or by scanning electron
microscopy. Note that with bright-field light microscopy,
the cell shape is just discernible under the highest power.
With scanning electron microscopy, cell shapes appear in
greater detail (higher resolution).
Certain shapes of bacteria are common to many taxonomic groups. For example, both bacteria and archaea form
similarly shaped rods, or bacilli (singular, bacillus), and
cocci (spheres; singular, coccus), as shown in Figure 2.6.
Thus, rods and spherical shapes evolved independently
within different taxa. In contrast, a unique bacterial shape
that evolved in only one taxon is the spirochete, a
tightly coiled spiral. Species of spirochetes cause
diseases such as syphilis and Lyme disease.
Paramecium may be
The spiral form of the cell is maintained by
just visible to the
unaided human eye.
internal axial filaments and flagella, as well as
an outer sheath. (For more on spirochetes, see
Section 18.6.) A different, unrelated spiral form
is the “spirillum” (plural, spirilla), a wide, rigid spiral cell that is similar to a rod-shaped bacillus.

Note:
Relative sizes of different cells.

Microbial Size and Shape

Different kinds of microbes differ in size, over a range of
several orders of magnitude, or powers of ten (Fig. 2.4).
Eukaryotic microbes are found across the full range of cell
size, from photosynthetic picoeukaryotes abundant in the
oceans (0.2–2.0 μm) to giant amebas that reach nearly a
centimeter (discussed in Chapter 20). Within a eukaryotic
cell larger than 5 μm, a typical student’s light microscope
may resolve intracellular compartments such as the nucleus
and vacuoles containing digested food (Fig. 2.5). Protists show complex shapes and appendages. For example,
an ameba from an aquatic ecosystem shows a large nucleus
and pseudopods to engulf prey (Fig. 2.5A). Pseudopods
can be seen moving by the streaming of their cytoplasm.
Another protist readily observed by light microscopy is Trypanosoma brucei, an insect-borne blood parasite that causes
African sleeping sickness (Fig. 2.5B). In the trypanosome,
we observe a nucleus and a flagellum. Eukaryotic flagella
propel the cell by a whiplike action. For more on microbial
eukaryotes, see Chapter 20.
The most commonly studied prokaryotes (bacteria and
archaea) are smaller than 10 μm. Their overall shape can
be seen, but most of their internal structures (discussed
in Chapter 3) are too small to resolve by light microscopy.
Figure 2.6 shows some common cell shapes of bacteria,

Microscopy for Different Size Scales

To resolve microbes and microbial structures of different
sizes requires different kinds of microscopes. Figure 2.7
shows the different techniques used to resolve microbes
and structures of various sizes. For example, a paramecium

A.

B.
Nucleus

Nucleus

Pseudopod

50 µm

FIGURE 2.5

Flagellum

Red blood cell
5 µm

CDC/DPDX



ANDREW SYRED/SCIENCE SOURCE

FIGURE 2.4

The genus name Bacillus refers to a specific taxonomic
group of bacteria, but the term “bacillus” (plural, bacilli) refers to
any rod-shaped bacterium or archaeon.

 Eukaryotic microbial cells. Eukaryotic microbes
are large enough that details of internal and external organelles can
be seen under a light microscope. A. Amoeba proteus. B. Trypanosoma brucei (cause of sleeping sickness) among blood cells.

2 µm

FIGURE 2.6

1 µm

5 µm

F. Cocci in chains.
Anabaena sp., filaments of cyanobacteria.
Producers for the marine food chain (SEM).

DENNIS KUNKEL MICROSCOPY

D. Spirochetes.
Leptospira interrogans, cause of leptospirosis
in animals and humans (SEM).

DENNIS KUNKEL/VISUALS UNLIMITED

B. Rods (bacilli).
Lactobacillus acidophilus, Gram-positive
bacteria (SEM).

41

10 µm

Common shapes of bacteria. A, C, E. The shapes of most bacterial cells can be discerned with light microscopy (LM),
but their subcellular structures and surface details cannot be seen. B, D, F. Surface detail is revealed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM).
These SEM images are colorized to enhance clarity.


500 nm

E.

100 nm

KISELEVA & DONALD FAWCETT/VISUALS UNLIMITED

5 µm

D.

T. J. BEVERIDGE/VISUALS UNLIMITED

30 µm

C.

BIODISC/VISUALS UNLIMITED

B.
ED RESCHKE/PETER ARNOLD, INC./GETTY IMAGES

A.

5 nm

10–3 m

10–4 m

10–5 m

10–6 m

10–7 m

10–8 m

10–9 m

1 mm

100 µm

10 µm

1 µm

0.1 µm = 100 nm

10 nm

1 nm = 10 Å

Human eye
Light microscopy
Scanning electron microscopy
Transmission electron microscopy

FIGURE 2.7

Microscopy and
X-ray crystallography, range of resolution.


Atomic force microscopy

A. Paramecium (stained light microscopy, LM).
B. Pseudomonas (stained LM). C. Escherichia coli (transmission electron microscopy, TEM).
D. Ribosomes on messenger RNA (TEM). E. Ribosome model (X-ray crystallography).

EYE OF SCIENCE/SCIENCE SOURCE

5 µm



E. Cocci in pairs (diplococci).
Streptococcus pneumoniae, a cause of
pneumonia. Methylene blue stain (LM).

MICHAEL ABBEY/VISUALS UNLIMITED

10 µm

OBSERVING THE MICROBIAL CELL

C. Spirochetes.
Borrelia burgdorferi, cause of Lyme disease,
among human blood cells (LM).

A. M. SIEGELMAN/VISUALS UNLIMITED

A. Filamentous rods (bacilli).
Lactobacillus lactis, Gram-positive bacteria (LM).



X-ray crystallography

DENNIS KUNKEL MICROSCOPY

CHAPTER 2

42



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

can be resolved under a light microscope, but an individual ribosome (20 nm in diameter) requires electron
microscopy.




Light microscopy (LM) resolves images of individual
bacteria by their absorption of light. The specimen is
commonly viewed as a dark object against a light-fi lled
field, or background; this is called bright-field microscopy (seen in Fig. 2.7A and B). Advanced techniques,
based on special properties of light, include fluorescence,
dark-field, and phase-contrast microscopy.
Electron microscopy (EM) uses beams of electrons to
resolve details several orders of magnitude smaller than
those seen under light microscopy. In scanning electron microscopy (SEM), the electron beam is scattered
from the metal-coated surface of an object, generating
an appearance of 3D depth. In transmission electron
microscopy (TEM) (Fig. 2.7C and D), the electron
beam travels through the object, where the electrons are
absorbed by an electron-dense metal stain.



Atomic force microscopy (AFM) uses intermolecular
forces between a probe and an object to map the 3D
topography of a cell, or of cell parts.



X-ray crystallography detects the interference pattern
of X-rays entering the crystal lattice of a molecule. From
the interference pattern, researchers build a computational model of the structure of the individual molecule,
such as a protein or a nucleic acid, or even a molecular
complex such as a ribosome (Fig. 2.7E).

Thought Question

2.2 (refer to Fig. 2.7) You have discovered a new kind of mi-

crobe, never observed before. What kinds of questions about
this microbe might be answered by light microscopy? What
questions would be better addressed by electron microscopy?

an example of chemical imaging of intestinal bacteria.
Another example of chemical imaging, showing nitrogenfixing cyanobacteria, is presented in eTopic 2.1.

To Summarize












Detection is the ability to determine the presence of an
object.
Resolution is the smallest distance by which two objects
can be separated and still be distinguished as separate.
Magnification is an increase in the apparent size of an
image.
Eukaryotic microbes may be large enough to resolve
subcellular structures under a light microscope. Other
eukaryotic cells are as small as bacteria.
Bacteria and archaea are generally too small for subcellular resolution by a light microscope. Their shapes
include characteristic forms such as rods and cocci.
Different kinds of microscopy resolve cells and subcellular structures of different sizes. Chemical imaging
microscopy reveals the chemical composition of a cell.

2.2

Optics and Properties
of Light

How do light rays magnify an image? Light microscopy
directly extends the lens system of our own eyes. Light is part
of the spectrum of electromagnetic radiation (Fig. 2.8), a
form of energy propagated as waves that are associated with
electrical and magnetic fields. Regions of the electromagnetic spectrum are defined by wavelength, which for visible
light is about 400–750 nm. Radiation of longer wavelengths includes infrared and radio waves, whereas shorter
wavelengths include ultraviolet rays and X-rays.

Chemical Imaging Microscopy

A new class of imaging techniques known as chemical
imaging microscopy goes beyond size and shape to reveal
the chemical composition of the microbial object. These
techniques apply mass spectroscopy to a microscopic object.
The object, such as a microbe, is bombarded with a beam of
ions that vaporizes organic molecules from the object’s surface. The molecular fragments that come off are identified
through mass analysis. The microbe may be cultured with
heavy isotopes of an element such as carbon or nitrogen,
whose incorporation into biomass alters the mass spectra.
These imaging techniques show where in the cell different
nutrients are fixed into biomass. Special Topic 2.1 presents

Light Carries Information

All forms of electromagnetic radiation carry information
from the objects they interact with. The information carried by radiation can be used to detect objects; for example,
radar (using radio waves) detects a speeding car. All electromagnetic radiation travels through a vacuum at the same
speed: about 3 × 108 meters per second (m/s), the speed of
light. The speed of light (c) is equal to the wavelength (λ)
of the radiation multiplied by its frequency (ν), the number
of wave cycles per unit time:
c = λν

CHAPTER 2

Electrical field
Magnetic field



Wavelength (λ)

B.

Decreasing wavelength, increasing frequency
Frequency (Hz)
103

106

109

1012

1015

1018

1021

109

106

103

Ultraviolet

Microwaves
Gamma rays

100

10–3

10–6

10–9

10–12

10–15

Magnification. The human retina absorbs radiation
within a range of wavelengths, 400–750 nm (0.40–
0.75 μm), which we define as visible light. But the smallest distance our retina can resolve is 150 μm, about 300
times the wavelength of light. Thus, we are unable to
access all of the information contained in the light that
enters our eyes. To use more of the information carried
within the light, we must spread the light rays apart far
enough for our retina to perceive the resolved image.

The physical behavior of light resembles in some ways a
beam of particles and in other ways a waveform. The particles of light are called “photons.” Each photon has an
associated wavelength that determines how the photon will
interact with a given object. The combined properties of
particle and wave enable light to interact with an object in
several different ways:


Wavelength (m)
Infrared

Visible light spectrum

Absorption means that the absorbing object gains the
photon’s energy (Fig. 2.9A ). The energy is converted

Ultraviolet
A. Absorption

700 nm

600 nm

500 nm

Because c is constant, the longer the wavelength λ is, the
lower the frequency ν is. Frequency is usually measured in
hertz (Hz), reciprocal seconds (λ/s).
The wavelength λ limits the size of objects that can be
resolved as separate from neighboring objects. Resolution
requires:



B. Reflection
Incident
angle
θ

400 nm

FIGURE 2.8  Electromagnetic energy. A. Electromagnetic
radiation is composed of electrical and magnetic waves
perpendicular to each other. B. The electromagnetic spectrum
includes the visible range of light.



43

Light Interacts with an Object
X-rays

TV
AM/FM
radio waves



1024

Visible
Infrared

OBSERVING THE MICROBIAL CELL

to or smaller than the size of the object. If the wavelength
of the radiation is larger than the object, then most of the
wave’s energy will simply pass through the object, like an
ocean wave passing around a dock post. Thus, radar, with
a wavelength of 1–100 centimeters (cm), cannot resolve
microbes, though it easily resolves cars and people.

A.

100



Contrast between the object and its surroundings.
Contrast is the difference in light and dark. If an object
and its surroundings absorb or reflect radiation equally,
then the object will be undetectable. It is hard to observe
a cell of transparent cytoplasm floating in water, because
the aqueous cytoplasm and the extracellular water tend
to transmit light similarly, producing little contrast.
Wavelength smaller than the object. For an object to be
resolved, the wavelength of the radiation must be equal

Angle of
reflection
θ′

Heat increases
The object blocks
part of the light.
C. Refraction

D. Scattering

The light bends when it
enters a substance that
changes its speed.

FIGURE 2.9

The wavefront of the light
bounces off the surface.



A small fraction of the
incident light is scattered in
all directions. Object size is
near incident wavelength.

Interaction of light with matter.

44



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

SPECIAL TOPIC 2.1- - Catch Your Bacteria Snacking
Light rays and electron beams offer glimpses into the astonishing world within a cell. But what are all those intriguing
knobs and tubules made of? Chemical imaging microscopy
shows more than the outline of bacteria; it shows what
they’ve been eating.
A high-resolution method for chemical imaging is called
nanoscale secondary ion mass spectrometry (NanoSIMS).

The imaging method starts with an ionizing probe, a source of
energy that breaks up the large organic molecules of a sample
(Fig. 1). The molecular fragments, called “secondary ions,” fly
off from the source and are captured by a mass spectrometer.
This instrument measures fragment masses of the secondary ions, generating a mass spectrum. Mass spectra are taken
from thousands of locations, scanned across a bacterial cell.

(m/z)3
Probe

A.

(m/z)1
(m/z)2
C
N
Molecular-image
generation

P
Sample preparation
eparation

trometry raster
Mass spectrometry

B.
Ruminococcaceae

FISH

at%

N

5 µm

at%

13

C

FIGURE 1

 Imaging mass spectrometry. Mass spectra are obtained from thousands of locations throughout the sample surface.
A. Molecular fragments are selected for analysis of mass-to-charge ratio (m/z). Selected isotopes may label specific atoms—for example,
C, N, or P. The relative intensities of individual compounds are visualized using false-color gradients. B. Fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH, left) and NanoSIMS (middle and right) of bacteria feeding on secretions from the intestinal epithelium, showing atomic percentages
(at%) of intracellular nitrogen (15N) and carbon (13C).

to a different form, usually heat. (That is why a live
specimen eventually “cooks” on the slide if observed for
too long.) When a microbial specimen absorbs light, it
can be observed as a dark spot against a bright field, as
in bright-field microscopy. Some molecules that absorb
light of a specific wavelength reemit energy as light with
a longer wavelength; this is called fluorescence. Fluorescence microscopy is discussed in Section 2.4.


Reflection means that the wavefront redirects from the
surface of an object at an angle equal to its incident angle

(Fig. 2.9B). Reflection of light waves is analogous to the
reflection of water waves. Reflection from a silvered mirror or a glass surface is used in the optics of microscopy.


Refraction means that light bends as it enters a substance that slows its speed (Fig. 2.9C). Such a substance
is said to be refractive and, by definition, has a higher
refractive index than air. Refraction is the key property
that enables a lens to magnify an image.

D. BERRY, ET AL. 2013. PNAS 110(12):4720

5 µm
15

D. BERRY, ET AL. 2013. PNAS 110(12):4720

5 µm

D. BERRY, ET AL. 2013. PNAS 110(12):4720

Bacteroides

CHAPTER 2



OBSERVING THE MICROBIAL CELL



food we consume? Our intestinal epithelium secretes a mucus
layer, which helps prevent colonization by pathogens. But the
mucus also “farms” bacteria, whose feeding helps moderate
the buildup of secretions.
Wagner’s group used different types of bacteria to colonize gnotobiotic (germ-free) mice. The mice were injected
intravenously with a nutrient (the amino acid threonine) containing the heavy-atom isotopes 13C and 15N. The threonine
is readily incorporated into mouse proteins and secretions,
but the bacteria inoculated into the mouse’s intestinal lumen
have no direct access to the threonine, only to mouse secretions containing it. Thus, NanoSIMS of the intestinal bacteria
reveals which ones are snacking on mucus.
In Figure 1B, various bacteria on the mouse epithelium
are identified by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH,
discussed in Chapter 21). The FISH technique uses short
species-specific nucleic acid probes to hybridize to the ribosomal RNA of different bacteria. In the FISH panel shown,
the fluorescent probes identify single cells of Bacteroides
acidifaciens (blue) and Ruminococcaceae OTU_5807 (red).
The parallel panels show the atomic percent (at%) of the
given isotopes 15N and 13C, imaged on a color scale quantifying the amount of isotope enrichment. The panels show that
most of the bacterial cells corresponding to B. acidifaciens
and Ruminococcaceae acquire nitrogen from the host (gold
or yellow color, white arrowhead). The third panel shows
that some but not all of the bacteria show carbon uptake.
Overall, out of the mixed gut microbes, the B. acidifaciens



Scattering means that a portion of the wavefront is converted to a spherical wave originating from the object
(Fig. 2.9D). If a large number of particles simultaneously scatter light, we see a haze—for example, the haze
of bacteria suspended in a culture tube. Special optical
arrangements (such as dark-field microscopy, discussed
in Section 2.5) can use scattered light to detect (but not
resolve) microbial shapes smaller than the wavelength
of light.

FREDERIK SCHULZ, UNIVERSITÄT WIEN

What information does NanoSIMS yield? Different kinds
of isotope labeling can focus on specific chemical questions. For example, the cell’s uptake of nitrogen-rich protein can be detected by incorporation of the heavy isotope
15
N. The increased weight of 15N compared to the normally
predominant 14N (as indicated by the mass ratio 15N/14N) is
detected quantitatively in the molecular fragment masses.
Alternatively, we can detect isotopes of carbon (13C/12C).
At the University of Vienna, Michael Wagner and colleagues
(Fig. 2) used NanoSIMS to address the question: Which of our
intestinal bacteria feed on our own secretions, instead of the

45

FIGURE 2

 David Berry, Alexander Loy, and Michael
Wagner use NanoSIMS to image bacteria foraging on the
gut epithelium.

and Ruminococcaceae strains were shown to be the main
snackers on host mucus. These observations will help medical researchers characterize the composition and dynamics
of a healthy gut microbiome.

RESEARCH QUESTION
The number of Bacteroides foraging on host secretions
changes when other species are introduced. Why might this
happen? Can you propose an experiment using NanoSIMS to
test your hypothesis?
Berry, D., B. Stecher, A. Schintlmeister, J. Reichert,
S. Brugiroux, et al. 2013. Host-compound foraging by
intestinal microbiota revealed by single-cell stable isotope
probing. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
USA 110:4720.

Magnification by a Lens

Magnification requires the bending of light rays, as in
refraction. As a wavefront of light enters a refractive material, such as glass, the region of the wave that first reaches
the material is slowed, while the rest of the wave continues
at its original speed until it also passes into the refractive
material (Fig. 2.10A
). As the entire wavefront continues through the refractive material, its path continues,
bent at an angle from its original direction.

46



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

A.

B.
60°

Glass

34.5°

Wavefront slows in
glass, causing a
change in direction.

(Glass refractive
index greater
than for air)

Focal
point

Parabolic lens bends
light rays to intersect
at a focal point.
60°

FIGURE 2.10  Refraction of light waves. A. Wavefronts of light shift direction as they enter a substance of higher refractive index,
such as glass. B. Glass with parabolic curvature (a lens) bends light rays to intersect at a focal point.

Thought Question

2.3 Explain what happens to the refracted light wave as it

emerges from a piece of glass of even thickness. How do its
new speed and direction compare with its original (incident)
speed and direction?

How does refraction accomplish magnification? Refraction magnifies an image when light passes through a
refractive material shaped so as to spread its rays. One
shape that spreads light rays is a parabolic curve. When
light rays enter a lens of refractive material with a parabolic

Virtual image
seen by eye
magnified
by lens

surface (Fig. 2.10B), parallel rays each bend at an angle
such that all of the rays meet at a certain point, called
the focal point. From the focal point behind the lens,
the light rays continue, spreading out with an expanding
wavefront. This expansion magnifies the image carried by
the wave. The distance from the lens to the focal point
(called the focal distance) is determined by the degree of
curvature of the lens, and by the refractive index of its
material.
In Figure 2.11 , the object under observation is
placed near the focal point (F) in front of a lens. The light
rays trace a path opposite to that of Figure 2.10B. The
rays expanding from point F are bent by the lens into a

Light rays
bend and
spread
Object
Fʹ

F

Inverted
image
Parabolic lens

FIGURE 2.11



A lens magnifies an image. The object is placed near the focal point (F) in front of the lens. The lens bends and spreads

the light rays, inverting the magnified image.

CHAPTER 2

A.

OBSERVING THE MICROBIAL CELL

Interference rings



47

Resolved

Image
plane
MICHAEL W. DAVIDSON

nearly parallel path entering the eye.
The eye perceives the expanded light
rays as a virtual image—that is, an
image that appears to represent a much
larger object farther away. The expansion of light rays, or magnification,
increases the distances between points
of the image. The details of the magnified image become larger than the spacing of photoreceptor units in the retina.
Thus, our eye can perceive details that
the unaided eye cannot see.



Intensity

Image
plane
Interference rings

Resolution of Detail

Unresolved

MICHAEL W. DAVIDSON

What limits the effect of magnification? B.
The spreading of light rays does not in
Image
itself increase resolution. For example, an
plane
image composed of dots does not gain
detail when enlarged on a photocopier,
nor does an image composed of pixels
Intensity
gain detail when enlarged on a computer
screen. In these cases, magnification
fails to show details because the individImage
ual details of the image expand in proplane
portion to the expansion of the overall
image. Magnification without increasing FIGURE 2.12  Interference of light waves at the focal point generates
concentric rings surrounding the peak intensity. A. Broad wavefronts generate
detail is called empty magnification.
narrow interference rings with peaks well resolved. B. Narrow wavefronts generate wide
The resolution of detail in microsinterference rings that are unresolved.
copy is limited by the wave nature
of light. In theory, a perfect lens that
What factors limit resolution of an image? The wavefocuses all of the light from an object should form a perlength of light limits the sharpness of the peak intensity
fect image as its rays converge through the focal point.
of a point of detail. The finite width of the wavefront capBut light rays actually form wavefronts of infinite extent.
tured by the lens leads to interference and widens the peak
Since the width of the lens is finite, only part of the waveintensity. Thus, bright-field light microscopy resolves only
front enters, causing interference. The converging edges
details that are greater than half the wavelength of light,
of the wave interfere with each other to form alternating
about 200 nm (0.2 μm). Nevertheless, in advanced optical
regions of light and dark (Fig. 2.12 ). Thus, a point
methods such as fluorescence microscopy (see Section 2.4),
source of light (such as a point of detail in a specimen)
computation can extract positional detail from light rays.
forms an image of a bright central peak surrounded by
Such methods, called super-resolution imaging, enable us
interference rings of light and dark. Even a well-focused
to track cellular molecules at a precision of 20–40 nm (disbright object appears as a bright disk surrounded by
cussed in Section 2.4).
faint rings.
Suppose an object consists of a collection of point
sources of light. Each point source generates a central peak
of intensity. The width of this central peak will define the
To Summarize
resolution, or separation distance, between any two points
 Electromagnetic radiation interacts with an object and
of the object (Fig. 2.12). This resolution determines the
acquires information we can use to detect the object.
degree of detail that can be observed. In practice, any
Contrast between object and background makes it
object, such as a stained microbe against a bright field, can
possible to detect the object and resolve its component
be considered a large collection of points of light that act as
parts.
partly resolved peaks of intensity.

48











PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

The wavelength of the radiation must be equal to or
smaller than the size of the object for a microscope to
resolve the object’s shape.

Low-power magnification (10!)

Absorption means that the energy from light (or other
electromagnetic radiation) is acquired by the object.
Reflection means that the wavefront bounces off the
surface of a particle at an angle equal to its incident
angle. Scattering means that a wavefront interacts with
an object of smaller dimension than the wavelength.
Light scattering enables the detection of objects whose
detail cannot be resolved.

θ

Objective

θ =15°

NA = n sin θ
= 1.0 sin 15°
= 0.25
Specimen

Refraction is the bending of light as it enters a substance that slows its speed. Refraction through a curved
lens magnifies an image, enlarging its details beyond
the spacing between our eye’s photoreceptors.

High-power magnification (100!)

Interference between wavefronts converts a point source
of light to a peak of intensity surrounded by rings. The
width of the peak limits the resolution of details of an
image.

Resolved

θ = 72°

2.3

Objective
Specimen

Bright-Field Microscopy

The most common kind of light microscopy is called
bright-field microscopy, in which an object such as a bacterial cell is perceived as a dark silhouette blocking the
passage of light (for examples, see Fig. 2.6A, C, and E).
Details of the object are defined by the points of light surrounding its edge. Here we explain how a typical student’s
microscope works, and how to use it to image microbes.

Magnification

How do the optics of a bright-field microscope maximize
the observation of detail? We consider the following factors:


Wavelength and resolution. Our eyes can resolve a distance as small as 100–200 μm, while the resolution limit
from the wavelength of light is 200 nm (0.2 μm)—that
is, 500- to 1,000-fold smaller. Thus, the greatest magnification that can improve our perception of detail is
about 1,000×. Any greater magnification expands the
image size, but the width of the image peaks expands
without resolution (see Fig. 2.12). As we noted in the
previous section, this expansion without increasing resolution is called empty magnification.



Light and contrast. For any given lens system, a balanced amount of light yields the highest contrast
between the dark specimen and the light background.
High contrast is needed to perceive the full resolution at
a given magnification.

Poorly resolved

FIGURE 2.13

NA = n sin θ
= 1.0 sin 72°
= 0.95
NA = Numerical aperture
n = Refractive index
= 1.00 (air)
θ = Angle of aperture

Numerical aperture and resolution. The
numerical aperture (NA) equals the refractive index (n) of the
medium containing the light cone, multiplied by the sine of the angle
of the light cone (θ). Higher NA allows greater resolution.





Lens quality. All lenses contain inherent aberrations
that detract from perfect curvature. Optical properties
limit the perfection of a single lens, but manufacturers construct microscopes with a series of lenses that
multiply each other’s magnification and correct for
aberrations.

Let’s first consider magnification of an image by a single lens. Figure 2.13 shows an objective lens, a lens situated directly above an object or specimen that we wish to
observe at high resolution. How can we maximize the resolution of details?
An object at the focal point of a lens sits at the tip of a
cone of light formed by rays from the lens converging at
the object. The angle of the light cone is determined by
the curvature and refractive index of the lens. The lens
fills an aperture, or hole, for the passage of light; and
for a given lens the light cone is defined by an angle θ
(theta) projecting from the midline, known as the angle
of aperture. As θ increases and the horizontal width
of the light cone (sin θ) increases, a wider cone of light
passes through the specimen. The wider the cone of light

CHAPTER 2

rays, the less the interference between wavefronts—and
the narrower the peak intensities in the image. Thus, a
wider light cone allows us to resolve smaller details. The
greater the angle of aperture of the lens (sin θ), the better the resolution.
Resolution also depends on the refractive index of the
medium that contains the light cone, which is usually air.
The refractive index (n) is the ratio of the speed of light
in a vacuum to its speed in another medium. For air, n is
extremely close to 1. For water, n = 1.33; for lens material, n ranges from 1.4 to 1.6. As light passing through air
or water enters a lens of higher refractive index, the light
bends, at angles up to a maximum (θ). The product of the
refractive index (n) of the medium multiplied by sin θ is the
numerical aperture (NA):
NA = n sin θ
In Figure 2.13 we see the calculation of NA for an
objective lens of magnification 10×, and for a lens of magnification 100×. As NA increases, the peak intensities of an
image narrow and the distance between two objects that
can be resolved decreases. The minimum resolution distance R varies inversely with NA:
λ NA
R = __
2

where λ represents the wavelength of incident light. Notice
that this equation limits resolution to approximately half
the wavelength of light (λ/2).
As the lens strength increases and the light cone widens, the lens must come nearer the object. Defects in
lens curvature become more of a problem, and focusing
becomes more challenging. As θ becomes very wide, too
much of the light from the object is lost from refraction at
the glass-to-air interface. To collect and focus more light,
we need to increase the refractive index of the medium

More light collected.
NA increased.
Resolution improves.

Objective lens
Immersion oil

Refracted light
No oil

Glass slide
Microscope
stage
Light

FIGURE 2.14

Light

Use of immersion oil in microscopy. Immersion oil with a refractive index comparable to that of glass (n = 1.5)
prevents light rays from bending away from the objective lens.




OBSERVING THE MICROBIAL CELL



49

between the object and the objective lens (air, as shown
so far). For the highest-power objective lens, generally
100×, a zone of constant refractive index is maintained
by replacing air with immersion oil between the object
and the lens. Immersion oil has a refractive index comparable to that of the lens (n = 1.5) (Fig. 2.14). Immersion oil minimizes the loss of light rays by refraction and
makes it possible to reach 100× magnification with minimal distortion. In a two-lens system, 100× objective is
multiplied by 10× ocular magnification to yield 1,000×
total magnification.

Thought Question

2.4 (refer to Fig. 2.13) For a single lens, what angle θ might

offer magnification even greater than 100X? What practical
problem would you have in designing such a lens to generate
this light cone?

The Compound Microscope

A compound microscope is a system of multiple lenses
designed to correct or compensate for lens aberrations
(deviations from perfect curvature). Why do we use a compound microscope instead of a single perfect lens? The
manufacture of high-power lenses is difficult because as the
glass curvature increases, the effects of aberration increase
faster than the magnification. Instead of one thick lens,
a series of lower-power lenses can multiply their magnification with minimal aberration. Figure 2.15
shows a
typical arrangement of a compound microscope: the light
source is placed at the bottom, shining upward through
a series of lenses, including the condenser, objective, and
ocular lenses.
Between the light source and the condenser sits a diaphragm, a device to cut the diameter of the light column.
Lower-power lenses require lower light levels because the
excess light makes it impossible to observe the darkening
effect of specimen absorbance. This difference between
the dark (absorbing) specimen and the bright (transparent) field is called contrast. Higher-power lenses spread the
light rays farther and thus require an open diaphragm to
collect sufficient light for contrast.
Above the diaphragm, the condenser consists of one
or more lenses that collect a beam of rays from the light
source onto a small area of the slide, where light may be
absorbed by the object or specimen. Condenser lenses
increase light available for contrast but do not participate in magnification. The objective lens is the first to
form a magnified image (I) of the object (Fig. 2.15A).
As the image forms, each light ray traces a path toward
a position opposite its point of origin; thus, the image is

50



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

A.

B.

F2′

I
F2

Eyepiece

Focusing
knob

Image of object
magnified only
by objective
lens

F1′

Objectives
on revolving
nosepiece

Specimen

Stage
F1
Object

Condenser
Diaphragm
Light source

I′

Virtual image seen by eye,
magnified by objective and
ocular lenses

FIGURE 2.15



Anatomy of a compound microscope. A. Light path through the microscope. B. Cutaway view.

mirror-reversed. Keep this mirror reversal in mind when
exploring a field of cells.
The first image of the object (I) is then amplified by
a secondary magnification step through the ocular lens
within the eyepiece. The final image (I') is comparable
to the virtual image of Figure 2.11, but I' includes the
total magnification of the object by objective times ocular
lenses. The magnification factor of the ocular lens is multiplied by the magnification factor of the objective lens to
generate the total magnification (power). For example, a
10× ocular multiplied by a 40× objective generates 400×
total magnification.
The nosepiece of a compound microscope typically
holds three or four objective lenses of different magnifying power, such as 4×, 10×, 40×, and 100× (requiring
immersion oil). These lenses are arranged so as to rotate
in turn into the optical column. In a high-quality instrument the lenses are set at different heights from the slide
so as to be parfocal. In a parfocal system, when an object
is focused with one lens, it remains in focus, or nearly so,
when another lens is rotated to replace the first.

Note:

Objective lenses can be obtained in several different
grades of quality, manufactured with different kinds of correction
for aberrations. Lenses should feature at minimum the following
corrections: “plan” correction for field curvature, to generate a
field that appears flat; and “apochromat” correction for spherical
and chromatic aberrations.

Observing a specimen under a compound microscope
requires several steps:


Position the specimen centrally in the optical column.
Only a small area of a slide can be visualized within the
field of view of a given lens. The higher the magnification, the smaller the field of view that will be seen.



Optimize the amount of light. At lower power, too
much light will wash out the light absorption of the
specimen. At higher power, more light needs to be
collected, lest everything appear dark. To optimize light,
the condenser must be set at the correct vertical position
to focus on the specimen, and the diaphragm must be
adjusted to transmit the amount of light that produces
the best contrast.

CHAPTER 2

Focus the objective lens. The focusing knob
permits adjustment of the focal distance
between the objective lens and the specimen
on the slide so as to bring the specimen into
the focal plane, the plane that contains the
focal points for light entering the lens from
all directions. Typically, we focus first using
a low-power objective, which generates a
greater depth of field—that is, a range of
planes in which the object appears in or near
focus. After focusing under low power, we
can rotate a higher-power lens into view and
then fine-tune the adjustment.

Preparing a Specimen
for Microscopy

OBSERVING THE MICROBIAL CELL



51

A.
Too close to lens;
image is blurred.

5 µm

B.
In focus; image
appears sharp.
C.
Too far beyond
focal point; image
appears “empty,”
with interference
rings.
D.
Object extends
through focal
planes.

A simple way to observe microbes is to place
them in a drop of water on a slide with a coverslip. This is called a wet mount preparation.
The advantage of the wet mount is that the
FIGURE 2.16  Bacteria observed at different levels of focus.
organism is viewed in as natural a state as possible, without artifacts resulting from chemical
treatment; and we can observe live behavior such as swimresolved. The partial resolution of these points of light
ming (Figs. 2.3B and 2.16). The disadvantage of the wet
generates interference effects, such as extra rings of light
mount is that most living cells are transparent and theresurrounding an object.
fore show little contrast with the external medium. With
In Figure 2.16 we observe Rhodospirillum rubrum,
limited contrast, the cells can barely be distinguished
a photosynthetic bacterium that enriches wetlands. As
from background, and both detection and resolution are
R. rubrum cells swim in and out of the focal plane, their
minimal.
appearance changes through optical effects. When a bacteAnother disadvantage of the wet mount is that the samrium swims out of the focal plane too close to the lens, resple rapidly converts absorbed light to heat, thus tending
olution declines and the image blurs (Fig. 2.16A). When
to overheat and dry out. To avoid overheating, researchthe bacterium swims within the focal plane, its image
ers use a temperature-controlled flow cell, in which fresh
medium passes through the specimen (Fig. 2.17). The
microbe to be observed must adhere to a
FIGURE 2.17  Flow cell allows
specially coated slide within the flow cell.
extended observation of living
The adherent cells may grow and multiply
microbes. Culture medium flows
Medium flows
as a biofilm, nourished continually by fresh
through an inlet tube into the slide
through cell.
chamber and then exits through
medium.

HTTP://WWW.AUSTINCC.EDU/MICROBUGZ/ENDOSPORE_STAIN.PHP





Focusing the Object

An object appears in focus (that is, it is
situated within the focal plane of the
lens) when its edge appears sharp and distinct from the background. The shape of
the dark object is actually defined by the
points of light surrounding its edge. At
higher power, as we reach the resolution
limit, these points of light are only partly

Electrical controller
maintains temperature.

BIOPTECHS FLOW CELL (PHOTO BY J. SLONCZEWSKI)

the outlet.

52



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

appears sharp, with a bright line along its edge. A helical
cell such as R. rubrum shows well-focused segments alternating with hazier segments that are too close to the lens
(Fig. 2.16B). When the cell swims too far past the focal
plane, the bright interference lines collapse into the
object’s silhouette, which now appears bright or
“hollow,” or surrounded by rings (Fig. 2.16C).
H3C
In fact, the bacterium is not hollow at all; only
its image has changed.
When the cell extends across several focal planes,
different portions appear out of focus (either too near or
too far from the lens). In addition, when the end of a
cell points toward the observer, light travels through the
length of the cell before reaching the observer, so the
cell absorbs more light and appears dark (Fig. 2.16D).
Motile bacteria swimming in and out of the focal plane
present a challenge even to experienced microscopists.
The higher the magnification, the narrower the depth
of the focal plane; thus, observing swimming organisms
requires a trade-off between magnification and depth of
field.

Thought Question

2.5 Under starvation, a bacterium such as Bacillus thuringi-

ensis, the biological insecticide, packages its cytoplasm into
a spore, leaving behind an empty cell wall. Suppose, under a
microscope, you observe what appears to be a hollow cell.
How can you tell whether the cell is indeed hollow or is simply
out of focus?

Fixation and Staining Improve
Resolution and Contrast

Detection and resolution of cells under a microscope are
enhanced by fixation and staining, procedures that usually kill the cell. Fixation is a process by which cells are
made to adhere to a slide in a fixed position. We can fix
cells with methanol or by heat treatment to denature the
cell’s proteins, whose exposed side chains then adhere to
the glass. A stain absorbs much of the incident light, usually over a wavelength range that results in a distinctive
color. The use of chemical stains was developed in the nineteenth century, when German chemists used organic synthesis to invent new coloring agents for clothing. Clothing
was made of natural fibers such as cotton or wool, so a substance that dyed clothing would be likely to react with biological specimens.
How do stains work? Most stain molecules contain conjugated double bonds or aromatic rings that absorb visible
light (Fig. 2.18) and one or more positive charges, such as

CH3
N CH3
H3C
N
–

CH3
N

(Cl )
S+
N

Methylene blue

CH3
N

CH3

C

H3C
N+ CH3
CH3

(Cl–)

Crystal violet

FIGURE 2.18  Chemical structure of stains. Methylene blue
and crystal violet are cationic (positively charged) dyes. Chloride
(Cl–) is the counter-ion.

phosphoryl groups on membrane phospholipids (discussed
in Section 3.2). The positively charged groups react with
negatively charged groups in the bacterial cell envelope.
Different stains vary with respect to the strength of their
binding and the degree of binding to different parts of
a cell.
Simple stains. A simple stain adds dark color specifically

to cells, but not to the external medium or surrounding tissue (in the case of pathological samples). The most
commonly used simple stain is methylene blue, originally
used by Robert Koch to stain bacteria (see Figs. 2.6E
and 2.7B). A typical procedure for fi xation and staining
is shown in Figure 2.19. First we fi x a drop of culture on
a slide by treating with methanol or by heating on a slide
warmer. Either treatment denatures cell proteins, exposing
side chains that bind to the glass. We then flood the slide
with methylene blue solution. The positively charged molecule binds to the negatively charged cell envelope of fi xed
bacteria. After excess stain is washed off and the slide has
been dried, we observe it under high-power magnification
using immersion oil.
Differential stains. A differential stain stains one kind
of cell but not another. The most famous differential
stain is the Gram stain, devised in 1884 by the Danish
physician Hans Christian Gram (1853–1938). Gram
fi rst used the Gram stain to distinguish pneumococcal
(Streptococcus pneumoniae) bacteria from human lung
tissue. In Figure 2.20A, Gram-stained S. pneumoniae
bacteria appear dark purple among human white blood
cells. Other species of bacteria, such as Proteus mirabilis
(a cause of urinary infections), fail to retain the purple
stain (Fig. 2.20B). Different bacterial species are classified as Gram-positive or Gram-negative, depending on
whether they retain the stain.

CHAPTER 2



OBSERVING THE MICROBIAL CELL



53

A.
1. Place a loopful of the
culture on a clean slide.

3. Air-dry.

5 µm

4. Fix cells to slide by
adding drop of
methanol; air-dry.

CDC/DR. MIKE MILLER

2. Spread in a thin film
over the slide.

B.

5 µm

6. Wash off stain
with water.

7. Blot off excess
water.

8. View under
microscope.

FIGURE 2.19

 Procedure for simple staining with
methylene blue.

FIGURE 2.20

DR. SANDRA RICHTER

5. Stain (e.g., with
methylene blue, 1 min).

Gram staining of bacteria. A. Gram stain of a
sputum specimen from a patient with pneumonia, containing Grampositive Streptococcus pneumoniae (purple diplococci) among
white blood cells in pus. The white blood cell nuclei stain pink
(counterstain). B. Gram-negative Proteus mirabilis (pink rods).


In the Gram stain procedure (Fig. 2.21), a dye such as
crystal violet binds to the bacteria; it also binds to the surface of human cells, but less strongly. After the excess stain
is washed off, a mordant, or binding agent, is applied. The
mordant used is iodine solution, which contains iodide ions
(I–). The iodide complexes with the positively charged crystal violet molecules trapped inside the cells. The crystal
violet–iodide complex is now held more strongly within the
cell wall. The thicker the cell wall, the more crystal violet–
iodide molecules are held.
Next, a decolorizer, ethanol, is added for a precise time
interval (typically 20 seconds). The decolorizer removes
loosely bound crystal violet–iodide, but Gram-positive cells
retain the stain tightly. The Gram-positive cells that retain
the stain appear dark purple, while the Gram-negative cells
are colorless. Timing the decolorizer step is critical because
if it lasts too long, the Gram-positive cells, too, will release
their crystal violet stain. In the final step, a counterstain,

54



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

A.

B.
Gram-positive

Gram-positive

Gram-negative

Peptidoglycan

1. Add methanol to
fix cells to surface;
air-dry.
Cells are fixed to slide surface.

Gram-negative

Outer membrane

Cells are fixed to slide surface.

Peptidoglycan
Cell membrane

2. Add crystal violet
stain (1 min).

Cell membrane
(inner membrane)
1. Crystal violet is added.

Crystal violet stains cells
reversibly.

Crystal violet stains cells
reversibly.

+

+

Iodine complex with crystal
violet increases stain retention.

+
+

+

+

+

+
+

+

+

+

Stain remains reversible.

4. Wash with ethanol
(20 s).

2. Iodide complexes
with crystal violet.
I–
I–

Stain is removed from
Gram-negative cells.

No change.

+

+

+

3. Add iodine, which
binds stain to
Gram-positive cells
(1 min).

+

I–

I–

+

+

I–

+

+

I–
I–
I–

+

+

+

+

I–
I–

+

+

I–

+

+

I–

I–

+

I–

+

I–

+

I–

+

5. Add safranin
counterstain (1 min).

Gram-positive cells
absorb safranin but
remain dark purple.

FIGURE 2.21



Safranin counterstains
Gram-negative cells.

–

I

I–

The Gram stain. A. Gram-positive cells have

thick cell walls that retain the crystal violet stain. Gram-negative
cells have thinner cell walls, which lose the crystal violet stain but
are counterstained by safranin. B. In a Gram-positive cell, multiple
layers of peptidoglycan retain the crystal violet–iodide complex.
In a Gram-negative cell, the stain leaks out.

safranin, is applied. This process allows the visualization of
Gram-negative material, which is stained pale pink by the
safranin. Gram-positive cells also retain safranin; thus, if
the cells are decolorized too long, both Gram-positive and
Gram-negative cells will appear pink due to safranin.
How does the Gram stain distinguish different cell
types? Most Gram-negative species of bacteria possess
a cell wall that is thinner and more porous than that of
Gram-positive species (discussed in Chapter 3). A Gramnegative cell wall has only one to three layers of peptidoglycan (sugar chains cross-linked by peptides), whereas a
Gram-positive cell has five or more layers. The multiple

I–

+

I–
I–

+
+

I–

+

3. Decolorizer releases
loosely trapped stain.

+

+

I–
I–
I–

+

I–

+

+

I–

+

I–

I–

I–
I–

+

+

+

+
+

layers of peptidoglycan retain enough stain complex that
the cell appears purple.
The Gram stain became a key tool for identifying pathogens in the clinical laboratory. As we’ll see in Chapter 3, the
Gram stain effectively distinguishes Proteobacteria (a clade
of bacteria with a thin cell wall and an outer membrane)
from Firmicutes (bacteria with a thick cell wall and no outer
membrane.) Proteobacteria include Escherichia coli and
many related intestinal bacteria. Another important Gramnegative group is the Bacteroidetes, whose species work
with Proteobacteria to digest our food (discussed in Chapters 13 and 21). Our colon also contains Gram-positive

CHAPTER 2



OBSERVING THE MICROBIAL CELL
FIGURE 2.22

B.

A.



55



Differential stains.

A. Acid-fast stain of
Mycobacterium tuberculosis (red) in sputum.
B. Endospore stain of
Clostridium tetani.

5 µm

CDC/DR. GEORGE P. KUBICA

Endospore (green)

Firmicutes such as species of Clostridium and Enterococcus. The digestive contributions of Firmicutes are less clear.
Most intestinal bacteria are mutualists; that is, they share
positive contributions with their host (the human body).
However, the gut community may be invaded by deadly
pathogens, such as Escherichia coli O157:H7, Enterococcus
faecalis, and Clostridium difficile.
Still other groups of bacteria and archaea have different kinds of cell walls that may stain Gram-positive, Gramnegative, or variable (discussed in Chapters 18 and 19).
Moreover, even Firmicutes such as Bacillus species show
variable stain results depending on their growth state and
environmental conditions.
Other differential stains reveal components specific to
certain classes of bacteria:








Acid-fast stain (Ziehl-Neelsen). Carbolfuchsin specifically stains mycolic acids of Mycobacterium tuberculosis
and M. leprae, the causative agents of tuberculosis and
leprosy, respectively (Fig. 2.22A).
Spore stain. When samples are boiled with malachite
green, the stain binds specifically to the endospore coat
(Fig. 2.22B). It detects spores of Bacillus species such
as B. thuringiensis (the insecticide) and B. anthracis (the
cause of anthrax), as well as spores of Clostridium botulinum, which produces botulinum toxin.
Negative stain. A negative stain is a suspension of
opaque particles such as India ink added to darken the
surrounding medium and reveal transparent components such as the outer capsule of a pathogen (presented
in Chapter 3). Other kinds of negative stains are used for
electron microscopy (see Section 2.6).
Antibody tags. Stains linked to antibodies can identify precise strains of bacteria or even specific molecular components of cells. The antibody (which binds a
specific cell protein) is linked to a reactive enzyme for

10 µm

MICROBUGZ/AUSTIN COMMUNITY COLLEGE

Bacterial cell (red)

detection, or to a fluorophore (fluorescent molecule)
for immunofluorescence microscopy (discussed next, in
Section 2.4).

To Summarize











In bright-field microscopy, image quality depends on
the wavelength of light; the magnifying power of a lens;
and the position of the focal plane, the region where the
specimen is in focus (that is, where the sharpest image is
obtained).
A compound microscope achieves magnification and
resolution through the objective and ocular lenses.
A wet mount specimen contains living microbes.
Fixing and staining a specimen kills it but improves
contrast and resolution.
The Gram stain differentiates between two major bacterial taxa, which stain either Gram-positive or Gramnegative. Eukaryotes stain negative.
Acid-fast, spore, negative, and antibody stains are
other kinds of differential stains.

2.4

Fluorescence Microscopy and
Super-Resolution Imaging

Fluorescence microscopy (also called epifluorescence
microscopy) is a powerful tool for identifying specific
kinds of microbes, such as pathogens or members of environmental communities. Fluorescence also reveals specific
cell parts at work, such as division proteins in the act of
accomplishing cell fission. The profound importance of
fluorescence for microbial discovery was acknowledged by

56



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

A.

B.
Host cell
cytoplasm

Chlorophyll

ALICIA MURO PASTOR AND AGUSTÍN VIOQUE

Listeria
bacterium

Actin tail

DAMIEN BALLESTRINO, ET AL. 2010 APPLIED AND ENVIRON. MICROBIOL. 76:3625.

Nucleus of
human cell

Heterocyst

FIGURE 2.23

 Fluorescence microscopy. A. Cyanobacteria show chlorophyll-based autofluorescence (red) and fluorescence from
heterocysts (green) expressing a nitrogen-stress gene fused to GFP. B. Listeria bacteria (expressing GFP) invade human cells, propelled by
polymerizing “tails” of actin. Human cell nuclei fluoresce red (DAPI stain for DNA).

the awarding of the 2008 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for
the discovery and development of green fluorescent protein, GFP (to Osamu Shimomura, Martin Chalfie, and
Roger Tsien) and the 2014 Nobel in Chemistry for the
development of super-resolved fluorescence microscopy, or
super-resolution imaging (to Eric Betzig, Stefan Hell, and
William Moerner).
In fluorescence microscopy, the specimen absorbs light of
a defined wavelength and then emits light of lower energy,
thus longer wavelength; that is, the specimen “fluoresces.”
Some microbes, such as cyanobacteria and algae, fluoresce on
their own (autofluorescence), owing to endogenous fluorescent molecules such as chlorophyll. For other aims, specific
parts of the cell are labeled with a fluorophore, a fluorescent dye or protein. In Figure 2.23A, cells of the cyanobacterium Anabaena show autofluorescence (red) arising from
their chlorophyll. Every tenth cell or so, however, develops as
a nitrogen-fixing heterocyst that lacks chlorophyll. In Figure 2.23A, the heterocysts specifically express a nitrogenstress gene fused to a gene encoding GFP.
Fluorescence microscopy is also used by marine ecologists
to reveal tiny bacteria and plankton growing in seawater, a
highly dilute natural environment (discussed in Chapter 21).
Such observations support the study of microbial responses
to climate change. Microbes, including viruses, bacteria,
and protists, are detected by fluorescence of DNA-specific
stains such as DAPI (4', 6-diamidino-2-phenylindole). The

advantage of DAPI fluorescent stain is that it detects only
live cells whose DNA is intact, distinguishing them from
environmental debris.
For medicine, fluorescence enables detection of microbial pathogens that colonize the relatively large cells and
organ systems of the human body. Figure 2.23B shows
infection by Listeria monocytogenes, the cause of listeriosis,
a dangerous food-borne disease. In this study, the Listeria
strain was engineered with a gene expressing GFP (green
fluorescence). The bacteria (green) propel themselves
through a human cell by polymerizing “tails” of the cell’s
actin (violet, stained by an actin-specific fluorophore, phalloidin). The human cell nuclei are labeled red with DAPI.
Thus, fluorescence can visualize three different components within one microscopic field.

Excitation and Emission

How and when does a molecule fluoresce? Fluorescence
occurs when a molecule absorbs light of a specific wavelength (the excitation wavelength) that has just the right
energy needed to raise an electron to a higher-energy orbital
(Fig. 2.24). Because this higher-energy electron state is
unstable, the electron decays to an orbital of slightly lower
energy, while losing some energy as heat. The electron then
falls to its original level by emitting a photon of less energy
and longer wavelength (the emission wavelength). The

CHAPTER 2

A.

3. Electron loses
some energy as
heat and drops
to slightly lower
orbital.

2. Electron
is raised
to orbital
of higher
energy.

4. Fluorescence is
emitted at longer
wavelength.

e

e

5. Electron
returns
to original
level.

e
e
e

1. Energy of UV photon
is absorbed by electron.

Atomic nucleus
(protons plus neutrons)

B.



OBSERVING THE MICROBIAL CELL



57

The reflected blue light enters the objective lens, which
focuses it onto the specimen, where it excites fluorophores
to fluoresce green. The fluorescence emanates in all directions from the specimen (like a point source). Since the
light rays point in all directions, a small portion of the fluorescent light (green) returns through the objective lens to
reach the dichroic mirror. The green light now has a longer wavelength, above the penetration limit of the mirror,
so it continues through to the ocular lens. The ocular lens
focuses the fluorescent light onto the photodetectors of a
highly sensitive digital camera.
Fluorescence can be observed in live organisms. The
fluorescent organisms are commonly held in place on the
slide—for example, by a pad of agarose gel.

Fluorophores for Labeling

Relative intensity

Excitation photon is
absorbed by electron.
Absorption
(excitation)

Fluorescence
(emission)
Overlap

300

FIGURE 2.24

400
500
Wavelength (nm)


600

700

What determines the properties of a fluorophore? The
molecular structure of each fluorophore determines its peak
wavelengths of excitation and emission, as well as its binding properties. For example, the aromatic rings of DAPI
mimic a base pair, enabling intercalation between base
pairs of DNA (Fig. 2.26A). DAPI absorbs in the UV and
emits in the blue range. Note, however, that the computer
driving the optical system can convert the fluorescence signal to any color chosen by the microscopist; for example, in
Figure 2.23B the DAPI stain is shown red.
Camera

Fluorescence. Energy gained from UV absorp--

tion is released as heat and as a photon of longer wavelength in the
e
visible region. A. Fluorescence on the molecular level. B. Comparison
on
of absorption and emission spectra for a fluorophore.

Ocular lens
Emission filter restricts
wavelength range.

emitted photon has a longer wavelength (less energy)
because part of the electron’s energy of absorption
was lost as heat.
The optical system for f luorescence microscopy
uses filters to limit incident light to the wavelength
Light source
of excitation and emitted light to the wavelength of
Excitation filter restricts
wavelength range.
emission (Fig. 2.25). The wavelengths of excitation and
emission are determined by the choice of f luorophore; in
Objective lens
this case we show excitation light as blue, and emission
as green. Because only a small portion of the spectrum is
used, f luorescence requires a high-intensity light source
such as a tungsten arc lamp. The light passes through
a filter that screens out all but the peak wavelengths of
excitation. The excitation light (blue) is then ref lected by
a dichroic mirror (dichroic filter), a material that ref lects
Specimen (object)
light below a certain wavelength but transmits light
above that wavelength.
FIGURE 2.25  Fluorescence microscopy.

Dichroic
mirror
(filter)

58



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

A.
NH
N
HN

N

N

NH2

H

NH2

4′,6-Diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI)
B.

GFP fluorophore

H+

FIGURE 2.26

Fluorescent molecules (fluorophores)
commonly used in microscopy. The conjugated double bonds


Originally isolated from a jellyfish, Aequorea victoria,
the Nobel-winning GFP can be expressed from a gene
spliced into the DNA of any organism; even monkeys
have been engineered to glow green. How does GFP act
as a fluorophore? The fluorophore part of GFP consists of
three amino acid residues that fuse to form an aromatic
ring structure, embedded within a beta barrel protein tube.
The properties of the fluorophore are modified by the surrounding protein, so mutation of the gene encoding GFP
generates numerous variants with different spectral ranges.
Another interesting property of GFP is that its fluorophore can ionize (labeled in Fig. 2.26B). The ionized
and protonated forms have slightly different excitation ranges, thus affording a way to measure hydronium ion concentration (pH) within a cell. This
property enables GFP to report on environmental
stress responses of bacteria.
The wide range of colors and environmental
sensitivities of GFP variants provides an extraordinary set of probes for cell structure, as we will
see in Chapter 3. For example, different fluorophores
label specific molecules during DNA replication within
a growing cell of Bacillus subtilis (Fig. 2.27B). The red
A.

COURTESY OF MELANIE BERKMEN, MIT

in these molecules provide closely spaced molecular orbitals that
give rise to fluorescence. A. DAPI specifically labels DNA. B. Green
fluorescent protein (GFP) is expressed endogenously by the cell.
Inset: Three GFP amino acid residues (serine, tyrosine, and glycine)
condense to form the fluorophore.

The cell specificity of the fluorophore can be determined by:







Chemical affi nity. Certain fluorophores have chemical
affi nity for certain classes of biological molecules. For
example, the fluorophore FM4-64 (green excitation, red
emission) specifically binds membranes.

B.

Labeled antibodies. Antibodies that specifically bind a
cell component are chemically linked to a fluorophore
molecule. The use of antibodies linked to fluorophores
is known as immunofluorescence.
DNA hybridization. A short sequence of DNA attached
to a fluorophore will hybridize to a specific sequence
in the genome. Thus we can label one position in the
chromosome.
Gene fusion reporter. Cells can be engineered with a
gene fusion, a fused gene that expresses one of their own
bacterial proteins combined with a gene encoding GFP
or one of many variants expressing different colors.

Pol-YFP
Ori-CFP
Membrane stain

2 µm

COURTESY OF MELANIE
BERKMEN, MIT



FIGURE 2.27

 The replisome and the DNA origin of
replication. A. Melanie Berkmen, working in the laboratory of Alan

Grossman, obtains the fluorescence micrograph shown. B. Fluorescence microscopy reveals the DNA origin, labeled blue by a protein
fused to cyan fluorescent protein, binding at a sequence near the
origin (Ori-CFP). Replisomes are labeled yellow by fusion of a DNA
polymerase subunit to yellow fluorescent protein (Pol-YFP) in
dividing cells of Bacillus subtilis.

CHAPTER 2

color arises from the membrane-specific fluorophore
FM4-64. The DNA origin of replication is labeled blue
by cyan fluorescent protein (CFP), a color variant of GFP.
The gene encoding CFP is fused to a gene encoding a
DNA-binding protein specific to the B. subtilis origin of
replication. The replisomes (DNA polymerases) are labeled
yellow, owing to a fused gene encoding yellow fluorescent
protein (YFP). The replisomes usually locate together near
the center of the cell, but sometimes they separate, visible
as two yellow spots.

Thought Question



OBSERVING THE MICROBIAL CELL

The emitted light travels in all directions from the point
source of the object, and its resolution is limited by
the wavelength. Thus, fluorescence cannot resolve the
detailed shape of a protein, or distinguish two proteins
that are close together. But we can detect the location of
a DNA-binding protein within a cell and resolve it as distinct from another fluorescent object located elsewhere.
Furthermore, computational techniques called super-resolution imaging enable us to pinpoint the protein’s location with a precision tenfold greater than the resolution
of ordinary optical microscopy.

A concern with the use of GFP fluorescence is that proteins fused to GFP may behave differently from the original
nonfused protein. In some cases, the GFP portion causes
fusion proteins to form complexes at the cell poles that
are absent in non-GFP cells. Thus, in cellular biology, it is
always important to confirm data with the results of a different kind of technique—for example, localization of the
target protein with a labeled antibody.
Note also in Figure 2.27B that the labeled membranes
and DNA origin appear diffuse—that is, unresolved.

Cell function requires the interaction of key single molecules, such as the chromosomal DNA with a protein binding its origin. William Moerner at Stanford University was
the first to demonstrate the possibility of single-molecule
tracking of fluorescent proteins in bacteria (Fig. 2.28).
How can we track a single molecule, which is far smaller
than the resolution limit of light (λ/2 = 200 nm)? Recall
the shape of the magnified image of a point source of light
(Fig. 2.12). Upon magnification, each image of a point
source appears as a peak intensity surrounded by rings of
much lower intensity. The sharpness of the main peak is
limited by the wavelength of light. But the precision with
which we know the peak’s central position is much narrower (Fig. 2.28A). In other words, the uncertainty of

ANDREAS GAHLMANN AND WILLIAM MOERNER.
2014. NATURE REVIEWS MICRO. 12:9.

A. Single-molecule localization

Uncertainty
in position
parameter

C.

L.A. CICERO/STANDFORD NEWS

actual order of events in Bacillus subtilis DNA replication?

Approximation
by Gaussian
function

59

Super-Resolution Imaging

2.6 What experiment could you devise to determine the

Intensity
profile



B. Single-molecule tracking: monitoring protein motion

Blured motion
In vivo

Reconstructed
path

Consecutive images of the same molecule

FIGURE 2.28

 Single-molecule
localization by computation: a
form of super-resolution imaging.

Frame 1

Frame 2

Frame 3

Frame 4

Frame 5

A. The uncertainty of the central peak
position. B. Tracking a single molecule
in a cell. C. William Moerner was the
first to demonstrate the possibility of
single-molecule tracking of fluorescent
proteins in bacteria.



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL
A.

B.
Diffraction-limited Cell-A

Super-resolution

Cell-A

PR NEWSFOTO/THE ROCKEFELLER UNIVERSITY/AP

ParA-YFP
ParB-CFP

1 µm

C. Interpretation

ParA

1 µm

DNA

JEROD L. PTACIN, ET AL. 2010.
NATURE CELL BIOLOGY 12:791.

60

ParB

FIGURE 2.29

 Super-resolution imaging reveals movement of origin-binding proteins across a cell. A. Lucy Shapiro, winner
of the National Medal of Science in 2013. B. Super-resolution imaging reveals the migration of the ParA cell fission protein across the cell of
Caulobacter crescentus. The gene encoding ParA is fused to YFP, and the gene encoding ParB is fused to CFP. C. ParA migrates clear across
the cell, generating a track to guide ParB to pull the newly replicated DNA origin across from one pole to the opposite pole. The arrow
indicates movement.

aeruginosa, treated with the antibiotic tobramycin. The
biofilm is treated with f luorophores that reveal live cells
(green) beneath the dead cells, killed by tobramycin (red).
The hidden live cells cause problems for medical therapy. Confocal microscopy enables us to visualize the 3D
structure of the biofilm. The method of confocal microscopy is explained in eTopic 2.2.

Dead cells
(red)
Cross section area

Live cells
(green)
Cross section

20 µm

MORTEN HENTZER AND MICHAEL GIVSKOV. 2003. J. CLIN. INVEST. 112:1300

the central peak position is about a tenth the width of the
intensity profile. Computation based on the intensity profile can reveal the peak positions with high precision. The
peak positions show how individual proteins move within a
living cell (Fig. 2.28B).
In an early application of super-resolution imaging,
Moerner worked with Lucy Shapiro at Stanford University to track the movement of DNA-binding proteins
during cell fission of Caulobacter crescentus (Fig. 2.29).
Shapiro received the National Medal of Science from
President Obama in 2013 for her studies of the intriguing
developmental cycle of this bacterium, which involves a
transition between stalked and f lagellar cells (presented
in Chapter 3). Moerner, Shapiro, and their students used
super-resolution imaging to track the migration of the
ParA cell fission protein (Fig. 2.29B and C). In this
experiment, a gene encoding ParA is fused to a gene for
yellow f luorescent protein (YFP), whereas ParB is fused
to cyan f luorescent protein (CFP). ParA migrates clear
across the cell, generating a spindle-like track to guide
ParB pulling the newly replicated DNA origin from one
pole to the opposite pole. This dramatic feat is one of
many intracellular mechanisms we explore in the next
chapter.
Some advanced forms of f luorescence microscopy
use laser beams to resolve subcellular details, and even
to visualize cells in 3D. One such method is confocal
laser scanning microscopy (or confocal microscopy).
In confocal microscopy, a microscopic laser light source
scans across the specimen. Figure 2.30 shows a biofilm
composed of the pathogenic bacterium Pseudomonas

FIGURE 2.30

 Biofilm with live/dead fluorophore, observed by confocal laser scanning microscopy. Pseudomonas

aeruginosa cells growing in a biofilm, treated with the antibiotic
tobramycin.

CHAPTER 2

Chemical Imaging Microscopy







Fluorescence microscopy uses fluorescence by a fluorophore to reveal specific cells or cell parts.
The specimen absorbs light at one wavelength and
then emits light at a longer wavelength. Color filters allow only light in the excitation range to reach
the specimen, and only emitted light to reach the
photodetector.
A fluorophore can label a cell part by chemical affinity for a component such as a membrane, attachment to
an antibody stain, or attachment to a short nucleic acid
that hybridizes to a DNA sequence.
Fluorescent proteins such as GFP can be fused
to a specific protein expressed by the cell. Endogenous GFP-type proteins can track intracellular movement of cell parts and can report environmental stress
responses.
Super-resolution imaging can define the position
of a f luorescent protein with a precision of 20–40
nm, tenfold better than the resolution limit of light
magnification.

Spirochete detected,
but the cell is too
narrow for resolution.

Chemical imaging microscopy maps the distribution of
chemicals within a cell.

2.5

Dark-Field and PhaseContrast Microscopy

Advanced optical techniques enable us to visualize structures that are difficult or impossible to detect under a
bright-field microscope, either because their size is below

61

Dark-field microscopy enables microbes to be visualized
as halos of bright light against the darkness, just as stars
are observed against the night sky. A tiny object whose size
is well below the wavelength of light, such as a virus particle, can be detected by light scattering. An important clinical application of dark-field microscopy is the detection of
Treponema pallidum, the cause of syphilis. T. pallidum cells
are so narrow (0.1 μm) that their shape cannot be resolved
by bright-field microscopy. Nevertheless, T. pallidum can
be detected by dark-field microscopy (Fig. 2.31). The spiral cells brightly scatter light, although the width of the
narrow cell is not resolved.
The optics of dark-field microscopy involve light scattering. The wavefront of scattered light is spherical, like a
wave emitted by a point source (see Fig. 2.9D). The scattered wave has a much smaller amplitude than that of the
incident (incoming) wave. Therefore, with ordinary brightfield optics, scattered light is washed out. Detection of scattered light requires a modified condenser arrangement that
excludes all light that is transmitted directly (Fig. 2.32).
The condenser contains a “spider light stop,” an opaque
disk held by three “spider legs” across an open ring. The

ARTHUR SIEGELMAN/VISUALS UNLIMITED





Dark-Field Microscopy Detects
Unresolved Objects

To Summarize



OBSERVING THE MICROBIAL CELL

the limit of resolution of light or because their cytoplasm
is transparent. These techniques take advantage of special properties of light waves, such as light scattering (dark
field) and phase contrast.

Fluorescence microscopy can now be coupled to new
tools of chemical imaging microscopy. Chemical imaging uses mass spectrometry (analysis of molecular fragments by mass) to visualize the distribution of chemicals
in a biological sample, such as a microbial colony. The
chemical distribution can actually be observed within
a cell, at 100-nm resolution, using nanoscale secondary
ion mass spectrometry (NanoSIMS). Chemical imaging
offers extraordinary opportunities to map the structure
and function of cells (see Special Topic 2.1). In natural
communities, such as soil or the intestinal microbiome,
the distribution of chemicals can be mapped onto specific
microbes or subcellular compartments defined by fluorescence microscopy.





5 µm

FIGURE 2.31



Dark-field observation of bacteria. Trepo-

nema pallidum specimen from a patient with syphilis.



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

Transmitted
light
Scattered
light

Microscopic
objects scatter
light into center.

Objective
Light cones
Specimen
Condenser
lenses

Spider
light stop
Light source

Light source

Spider light stop
excludes all but
outer ring of light.

FIGURE 2.32

 A dark-field condenser system with a spider
light stop. Below the condenser, the spider light stop excludes all

but an annular ring of light from the light source. The annular ring
converges as a hollow cone of light focused on the specimen. Only
light scattered by the specimen enters the objective lens; the field
background appears dark.

ring permits only a hollow cone of light to focus on the
object. The incident light converges at the object and then
generates an inverted hollow cone radiating outward.
For dark field, the objective lens is positioned in the
central region, where it completely misses the directly
transmitted light. For this reason, the field appears dark.
However, light scattered by the object radiates outward in
a spherical wave. A sector of this spherical wave enters the
objective lens and is detected as a halo of light.
An intriguing application of dark-field optics is the
study of bacterial motility. Motility is important in

bacterial diseases such as urethritis, in which
the pathogen needs to swim up through the
urethra. The bacterial swimming apparatus
consists of helical filaments called flagella
(singular, flagellum), which are rotated by a
motor device embedded in the bacterial cell
wall (for flagellar structure, see Section 3.7).
The “swimming strokes” of bacteria were
first elucidated by Howard Berg and Robert
Macnab (1940–2003), using dark-field optics
to view the helical flagella. The flagella are too
narrow to resolve, but dark-field optics can
detect them, as seen in the dark-field micrograph of Salmonella enterica (Fig. 2.33).
Detecting flagella requires such high light
intensity the bacterial cell itself appears “overexposed”; its shape is unresolved. Another
disadvantage of dark-field microscopy is that
any tiny particle, including specks of dust
(see Fig. 2.31), can scatter light and interfere
with visualization of the specimen. Unless
the medium is extremely clear, it can be difficult to distinguish microbes of interest from
particulates.

Thought Questions

2.7 Some early observers claimed that the rotary motions
observed in bacterial flagella could not be distinguished from
whiplike patterns, comparable to the motion of eukaryotic
flagella. Can you imagine an experiment to distinguish the two
and prove that the flagella rotate? Hint: Bacterial flagella can
get “stuck” to the microscope slide or coverslip.
2.8 Compare and contrast fluorescence microscopy with
dark-field microscopy. What similar advantage do they
provide, and how do they differ?

B. High light intensity

FIGURE 2.33

 Motile bacteria
observed under dark-field microscopy. A. Flagellated Salmonella enterica

observed with low light, which limits scattering. Only cell bodies are detected; no
flagella. B. The light intensity is increased.
Flagella are detected, although their fine
structure is not resolved, because their
width is below the threshold of resolution
by light.

10 µm

R. M. MACNAB. 1976. J. CLIN. MICROBIOL. 4(3):258

A. Low light intensity

10 µm

R. M. MACNAB. 1976. J. CLIN. MICROBIOL. 4(3):258

62

CHAPTER 2

Phase-Contrast Microscopy

Phase-contrast microscopy (PCM) exploits differences in
refractive index between the cytoplasm and the surrounding medium or between different organelles. The example of phase-contrast microscopy in Figure 2.34A shows
a community of microbes cultured from a cyanobacterial
liftoff mat in the ice of an Antarctic lake. This mat sample survived a month stored at –80°C and then was placed
under light in dilute salts at 10°C. Filamentous cyanobacteria (Microcoleus antarcticus) soon appeared, bubbling oxygen. The filaments hosted a protist, a stalked cell with cilia

A.

PROVIDED BY AUTHOR (SLONCZEWSKI); RICHARD DENNIS

Microcoleus
antarcticus
(cyanobacteria)

Stalked
protist

20 μm

B.
Constructive interference
(in phase)

A1

Destructive interference
(out of phase)

C

A1

C

C

A2

C

Wavelength
A2

C = Vibration
direction

Wavelength
AT
AT

C

C

A1 + A2 = AT
Brighter

FIGURE 2.34

A = Amplitude

A1 – A2 = AT
Darker

 Phase-contrast microscopy (PCM). A. PCM
of cyanobacteria with stalked protist. Cultured from Antarctica, Lake
Fryxell cyanobacterial liftoff mat. B. Interference is the principle
behind PCM. In constructive interference (left), the peaks of the two
wave trains rise together; their amplitudes are additive (A1 + A2),
forming a wave of greater total amplitude (AT). In destructive
interference (right), the peaks of the waves are opposite one
another, so their amplitudes cancel (A1 – A2), forming a wave of
lesser amplitude.



OBSERVING THE MICROBIAL CELL



63

beating to engulf bacteria. Under phase contrast, the cell
outlines appear dark because light passes entirely through
the cell envelope, whose refractive index differs from that
of cytoplasm.
Phase-contrast optics depend on the principle of interference (introduced in Section 2.2). In interference, two
wavefronts (or two portions of a wavefront) interact with
each other by addition (amplitudes in phase) or subtraction
(amplitudes out of phase) (Fig. 2.34B). The result of interference between two waves is a pattern of alternating zones
of constructive and destructive interference (brightness and
darkness).
The optical system for phase contrast was invented in
the 1930s by the Dutch microscopist Frits Zernike (1888–
1966), for which he earned the Nobel Prize in Physics. In
this system, slight differences in the refractive index of the
various cell components are transformed into differences in
the intensity of transmitted light. Zernike’s scheme makes
use of the fact that living cells have relatively high contrast
because of their high concentration of solutes. Given the
size and refractive index of commonly observed cells, light
is retarded by approximately one-quarter of a wavelength
when it passes through the cell. In other words, after passing through a cell, light exits the cell about one-quarter of
a wavelength behind the phase of light transmitted directly
through the medium.
The Zernike optical system is designed to retard the
refracted light by an additional quarter of a wavelength,
so that the light refracted through the cell is slowed by a
total of half a wavelength compared with the light transmitted through the medium. When two waves are out of
phase by half a wavelength, they produce destructive interference, canceling each other’s amplitude (Fig. 2.34B,
right). The result is a region of darkness in the image of
the specimen.
As in dark-field microscopy, the light transmitted through
the medium in phase-contrast microscopy needs to be separated from the light interacting with the object—in this
case, light waves slowed by refraction. This separation is performed by a ring-shaped slit, called an “annular ring,” similar
in function to the spider light stop. The annular ring stops
light from passing directly through the center of the lens system, where the specimen is located, and generates a hollow
cone of light, which is focused through the specimen and
generates an inverted cone above it (Fig. 2.35). Light passing through the specimen, however, is not only retarded; it is
also refracted and thus bent into the central region within the
inverted cone.
Both the refracted light from the specimen and the
outer cone of transmitted light enter the phase plate. The
phase plate consists of refractive material that is thinner in
the region met by the outer (transmitted) light cone. The
refracted light passing through the center of the phase plate



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

FIGURE 2.35

 Phase-contrast
optics. A. The specimen retards light

by approximately one-quarter of a
wavelength. The phase plate contains
a central disk of refractive material
that retards light from the specimen
by another quarter wavelength, increasing the phase difference to half a
wavelength. The light from the specimen and the transmitted light are
now fully out of phase; they cancel,
making the specimen appear dark. B.
In the phase-contrast microscope, the
annular ring forms a hollow cone of
light that passes through the refractive material of the specimen. When
the transmitted and refracted light
cones re-join at the focal point, they
are out of phase; their amplitudes
cancel each other, and that region
of the image appears dark against a
bright background.

A.

B.

Phase plate

Phase-contrast
image

Specimen now
appears dark.
¼ wavelength

Specimen
Slide

Phase plate

Approximate
effect of
specimen.
Specimen

Light source

Annular ring

Light refracted by
½λ in total

Light refracted by
¼λ (specimen)

Unobstructed light
(phase unaltered
by specimen)

Light source

COURTESY OF NATURAL SCIENCE DEPT., UNIVERSITY OF DELHI

is retarded by an additional one-quarter wavelength comof light that generates interference fringes. These interferpared with the transmitted light passing through the thinner
ence patterns are highly sensitive to slight differences in the
region on the outside; the overall difference approximates
refractive index of the specimen. They produce an illusion
half a wavelength. When the light from the inner and outer
of shadowing across the specimen. The “false 3D” effect
regions focuses at the ocular lens, the amplitudes of the
can be seen across the yeast cells and their intracellular
waves cancel and produce a region of darkness. In this sysvacuoles.
tem, small differences in refractive
index can produce dramatic differ- A. Phase contrast (Zernike optics)
B. DIC (Nomarski optics)
ences in contrast between the offset
phases of light.
Figure 2.36 shows a eukaryotic
microbe, the baker’s yeast SacchaFalse
3D effect
romyces cerevisiae, imaged by two
different optical systems involving phase contrast. Both systems
distinguish intracellular compartments such as nucleus and vacuoles. The classical phase contrast
with Zernike optics (Fig. 2.36A)
shows a dark line of phase contrast
at the cortex surrounding each yeast
cell. Figure 2.36B shows a different kind of optical system, called
differential interference contrast
microscopy (DIC), also known as
Nomarski microscopy. DIC optics
require a polarized light source
(with light rays restricted to one
FIGURE 2.36  Phase contrast (Zernike optics) compared to differential interplane). The optical system enhances
ference contrast (DIC, Nomarski optics). A. Saccharomyces cerevisiae (baker’s yeast)
contrast by superimposing an image
observed by phase contrast. The dense cell wall, highly refractive, appears as a dark rim.
of the specimen onto a second beam
B. Yeast observed by DIC. The gradient of contrast across the cell generates a false 3D effect.

WIKIMEDIA COMMONS

64

CHAPTER 2

To Summarize








OBSERVING THE MICROBIAL CELL

Optical lens

Magnetic lens

Light source

Electron source

Dark-field microscopy uses scattered light to detect
objects too small to be resolved by light rays. Extremely
small microbes and thin structures can be detected. The
shapes of objects are not resolved.

2.6

Electron Microscopy,
Scanning Probe Microscopy,
and X-Ray Crystallography

All cells are built of macromolecular structures. The foremost tool for observing the shapes of these structures is
electron microscopy (EM). In electron microscopy, magnetic lenses focus beams of electrons to image cell membranes, chromosomes, and ribosomes with a resolution a
thousand times that of light microscopy. Other kinds of
microscopy are emerging, such as scanning probe microscopy, which images the contours of live bacteria. For atomlevel detail of a macromolecule, the tool of choice remains
X-ray crystallography.

Electron Microscopy

How does an electron microscope work? Electrons are
ejected from a metal subjected to a voltage potential. Like
photons, the electrons travel in a straight line, interact
with matter, and carry information about their interaction.
And also like photons, electrons can exhibit the properties of waves. The wavelength associated with an electron is
100,000 times smaller than that of a photon; for example,
an electron accelerated over a voltage of 100 kilovolts (kV)
has a wavelength of 0.0037 nm, compared with 400–750
nm for visible light. However, the actual resolution of electrons in microscopy is limited not by the wavelength, but
by the aberrations of the lensing systems used to focus electrons. The magnetic lenses used to focus electrons never
achieve the precision required to utilize the full potential
resolution of the electron beam.

65

Soft iron pole

Phase-contrast microscopy with Zernike optics superimposes refracted light and transmitted light shifted out
of phase so as to reveal differences in refractive index
as patterns of light and dark. Live cells with transparent cytoplasm, and the organelles of eukaryotes, can be
observed with high contrast.
Differential interference contrast microscopy (DIC)
with Nomarski optics superimposes interference bands on
an image, accentuating small differences in refractive index.



N

N

S

S

Copper coils
Image is inverted.

Image is inverted
and rotated.

FIGURE 2.37  A magnetic lens. The beam of electrons spirals
around the magnetic field lines. The U-shaped magnet acts as a lens,
focusing the spiraling electrons much as a refractive lens focuses
light rays.

Electrons are focused by means of a magnetic field
directed along the line of travel of the beam (Fig. 2.37).
As a beam of electrons enters the field, it spirals around
the magnetic field lines. The shape of the magnet can be
designed to generate field lines that will focus the beam of
electrons in a manner analogous to the focusing of photons
by a refractive lens. The electron beam, however, forms a
spiral because electrons travel around magnetic field lines.
Magnetic lenses generate large aberrations; thus, we need a
series of corrective magnetic lenses to obtain a resolution of
about 0.2 nm. This resolution is a thousand times greater
than the 200-nm resolution of light microscopy.

Thought Question

2.9 Like a light microscope, an electron microscope can be
focused at successive powers of magnification. At each level,
the image rotates at an angle of several degrees. Given the
geometry of the electron beam, as shown in Figure 2.37, why
do you think the image rotates?

Transmission EM and scanning EM. Two major types of

electron microscopy are transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM).
In TEM, electrons are transmitted through the specimen
as in light microscopy to reveal internal structure. In SEM,
the electron beams scan across the surface of the specimen
and are reflected to reveal the contours of its 3D surface.

66



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL
Transmission electron
microscopy

Light microscopy
Illumination
source

Electron
source
(tungsten
filament)

A.

Electron gun
Vacuum column
Electron beam
Condensing
lenses

Condenser lens

Monitor

Specimen
Scan coils
Objective lens
Objective lens
Specimen
Ocular
lens

Projection
lens

Secondary
electrons
Detector
and amplifier
B.

Image plane
Fluorescent screen

Eye

FIGURE 2.38



Transmission electron microscopy (TEM).

The transmission electron microscope closely parallels
the design of a bright-field microscope, including a source
of electrons (instead of light), a magnetic condenser lens,
a specimen, and an objective lens (Fig. 2.38). The light
source is replaced by an electron source consisting of a highvoltage current applied to a tungsten filament, which gives
off electrons when heated. The electron beam is focused
onto the specimen by a magnetic condenser lens. The specimen image is then magnified by a magnetic objective lens.
The projection lens, analogous to the ocular lens of a light
microscope, focuses the image on a fluorescent screen.
The scanning electron microscope is arranged somewhat differently from the TEM, in that a series of condenser lenses focuses the electron beam onto the surface of
the specimen. Reflected electrons are then picked up by a
detector (Fig. 2.39).
Sample preparation for EM. Standard electron microscopy

of biological specimens at room temperature poses special
problems. The entire optical column must be maintained
under vacuum to prevent the electrons from colliding with
the gas molecules in air. The requirement for a vacuum precludes the viewing of live specimens, which in any case would
be quickly destroyed by the electron beam. Moreover, the

INGA SPENCE/VISUALS UNILIMITED, INC.

The light source is replaced by an electron source consisting of a
high-voltage current applied to a tungsten filament, which gives
off electrons when heated. Each magnetic lens shown (condenser,
objective, projection) actually represents a series of lenses.

FIGURE 2.39  Scanning electron microscopy (SEM). A. In
the scanning electron microscope, the electron beam is scanned
across a specimen coated in gold, which acts as a source of secondary electrons. The incident electron beam ejects secondary electrons toward a detector, generating an image of the surface of the
specimen. B. Loading a specimen into the vacuum column.

structure of most specimens lacks sufficient electron density
(ability to scatter electrons) to provide contrast. Thus, the
specimen requires an electron-dense negative stain using
salts of heavy-metal atoms such as tungsten or uranium. The
heavy atoms collect outside the surfaces of cell structures
such as membranes, where their electron scatter reveals the
outline of the structure. Staining, however, can be avoided
for cryo-electron microscopy (see the next section).
We can prepare a specimen by embedding it in a polymer for thin sections. A special knife called a microtome
cuts slices through the specimen, each slice a fraction of

CHAPTER 2

a micrometer thick. Alternatively, a specimen consisting
of, for example, virus particles or isolated organelles can
be sprayed onto a copper grid. In either case, the electron
beam penetrates the object as if it were transparent. The
electrons are actually absorbed by the heavy-atom stain,
which collects at the edge of biological structures.
Figure 2.40 shows examples of transmission electron microscopy. The TEM of Bacillus anthracis in Figure 2.40A shows a thin section through a bacillus, including
a cell wall, membranes, and glycoprotein filaments. The
section is stained with uranyl acetate (a salt of uranium ion).
The image includes electron density throughout the depth
of the section. In Figure 2.40B, flagellar motors have been
isolated from a bacterial cell envelope and spread on a grid



OBSERVING THE MICROBIAL CELL



67

for TEM. The motor protein complexes are visualized by
an electron-dense negative stain (phosphotungstate) deposited in the crevices around the complexes on a copper grid.
The micrograph reveals details of each motor, including
the axle and individual rings. The details are well resolved
by the beam of electrons—an achievement far beyond that
possible with a light microscope.
Scanning electron microscopy can show whole cells in
3D view, with much greater resolution than light microscopy can accomplish. SEM is particularly effective for visualizing cells within complex communities such as a biofilm.
Figure 2.41A shows a biofilm of hyperthermophilic archaea
from a deep-sea thermal vent, cultured at 95°C. The bulbous cells of Pyrococcus furiosus extend flagella that attach
B. TEM of flagellar motors from
Salmonella enterica

A. TEM of Bacillus anthracis showing envelope and cytoplasm

250 nm

Flagellar
motor

50 nm

MICHIO HOMMA, ET AL. 1987. PNAS 84:7483

Cell wall

STÉPHANE MESNAGE, ET AL. 1988. J. BACTERIOL. 180:52

Glycoprotein

FIGURE 2.40

 Transmission electron micrographs. A. Bacillus anthracis thin section showing envelope and cytoplasm. Stained with
uranyl acetate. B. Flagellar motors from Salmonella enterica, shadowed with colloidal gold.

A.

B.

1 µm

FIGURE 2.41

 Scanning electron micrographs. A. Pyrococcus furiosus extend flagella that attach the rod-shaped Methanopyrus kandleri.
B. Helicobacter pylori adheres to the villi (small bulges) of the gastric epithelium. Bacteria are colorized green.

VERONIKA BURMEISTER/VISUALS UNLIMITED

Methanopyrus
kandleri

ALEXANDRA K. PERRAS, ET AL. 2014. FRONTIERS IN MICROBIOLOGY 5: 397.

Pyrococcus
furiosus

68



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

the rod-shaped Methanopyrus kandleri. The shapes of these
archaea show up clearly in relation to one another via SEM.
In a clinical example, Figure 2.41B shows the pathogen
Helicobacter pylori colonizing the gastric epithelium (stomach
lining). H. pylori bacteria are helical rods (colorized green).
Note that the colorizing consists of interpretation by a photo
artist; no actual colors are observed by electron microscopy,
since colors are defined not by electrons but by visible light.
The bacterium Helicobacter pylori was first reported by Australian scientist Barry Marshall, but it proved difficult to isolate and culture. Ultimately, electron microscopy confirmed
the existence of H. pylori in the stomach and helped document its role in gastritis and stomach ulcers.
Thought Question

2.10 What kinds of research questions could you investigate
using SEM? What questions could you answer using TEM?

Electron beam
1. Rotate
specimen in
the beam.
Projection images

2. Combine and compute
3D transform.

3. Reconstruct object
in three dimensions.

FIGURE 2.42  3D image construction in cryo-electron
tomography. Cryo-EM images are obtained in multiple focal

planes throughout an object. The images are combined through
a mathematical transformation to model the entire object in 3D.

An important limitation of traditional electron microscopy, whether TEM or SEM, is that the fixatives and heavyatom stains can introduce artifacts into the image, especially
at finer details of resolution. In some cases, different preparation procedures have led to substantially different interpretations of subcellular structure. For example, an oval that
appears hollow might be interpreted as a cell when in fact
it represents a deposit of staining material. A microscopic
structure that is interpreted incorrectly is termed an artifact.
Avoiding artifacts is an important concern in microscopy.

Cryo-Electron Microscopy
and Tomography

How can electron microscopy achieve finer resolution and
avoid artifacts due to staining? High-strength electron
beams now permit low-temperature cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM), also known as electron cryomicroscopy. In cryo-EM, the specimen does not require staining,
because the high-intensity electron beams can detect smaller
signals (contrast in the specimen) than earlier instruments
could. The specimen must, however, be flash-frozen—that
is, suspended in water and frozen rapidly in a refrigerant of
high heat capacity (ability to absorb heat). The rapid freezing avoids ice crystallization, leaving the water solvent in
a glass-like amorphous phase. The specimen retains water
content and thus closely resembles its living form, although
it is still ultimately destroyed by electron bombardment.
Another innovation made possible by cryo-EM is
tomography, the acquisition of projected images from
different angles of a transparent specimen (see the Current Research Highlight). Cryo-electron tomography, or

electron cryotomography, avoids the need to physically
slice the sample for thin-section TEM. The images from
tomography are combined digitally to visualize the entire
object in 3D. Repeated scans can be summed computationally to obtain an image at high resolution (Fig. 2.42). The
scans are taken either at different angles or within different
focal planes. Each different scan images slightly different
parts of the object. The scans are summed computationally
to generate a 3D model.
One use of cryo-electron tomography is to generate
high-resolution models of virus particles. For a highly symmetrical virus, images of multiple particles can be averaged together. The digitally combined images can achieve
high resolution, nearly comparable to that of X-ray crystallography. Wah Chiu at Baylor College of Medicine
(Fig. 2.43A) pioneered the use of cryo-EM to visualize
virus particles at high resolution. An example is rice dwarf
virus (Fig. 2.43B), one of the world’s most economically
destructive agricultural pathogens. Other viruses modeled recently include herpes virus and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Cryo-EM is especially useful for
particles that cannot be crystallized for X-ray diffraction
analysis, the most common means of molecular visualization (see pages 71–73).
Cryo-EM models of a virus are impressive, but can we
build a 3D model of an entire cell? Grant Jensen and colleagues at the California Institute of Technology use cryoelectron tomography to visualize an entire flash-frozen
bacterium. Such a model includes all the cell’s parts and
their cytoplasmic connections—and reveals new structures
never seen before.

CHAPTER 2



OBSERVING THE MICROBIAL CELL



69

WAH CHIU, BAYLOR COLLEGE OF MEDICINE

Z. HONG ZHOU, UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HOUSTON MEDICAL SCHOOL AND GUANGYING LU, PEKING UNIVERSITY

B.

A.

FIGURE 2.43



Cryo-electron tomography reveals virus structure.

A. Wah Chiu (standing) and Joanita Jakana, using a JEOL 300-kilo-electron-volt (keV)
electron cryomicroscope. Chiu’s laboratory images virus structures using cryo-electron
tomography. B. Rice dwarf virus model, at resolution 0.68 nm. The outer shell is composed
of 396 subunits (bright colors). A cutaway from the outer shell reveals the inner shell
(pale colors) composed of 120 subunits.
B.

A.

C.

Cell wall

0.5 µm

Axial
filament

FIGURE 2.44  Magnetotactic cell visualized by cryo-electron tomography. A. A single cryo-EM scan lengthwise through
Magnetospirillum magneticum. B. 3D model of M. magneticum based on multiple scans. C. Expanded view of the cell interior.

The cell modeled in Figure 2.44 is Magnetospirillum
magneticum, a bacterium that can swim along magnetic
field lines because the cell contains a string of magnetic
particles composed of the mineral magnetite (iron oxide,

Fe3O4). A cryo-EM section through the bacterium
(Fig. 2.44A) shows fine details, including the inner membrane (equivalent to the cell membrane), peptidoglycan
cell wall, and outer membrane, an outer covering found

THE JENSEN LABORATORY

Magnetosome

Invagination
of cell
membrane

THE JENSEN LABORATORY

Outer
membrane

AAAS. ARASH KOMEILI, ET AL. SCIENCE 13 JANUARY 2006 311: 242-245; FIG 1

Inner
membrane



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

in Gram-negative bacteria. Four dark magnetosomes (particles of magnetite) appear
in a chain, each surrounded by a vesicle of
membrane.
Figure 2.44B models the magnetosomes, reconstructed using multiple cryoEM scans across the volume of the cell. The
magnetosomes are colorized red, each surrounded by a membrane vesicle (green). The
vesicles are organized within the cell by a
series of protein axial filaments, colorized
yellow. Figure 2.44C shows an expanded
image of the magnetosomes viewed from the
cell interior. This expansion reveals that the
magnetosome vesicles consist of invaginations from the cell membrane. Thus, the 3D
model shows how the magnetite particles
are fixed in position by invaginated membranes and held in a line by axial filaments.
Chapter 3 presents additional structures
visualized by cryo-EM tomography, such as
the flagellar motors of spirochete bacteria,
and the carbon dioxide–fixing structures of marine cyanobacteria. Most
μm
surprisingly, cryo-EM reveals bacte137.4
rial microtubules—structures never
114.5
seen before, which offer a promising
new target for antibiotics.
91.6
68.7

Scanning Probe
Microscopy

Scanning probe microscopy (SPM)
enables nanoscale observation of cell
surfaces. Unlike electron microscopy, some forms of SPM can be used
to observe live bacteria in water or
exposed to air.
SPM techniques measure a physical interaction, such as the “atomic
force” between the sample and a
sharp tip. Atomic force microscopy
(AFM) measures the van der Waals
forces between the electron shells of
adjacent atoms of the cell surface and
the sharp tip. In AFM, an instrument probes the surface of a sample
with a sharp tip a couple of micrometers long and often less than 10 nm
in diameter (Fig. 2.45A). The tip is
located at the free end of a lever that

45.8

A.
Laser
Photodiode

Cantilever/mirror

AFM tip

Sample

x
z

y

As the tip moves up or
down, the cantilever/mirror
is deflected.

The sample is moved
back and forth in the
x-y plane.

B.
0.0

68.7

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5 μm

μm
2.5

μm
2.5

2.0

2.0

1.5

1.5

1.0

1.0

0.5

0.5

0.0

0.0

22.9
0.0

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5 μm

NICOLE HANSMEIER, ET AL. 2006. MICROBIOLOGY 152:923–935

70

FIGURE 2.45

 Atomic force microscopy enables visualization of
untreated cells. A. The atomic force microscope (AFM) has a fine-pointed

tip attached to a cantilever that moves over a sample. The tip interacts with the
sample surface through atomic force. As the tip is pushed away, or pulled into
a depression, the cantilever is deflected. The deflection is measured by a laser
light beam focused onto the cantilever and reflected into a photodiode detector.
B. This AFM image shows live bacteria collected on a filter, from seawater off the
coast of California. Two round bacteria and a helical bacterium can be seen
(raised regions, green-white).

CHAPTER 2

is 100–200 μm long. The lever is deflected by the force
between the tip and the sample surface. Deflection of the
lever is measured by a laser beam reflected off a cantilever
attached to the tip as the sample scans across. The measured deflections allow a computer to map the topography
of cells in liquid medium with a resolution below 1 nm.
In Figure 2.45B, AFM was used to observe live bacteria collected on a filter, from seawater off the coast of California. Two round bacteria and a helical bacterium can be
seen (raised regions, green-white). The cells were observed
in water suspension, without stain. Thus, AFM can help
assess the ecological contributions of marine bacteria that
cannot be cultured.

To know a cell, we need to isolate the cell’s individual
molecules. The major tool used at present to visualize a
molecule is X-ray diffraction analysis, or X-ray crystallography. Much of our knowledge of microbial genetics
(Chapters 7–12) and metabolism (Chapters 13–16) comes
from crystal structures of key macromolecules.
Unlike microscopy, X-ray diffraction does not present a
direct view of a sample, but generates computational models. Dramatic as the models are, they can only represent
particular aspects of electron clouds and electron density

Crystal

ω

OBSERVING THE MICROBIAL CELL



Area
detector(s)

C.

Focused
beam

50-keV
electrons

Focusing mirrors
(or monochromator)

χ
φ

θ

BRUKER AXS INC.

Rotating
Primary
anode (copper) X-ray beam
B.
Incident waves of wavelength λ

Array of
atoms

71

that are fundamentally “unseeable.” That is why we represent molecular structures in different ways that depend on
the context—by electron density maps, as models defined
by van der Waals radii, or as stick models. Proteins are frequently presented in a cartoon form that shows alpha helix
and beta sheet secondary structures.
For a molecule that can be crystallized, X-ray diffraction makes it possible to fix the position of each individual atom in the molecule. Atomic resolution is possible
because the wavelengths of X-rays are much shorter than
the wavelengths of visible light and are comparable to the
size of atoms. X-ray diffraction is based on the principle of
wave interference (see Fig. 2.34B). The interference pattern is generated when a crystal containing many copies
of an isolated molecule is bombarded by a beam of X-rays
(Fig. 2.46A). The wavefronts associated with the X-rays are
diffracted as they pass through the crystal, causing interference patterns. In the crystal, the diffraction pattern is generated by a symmetrical array of many sample molecules
(Fig. 2.46B). The more copies of the molecule in the array,
the narrower the interference pattern and the greater the
resolution of atoms within the molecule. Diffraction patterns obtained from the passage of X-rays through a crystal
(Fig. 2.46C) can be analyzed by computation to develop
a precise structural model for the molecule, detailing the
position of every atom in the structure.

X-Ray Diffraction Analysis

A.



FIGURE 2.46  Visualizing molecules by X-ray
crystallography. A. Apparatus for X-ray crystallog-

raphy. The X-ray beam is focused onto a crystal, which
is rotated over all angles to obtain diffraction patterns.
The intensity of the diffracted X-rays is recorded on film
or with an electronic detector. B. X-rays are diffracted
by rows of identical molecules in a crystal. The diffraction pattern is analyzed to generate a model of the individual molecules. C. Diffraction pattern from a crystal.

72



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

A.

C.

B.

Corrin
ring

WIKIMEDIA COMMONS

BRIKBECK PHOTO UNIT

Cobalt

FIGURE 2.47  Pioneering X-ray crystallography. A. John Bernal developed X-ray crystallography to solve the structure of complex
biological molecules. B. Dorothy Hodgkin was awarded the 1964 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for her work in X-ray crystallography. C. Vitamin B12,
whose structure was originally solved by Hodgkin. The corrin ring structure is built around an atom of cobalt (pink). Carbon atoms here are
gray; oxygen, red; nitrogen, blue; phosphorus, yellow. Hydrogen atoms are omitted for clarity.

The application of X-ray crystallography to complex
biological molecules was pioneered by the Irish crystallographer John Bernal (1901–1971) (Fig. 2.47A). Bernal
was particularly supportive of women students and colleagues, including Rosalind Franklin (1920–1958), who
made important discoveries about DNA and RNA, and
Nobel laureate Dorothy Crowfoot Hodgkin (1910–1994).
Hodgkin (Fig. 2.47B) won the 1964 Nobel Prize in
Chemistry for solving the crystal structures of penicillin
and vitamin B12 (Fig. 2.47C). She later solved one of the
first protein structures—that of the hormone insulin.
Today, X-ray data undergo digital analysis to generate sophisticated molecular models, such as the one seen
in Figure 2.48 of anthrax lethal factor, a toxin produced
by Bacillus anthracis that kills the infected host cells. The
model for anthrax lethal factor was encoded in a Protein
Data Bank (PDB) text file that specifies coordinates for all
atoms of the structure. The Protein Data Bank is a worldwide database of solved X-ray structures, freely available on
the Internet. Visualization software is used to present the
structure as a “ribbon” of amino acid residues, color-coded
for secondary structure. In Figure 2.48, the red coils represent alpha helix structures, whereas the blue arrows represent beta sheets (for a review of protein structures, see
Appendix 1).

Note:

Molecular and cellular biology increasingly rely on visualization in 3D. Many of the molecules illustrated in this book are
based on structural models deposited in the Protein Data Bank, as
indicated by the PDB file code. You may view these structures in
3D by downloading the PDB file and viewing it with a free plug-in
such as Jmol.

Beta sheet

Alpha helix

FIGURE 2.48

 X-ray crystallography of a protein complex,
anthrax lethal factor. The toxin consists of a butterfly-shaped

dimer of two peptide chains. This cartoon model is based on X-raycrystallographic data, showing alpha helix (red coils) and beta sheet
(blue arrows). (PDB code: 1J7N)

A limitation of X-ray analysis is the unavoidable deterioration of the specimen under bombardment by X-rays.
The earliest X-ray diffraction models of molecular complexes such as the ribosome relied heavily on components from thermophilic bacteria and archaea that grow at
high temperatures. Because thermophiles have evolved to
grow under higher thermal stress, their macromolecular

CHAPTER 3



CELL STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION



77

CHAPTER 3

Cell Structure and Function

W

ith just a few thousand genes in its
genome, the bacterial cell continually
builds new parts while timing its DNA
replication with fission. A cell expands its membrane
and builds new ribosomes to make proteins. Flagella
propel bacteria and archaea to new habitats. And the
microbes secrete signals to contact fellow cells. Cellsurface proteins give us targets for new antibiotics
or vaccines. Other features, such as flagellar motors,
inspire us to build microscopic machines.

3.2 The Cell Membrane and Transport
3.3 The Cell Wall and Outer Layers
3.4 The Nucleoid and Cell Division
3.5 Cell Polarity and Aging
3.6 Specialized Structures

C U R R E N T R E S E A RC H

highlight

Growing bacterium expands its nucleoid ahead of cell
division. Escherichia coli DNA is coiled into a region called a
nucleoid (blue fluorophore). Completing cell division requires
the Z-ring formed by polymerization of the protein FtsZ (red
fluorophore). With rich nutrients available, DNA replicates
well ahead of cell division, forming two to four nucleoids.
Norbert Hill in Petra Levin’s lab identified a nutrient-dependent regulator that delays FtsZ polymerization. By delaying
Z-ring formation, the regulator allows the bacterial cell to
grow larger before it divides.
Source: Norbert S. Hill et al. 2013. PLoS Genetics 9:e1003663.

Nucleoids

A N I N T E RV I E W W I T H
PETRA LEVIN, MICROBIOLOGIST, WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY
IN ST. LOUIS

COURTESY OF DOROTHY GREGG

3.1 The Bacterial Cell: An Overview

What excites you about the “cell division odyssey”?

Determining how cells coordinate division with cell growth, DNA replication,
and chromosome segregation is akin
to solving an extremely challenging
brainteaser. Each time we identify a
component of the signal transduction
pathway coordinating cell division with
cell growth or an elusive part of the cell division machinery,
I experience not only the thrill of discovery but also the thrill
of knowing we have opened the door to yet another mystery!
How do you think our view of bacterial cell division will be
transformed in the future?

Z-ring
2 μm

The new microfluidic devices, and the high-throughput
image capture technology that facilitates their use, enable
us to follow single cells from birth to division across tens
of generations. Another recent advance is super-resolution microscopy. In combination, these advances will help
us answer long-standing questions about the forces behind
bacterial cytokinesis and the mechanisms that coordinate
cell division with other cell cycle processes. I can’t wait!

77



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

To grow and multiply, a microbial cell must gain nutrients faster than its competitors do. For example, when your
intestinal Gram-negative bacteria have plenty of food, they
delay cell division at the Z-ring (see the Current Research
Highlight) so that they can absorb nutrients and grow
larger. At the same time, each cell must exclude toxins such
as your intestinal bile salts. Such toxins are screened by
the cell’s outer membrane. Microbial cells have evolved an
amazing range of molecular parts, from rotary machines
that make ATP to enzyme factories that build antibiotics.
Chapter 3 explores the key parts of bacteria and archaea,
including specialized structures such as magnetosomes.
Most bacteria share these traits:




Compact genome. Prokaryotic genomes are compact,
with relatively little noncoding DNA. Small genomes
maximize the production of cells from limited resources.



Tightly coordinated functions. The cell’s parts work
together in a highly coordinated mechanism, which may
enable a high rate of reproduction.

Beyond the fundamentals, bacteria evolve amazing diversity, which we will explore in Chapter 18. We also discuss
diversity of archaea in Chapter 19, and of microbial eukaryotes such as fungi and protists in Chapter 20. Overall, the
three domains show these key traits:


Thick, complex outer envelope. The envelope protects the cell from environmental stress and mediates
exchange with the environment.
Envelope

Nucleoid

Archaea, like bacteria, are prokaryotes (cells that
lack a nucleus). Archaea have unique membrane and
envelope structures that enable survival in extreme
environments.

Ribosomes

Ribosome
mRNA
50S

0.25 µm

DENNIS KUNKEL MICROSCOPY

78

Flagellum

FIGURE 3.1  Escherichia coli: a Gram-negative bacterium of
the gut microbiome. The envelope includes the outer membrane;

the cell wall and periplasm; and the inner (cell) membrane. Embedded
in the membranes is the motor of a flagellum. The cytoplasm includes
enzymes, messenger RNA extending out of the nucleoid, and ribosomes.
Ribosomes translate the mRNA to make proteins,
which are folded by chaperones. The nucleoid
contains the chromosomal DNA wrapped around
DNA-binding protein
binding proteins. (PDB codes: ribosome, 1GIX, 1GIY;
DNA-binding protein, 1P78; RNA polymerase, 1MSW)
HU

RNA polymerase

DNA

RNA

30S

Flagellar
motor

Polypeptide

CHAPTER 3



Eukaryotic cells have extensive membranous organelles. Organelles such as endoplasmic reticulum and
Golgi complex are reviewed in eAppendix 2. The mitochondria and chloroplasts of eukaryotic cells evolved by
endosymbiosis with engulfed bacteria (see Chapter 17).
Diverse microbial eukaryotes, such as fungi and protists,
are explored in Chapter 20.

Now we embark on a tour of a typical Gram-negative
bacterial cell, a common resident of your gut, Escherichia
coli (Fig. 3.1). Along the way, we learn how our understanding of this model cell has emerged from microscopy,
cell fractionation, and genetic analysis.

3.1

The Bacterial Cell:
An Overview



CELL STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION



79

Escherichia coli. Its general features apply to many kinds
of bacteria, particularly the Gram-negative inhabits of your
colon such as Proteobacteria and Bacteroidetes. Remember
that we cannot literally “see” the molecules within a cell,
but microscopy and subcellular analysis provide the basis
for our model.

Model of a Bacterial Cell

Within a cell, the cytoplasm consists of a gel-like network
composed of proteins and other macromolecules. The
cytoplasm is contained by a cell membrane, or plasma
membrane. For E. coli, a Gram-negative bacterium (discussed in Section 3.3), the cell membrane is called the
inner membrane, in order to distinguish it from the

A cell is more than a “soup” full of ribosomes and enzymes.
In fact, the cell’s parts fit together in a structure that is
ordered, though flexible. Our model of the bacterial cell
(Fig. 3.1) offers an interpretation of how the major components of one cell fit together. The model represents

Bacterial Cell Components (Examples)
Outer membrane proteins:
Sugar porin (10 nm)
Braun lipoprotein (8 nm)
Inner membrane proteins:
Transporter
Secretory complex (Sec)
ATP synthase (20 nm diameter in
inner membrane; 32 nm total height)

Lipopolysaccharide

Cell wall
Periplasm

Envelope

Outer membrane

Inner membrane
(cell membrane)
Ribosome

Arabinose-binding protein
(3 × 3 × 6 nm)
Acid resistance chaperone (HdeA)
(3 × 3 × 6 nm)
Disulfide bond protein (DsbA)
(3 × 3 × 6 nm)
Cytoplasmic proteins:

Peptide
Cytoplasm

RNA

Periplasmic proteins:

RNA polymerase

Pyruvate kinase
(5 × 10 × 10 nm)
Phosphofructokinase
(4 × 7 × 7 nm)
Proteasome
(12 × 12 × 15 nm)
Chaperone GroEL
(18 × 14 nm)
Other proteins
Transcription and translation complexes:
RNA polymerase (10 × 10 × 16 nm)

DNA-bridging
protein H-NS

DNA
50 nm

Nucleoid

DNA-binding
protein HU

Ribosome (21 × 21 × 21 nm)
Nucleoid components:
DNA (2.4 nm wide × 3.4 nm/10 bp)
DNA-binding protein (3 × 3 × 5 nm)
DNA-bridging protein (3 × 3 × 5 nm)

80



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

additional “outer membrane.” The inner membrane is
composed of phospholipids, transporter proteins, and
other molecules. This membrane prevents cytoplasmic
proteins from leaking out and maintains gradients of ions
and nutrients. Between the inner and outer membranes
lies the cell wall, a fortress-like structure composed of
sugar chains linked covalently by peptides (peptidoglycan). The cell wall forms a single molecule that surrounds
the cell. The wall material is flexible, but it limits expansion of the cytoplasm, keeping the cell membrane intact
when water flows in. Like a balloon, the resulting turgor
pressure makes the cell rigid.
In a Gram-negative bacterium, the cell wall lies within
the periplasm, a water-filled space containing nutrientbinding proteins and secretion machines. Outside the cell
wall lies the outer membrane of phospholipids and lipopolysaccharides (LPS), a class of lipids attached to long
polysaccharides (sugar chains). The LPS layer may be surrounded by a thick capsule. The capsule polysaccharides
form a slippery layer that inhibits phagocytosis by macrophages (presented in Chapter 26). The inner membrane,
cell wall, and outer membrane constitute the Gramnegative cell envelope.
The bacterial envelope includes cell-surface proteins that
enable the bacterium to interact with specific host organisms. For example, E. coli cell-surface proteins help the
bacterium colonize the human intestinal epithelium. The
nitrogen-fixing symbiont Sinorhizobium has cell-surface
proteins that help the bacteria to colonize legume plants
for nitrogen fixation. Another common external structure
is the flagellum (plural, flagella), a helical protein filament
whose rotary motor propels the cell in search of a more
favorable environment. Flagella appear on many Proteobacteria, such as E. coli, but are absent in the Bacteroidetes
such as Bacteroides and Prevotella species.
Within the cell, the cell membrane and envelope provide an attachment point for one or more chromosomes.
The chromosome is organized within the cytoplasm as a
system of looped coils called the nucleoid (visualized by
DAPI fluorescence in the Current Research Highlight).
Unlike the round, compact nucleus of eukaryotic cells, the
bacterial nucleoid is not enclosed by a membrane. In fact,
loops of DNA extend throughout the cytoplasm. The DNA
is transcribed by RNA polymerase to form messenger RNA
(mRNA), as well as transfer RNA (tRNA) and ribosomal
RNA (rRNA). As the mRNA transcripts grow, they bind
ribosomes to start synthesizing polypeptide chains. As the
polypeptides grow, protein complexes called chaperones
help them fold into their functional conformations. The
concept of information flow from DNA to RNA to protein
is presented in Chapters 7–10.
How can we know how all the cell parts shown in
Figure 3.1 interact and work together? Fluorescence

microscopy can show us how the nucleoid DNA expands
as the cell grows. As we learned in Chapter 2, fluorescence
can pinpoint a molecule or complex within a cell, such as
the Z-ring where the cell divides (see the Current Research
Highlight). But to visualize the cell’s interior as a whole
requires higher resolution, as in electron microscopy.

Biochemical Composition of Bacteria

The bacterial cell model in Figure 3.1 represents the
shape and size of cell parts but tells us little about the
chemistry of the cell, or of the cell’s environment. Chemistry explains, for example, why wiping a surface with ethanol kills microbes, whereas water has little effect. Water
is a universal constituent of cytoplasm but is excluded by
cell membranes. Ethanol, however, dissolves both polar
and nonpolar substances; thus, ethanol disintegrates
membranes and destroys the folded structure of proteins.
For a review of elementary chemistry, see eAppendix 1.
All cells share common chemical components:


Water, the fundamental solvent of life



Essential ions, such as potassium, magnesium, and
chloride ions



Small organic molecules, such as lipids and sugars, that
are incorporated into cell structures and that provide
nutrition by catabolism



Macromolecules, such as nucleic acids and proteins,
that contain information, catalyze reactions, and mediate transport, among many other functions

The details of bacterial chemistry emerged in the 1950s
through pioneering studies by Fred Neidhardt at the University of Michigan, and many colleagues. Cell composition varies with species, growth phase, and environmental
conditions (as we will see in later chapters). Table 3.1 summarizes the chemical components of a cell for the model
bacterium Escherichia coli during exponential growth.
Small molecules and ions. The E. coli cell consists of about
70% water, the essential solvent required to carry out fundamental metabolic reactions and to stabilize proteins.
The water solution contains inorganic ions, predominantly potassium, magnesium, and phosphate. Inorganic
ions store energy in the form of transmembrane gradients, and they serve essential roles in enzymes. For example, a magnesium ion is required at the active site of RNA
polymerase to help catalyze the linking of ribonucleotides
into RNA.
The cell also contains many kinds of small charged
organic molecules, such as phospholipids and enzyme
cofactors. A major class of organic cations is the polyamines, molecules with multiple amine groups that are

CHAPTER 3



CELL STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION



81

TABLE 3.1,Molecules of a Bacterial Cell, Escherichia coli, During Balanced Exponential Growtha
Component

Percentage of
total weightb

Approximate number
of molecules/cell

Water

70

20,000,000,000

Proteins

16

2,400,000

rRNA, tRNA, and other small RNA (sRNA) molecules

6

250,000

mRNA

0.7

Number of
different kinds
1
4,000c

RNA:
4,000

200
2,000c

Lipids:
Phospholipids (membrane)
Lipopolysaccharides (outer membrane)

3

25,000,000

1

1,400,000

DNA

1

Metabolites and biosynthetic precursors

1.3

2d
50,000,000

50
1
1
1,000

Peptidoglycan (murein sacculus)

0.8

1

1

Inorganic ions

0.1

250,000,000

20

Polyamines (mainly putrescine and spermidine)

0.1

6,700,000

2

a

Values shown are for a hypothetical “average” cell cultured with aeration in glucose medium with minimal salts at 37°C.

b

The total weight of the cell (including water) is about 10–12 gram (g), or 1 picogram (pg).

c

The number of different kinds is difficult to estimate for proteins and mRNA because some genes are transcribed at extremely low levels and because proteins and RNA include
kinds that are rapidly degraded.
d

In rapidly growing cells, cell fission typically lags approximately one generation behind DNA replication—hence, two identical DNA copies per cell.

Source: Modified from F. Neidhardt and H. E. Umbarger. 1996. Chemical composition of Escherichia coli, p. 14. In F. C. Neidhardt (ed.), Escherichia coli and Salmonella: Cellular
and Molecular Biology, 2nd ed. ASM Press, Washington, DC.

positively charged when the pH is near neutral. Polyamines
balance the negative charges of the cell’s DNA and stabilize
ribosomes during translation.
Macromolecules. Many cells have similar content of water

and small molecules, but their specific character is defi ned
by their macromolecules, especially their nucleic acids
(DNA and RNA) and their proteins. DNA and RNA
molecules can be isolated by size using agarose gel electrophoresis, in which the negatively charged molecules
migrate in an electrical field (see eAppendix 3). The nucleic
acid content of bacteria is relatively high, nearly 8% for
E. coli—much higher than in multicellular eukaryotes. For
microbes, the high nucleic acid content allows the cell to
maximize reproduction of its chromosome while minimizing cell resources.
The high proportion of nucleic acids actually makes
bacterial cells inedible for humans, who lack the enzymes
to digest the uric acid waste product of digested nucleotides. That is why we cannot eat most kinds of bacteria as a
major part of our diet. Nevertheless, we do consume bacteria within vegetables, as all plants have bacteria growing
within their transport tissues.
The cell’s genomic DNA directs expression of its proteins
(discussed in Chapters 7–10). A given cell uses different

genes to make different proteins, depending on environmental conditions such as temperature, nutrient levels, and
entry into a host organism. Individual proteins are made
in very different amounts, from 10 per cell to 10,000 per
cell. The proteins expressed by a cell under given conditions are known collectively as a proteome. (We discuss the
proteome in Chapter 8, as a function of the DNA genome
and RNA transcriptome.) Other kinds of macromolecules
are found in the cell wall and outer membrane. The bacterial cell wall consists of peptidoglycan, an organic polymer
of peptide-linked sugars that constitutes nearly 1% of the
cell mass, approximately the same mass as that of DNA.
Peptidoglycan limits the volume of the enclosed cell, so as
water rushes in, it generates turgor pressure. This investment of biomass in the cell wall shows the importance (for
most species) of maintaining turgor pressure in dilute environments, where water would otherwise enter by osmosis,
causing osmotic shock (see Appendix 1 and Section 3.2).

Thought Question

3.1 Which chemicals do we find in the greatest number in a

bacterial cell? The smallest number? Why does a cell contain
100 times as many lipid molecules as strands of RNA?

82



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

Cell Fractionation

Cell fractionation (Fig. 3.2) is how we separate cellular
components such as membranes, ribosomes, and flagella.
We can study these isolated parts in detail, though we lose
information about interactions with other parts of the cell.
1. EDTA weakens
outer membrane,
and sucrose enters
periplasm.

Outer membrane
Cell wall
Inner membrane
Cytoplasm

2. Lysozyme breaks
down cell wall.

Spheroplasts

PNAS 108:6264

3. Water dilution
shocks outer membrane;
periplasm leaks out.

4. Ultracentrifuge

Outer membrane
vesicles
Spheroplast
remains

200,000 g

Pellet contains:
Cytoplasm
Spheroplasts
Outer membrane

Supernatant
contains:
Periplasm

Pellet contains:
Inner membrane
Outer membrane

Supernatant
contains:
Cytoplasm

Chaperones
for extreme
stress

5. French press

6. Ultracentrifuge

FtsZ for
cell division
studies
300,000 g

7. Density gradient
ultracentrifugation

Higher-density band:
Outer membrane
OMP vaccine
candidates

FIGURE 3.2

Lower-density band:
Inner membrane
Cytochromes
for bioelectricity

 Fractionation of Gram-negative cells. Cell
periplasm fills with sucrose, and lysozyme breaks down the cell wall.
Dilution in water causes osmotic shock to the outer membrane, and
periplasmic proteins leak out. Subsequent centrifugation steps separate
the proteins of the periplasm, cytoplasm, and inner and outer membranes. Photo Source: Lars D. Rennera and Douglas B. Weibel. PNAS 108(15):6264.

Cell fractionation also provides purified proteins that act
as antigens for candidate vaccines. For example, a vaccine
against Neisseria meningitidis type B (meningococcus)
contains a highly immunogenic outer membrane protein.
How can we disassemble a cell to isolate its parts?
Early-twentieth-century microbiologists wondered how
to separate cell parts, without all the molecules mixing
together. The answer was ultracentrifugation, the separation of molecules subject to high g forces (explained
in eAppendix 3). Mary Jane Osborn at the University of
Connecticut Health Center discovered that the inner and
outer membranes of Gram-negative bacteria have different
densities, and thus can be separated by density gradient
ultracentrifugation.
Cell fractionation requires techniques that lyse (break
open) the cell. The lysis method must generate enough
force to separate the membrane lipids (held together by
hydrophobic force) but not enough to disintegrate complexes of protein and RNA. For a Gram-negative cell, the
method requires further specificity to separate “compartments” containing different sets of proteins: the inner
and outer membranes, and the aqueous cytoplasm and
periplasm.
Cell wall lysis and spheroplast formation. First, we suspend the cells in a sucrose solution containing ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), a molecule whose charged
groups disrupt the outer membrane (Fig. 3.2, step 1).
The disrupted membrane allows sucrose to cross. Sucrose
fi lls the periplasm, maintaining an osmotically stable solution. Next, lysozyme cleaves peptidoglycan and thus breaks
down the cell wall (step 2). Lacking the turgid cell wall, the
cell swells into a sphere called a spheroplast.
The periplasm of the spheroplasts then undergoes
osmotic shock, by transfer to distilled water (step 3). Water
rushes in through the EDTA-weakened outer membrane,
and the periplasm leaks out into the extracellular medium.
Note that other means of cell disruption may work better for other kinds of cells. Mild-detergent lysis can dissolve
membranes without denaturing proteins. Alternatively,
sonication is a way to lyse a cell by intense ultrasonic vibrations that are above the range of human hearing. For especially tough cells, such as cyanobacteria, a “bead beater”
with microscopic glass beads can tear the cells open.
Ultracentrifugation. A key tool of cell fractionation is the

ultracentrifuge, a device in which tubes containing solutions of cell components are spun at very high speed.
The high rotation rate generates centrifugal forces strong
enough to separate subcellular particles (see eAppendix 3).
The particles are collected in fractions of sample from
the tube, and then the fractions are observed by electron
microscopy.

CHAPTER 3

130
95
72
55
36
28
17

THEIN, ET AL. 2010. JOURNAL OF PROTEOME RESEARCH, 9:6135.

A.
Outer
Molecular Total
cell membrane
weight
protein protein
(kDa)



CELL STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION



83

B.

SDS-PAGE
protein band
?

Unknown protein

Tryptic peptides
Purification

Triptic digest

Protein sequence
DTHKSEIAHRFKDLG
EEHFKGLVLIAFSQYL
QQCPFDEHVKLVNEL
TEFAKTCVADESHAG
CEKSLHTLFGDELCK
VASLRETYGDMADCCEK

Mass spectrum

Theoretical tryptic peptides
DTHK
SEIAHR
FK
DLGEEHFK
GLVLIAFSQYLQQCPFDEHVK
LVNELTEFAK
TCVADESHAGCEK
SLHTLFGDELCK
VASLR
ETYGDMADCCEK

Theoretical
mass spectrum

Identification via
database search

FIGURE 3.3  Protein analysis. A. Gel electrophoresis of total cell proteins compared to outer membrane proteins from cell fractionation. B. Outer membrane proteins are identified by tryptic digest and mass spectrum analysis. The resulting peptide sequence is compared
with those predicted from genome data.

Following osmotic shock, ultracentrifugation of the
spheroplasts (Fig. 3.2, step 4) separates the periplasmic contents from the other three types of cell compartments (cytoplasm, inner membrane, and outer membrane
fragments, which form vesicles). The periplasm is a valuable source of interesting proteins such as sugar transporters and chaperones (proteins that help other proteins fold
under stress).
Spheroplast lysis. The pellet can now be further pro-

cessed by a French press (Fig. 3.2, step 5), a device that
squeezes cell contents through a narrow tube to break open
the membranes. The broken membranes coalesce into tiny
vesicles. A second step of ultracentrifugation now pellets
the inner and outer membrane vesicles, while removing the
cytoplasm in the supernatant (step 6). The cytoplasm provides many types of proteins for study, such as FtsZ, as well
as complexes (multiprotein structures) such as the ribosomes and DNA polymerases.
Finally, the membrane fraction contains a mixture of
very different components of the inner membrane (such
as electron transport proteins) and the outer membrane
(such as cell-surface proteins that we could use to make
vaccines). We can separate the inner and outer membranes by density gradient ultracentrifugation (step 7).
The gradient of solution density is generated by forming a gradient of sucrose concentration. In the gradient,
the inner and outer membrane vesicles separate because
of differences in their density, not their particle size. The
lower-density fractions contain inner membrane vesicles,

whereas the higher-density fractions contain outer membrane vesicles.
The membrane vesicle proteins are analyzed on electrophoretic gels (Fig. 3.3). We can identify the protein bands
on the gel by enzyme digest and mass spectroscopy. The
enzyme trypsin cleaves proteins only at aminoacyl residues lysine or arginine, thus generating peptides of defined
composition. The peptide mass sizes are used to identify
the cleaved protein, based on comparison with the protein
sequence predicted by the organism’s genome.
Thought Question

3.2 Suppose we wish to isolate flagellar motors, which are

protein complexes that span the envelope from inner membrane to outer membrane (Fig. 3.1). How might we modify the
cell fractionation procedure?

Genetic Analysis

A limitation of cell fractionation is that it provides little
information about processes that require an intact cell,
such as cell division. How can we remove or alter a part of a
cell without breaking it open?
An approach that is complementary to cell fractionation is genetic analysis (discussed in detail in Chapters 7–12). In genetic analysis, we can mutate a strain so
as to lose or alter a gene; then we select mutant strains
for loss of a given function. The phenotype of the mutant
cell may yield clues about the function of the altered part.

84



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL
B.

A.

FtsZ

J. STRICKER AND H. ERICKSON 2003. J. BACTERIOL 185:4796.

D45A Cells elongate
without dividing;
form Z-spirals.

D45A

D212A

5 µm

D212A Cells elongate
with no Z-ring; cytoplasm
blebs out the side.

FIGURE 3.4  Genetic analysis of FtsZ. A. E. coli with aspartate (D) at position 45 replaced by alanine (A) (D45A) elongate abnormally,
forming blebs from the side, with no Z-rings. Cells with aspartate replaced by alanine at position 212 (D212A) elongate to form extended
nondividing cells that contain spiral FtsZ complexes. FtsZ was visualized by immunofluorescence. B. Model of FtsZ protein monomer based on
X-ray crystallography shows the position of the mutant residues, D212A and D45A.

For example, Figure 3.4A shows what happens to E. coli
cells containing mutations in the gene encoding FtsZ. In
certain strains, the ftsZ gene has one base pair altered by
site-directed mutagenesis (see Chapter 12) so as to replace
aspartate (D) at position 212 with alanine (A), designated D212A. The effect is to remove a negative charge at
a defined position on FtsZ (Fig. 3.4B). As a result, cells
extend into long filaments while failing to divide, and the
FtsZ protein forms abnormal spiral complexes. A different mutant has aspartate replaced by alanine at position
45. The position-45 mutant cells elongate while forming
abnormal blebs of cytoplasm off the side of the cell where
fission fails. These experiments reveal functional parts of
the FtsZ structure and clues to the formation of the Z-ring.
Different kinds of experimental methods may complement each other, to confirm or extend the conclusions from
each. Another example is the analysis of the ribosome by
cell fractionation, crystallography, and genetic analysis.
Ribosome analysis is presented in eTopic 3.1.

To Summarize




Bacterial cells are protected by a thick cell envelope. The
envelope includes a cell membrane and a peptidoglycan cell
wall. A Gram-negative cell includes an outer membrane,
and the cell membrane is called the inner membrane.
Bacteria are composed of nucleic acids, proteins,
phospholipids, and other organic and inorganic
chemicals. Proteins in the cell vary, depending on the
species and environmental conditions.









The bacterial cytoplasm is highly structured. DNA
replication, RNA transcription, and protein synthesis
occur coordinately within the cytoplasm.
Microscopy reveals cell structure. Transmission electron microscopy shows how cell parts fit within the cell
as a whole. Fluorescence microscopy reveals the location
and dynamics of individual components.
Cell fractionation isolates cell parts for structural and
biochemical analysis. The compartments of a Gram-negative cell can be separated by cell lysis and ultracentrifugation.
Genetic analysis of mutants reveals functions of cell
parts. Genetic analysis complements cell fractionation.

3.2

The Cell Membrane
and Transport

How does a cell distinguish “itself” from what is outside? The structure that defines the existence of a cell is
the cell membrane (Fig. 3.5). Overall, the membrane contains the cytoplasm within the external medium, mediating
exchange between the two. The cell membrane consists of
a phospholipid bilayer containing lipid-soluble proteins. It
behaves as a two-dimensional fluid, within which proteins
and lipids can diffuse. The proteins form about half the
mass of the membrane and provide specific functions, such
as nutrient transport. For review of elementary cell structure, see eAppendix 2.

CHAPTER 3

Phospholipid

Transporter
protein

Proton-driven
ATP synthase

Cytoplasm

FIGURE 3.5  Bacterial cell membrane. The cell membrane
consists of a phospholipid bilayer, with hydrophobic fatty acid chains
directed inward, away from water. The bilayer contains stiffening
agents such as hopanoids. Half the membrane volume consists of
proteins.

Membrane Lipids



85

Membrane Proteins

Most membrane lipids are phospholipids. A phospholipid
possesses a charged phosphoryl “head” that contacts the
water interface, as well as a hydrophobic “tail” of fatty acids
packed within the bilayer. Lipid biosynthesis is a key process that is vulnerable to antibiotics. For example, the bacterial enzyme enoyl reductase, which synthesizes fatty acids
(discussed in Chapter 15) is the target of triclosan, a common antibacterial additive in detergents and cosmetics.
A.

CELL STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION

A typical phospholipid consists of glycerol with ester
links to two fatty acids and a phosphoryl polar head group,
which at neutral pH is deprotonated (negatively charged)
(Fig. 3.6). This kind of phospholipid is called a phosphatidate. The negatively charged head group of the phosphatidate can contain various organic groups, such as glycerol to
form phosphatidylglycerol (Fig. 3.6A). In other lipids, the
polar head group has a side chain with positive charge. The
positive charge commonly resides on an amine group, such
as ethanolamine in phosphatidylethanolamine (Fig. 3.6B).
Phospholipids with positive charge or with mixed charges
are concentrated in portions of the membrane that interact
with DNA, which has negative charge.
In the bilayer, all phospholipids face each other tail to
tail, keeping their hydrophobic side chains away from the
water inside and outside the cell. The two layers of phospholipids in the bilayer are called leaflets. One leaflet of phospholipids faces the cell interior; the other faces the exterior.
As a whole, the phospholipid bilayer imparts fluidity and
gives the membrane a consistent thickness (about 8 nm).

Extracellular environment

Hopanoid



Membrane proteins serve functions such as transport, communication with the environment, and structural support.


Structural support. Some membrane proteins anchor
together different layers of the cell envelope (discussed
in Section 3.3). Other proteins attach the membrane to
the cytoskeleton, or form the base of structures extending out from the cell, such as flagella.

B.
H
HC

OH

HC

OH

HC

H

H3N+

Terminal
glyceride
group

CH2

O
O

P

H

H

O

C

C

C

O

O

H

CO

CO

–

H
Ester
link

Ethanolamine
group

CH2
O

O

O

P

H

H

O

C

C

C

O

O

H

CO

CO

–

H

O

Phosphoryl
head group

H

Glycerol
derivative

Fatty acid
side chains

Phosphatidylglycerol

FIGURE 3.6

Phosphatidylethanolamine

 Phospholipids. A. Phosphatidylglycerol consists of glycerol with ester links to two fatty acids, and a phosphoryl group
linked to a terminal glycerol. B. Phosphatidylethanolamine contains a glycerol linked to two fatty acids, and a phosphoryl group with a terminal
ethanolamine. The ethanolamine carries a positive charge.









PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

Detection of environmental signals. In Vibrio cholerae, the causative agent of cholera, the membrane
protein ToxR detects acidity and elevated temperature—
signs that the bacteria is in the host’s digestive tract. The
ToxR domain facing the cytoplasm then binds to a DNA
sequence, activating expression of cholera toxin.
Secretion of virulence factors and communication
signals. Membrane protein complexes export toxins and
cell signals across the envelope. For example, symbiotic
nitrogen-fixing rhizobia require membrane proteins
NodI and NodJ to transport nodulation signals out to
the host plant roots, inducing the plant to form root
nodules containing the bacteria.
Ion transport and energy storage. Transport proteins
manage ion flux between the cell and the exterior. Ion
transport generates gradients that store energy.

An example of a bacterial membrane protein is the leucine transporter LeuT (Fig. 3.7). LeuT drives uptake of
leucine, coupled to a gradient of sodium ions. The protein complex was purified for X-ray diffraction from Aquifex aeolicus, a thermophile whose heat-stable proteins form
durable crystals. Remarkably, LeuT is homologous (shares
common ancestry) with a human neuron protein that transports neurotransmitters. Thus, this bacterial protein serves
as a model for study of neuron function.
Proteins embedded in a membrane require a hydrophobic portion that is soluble within the membrane. Typically,
several hydrophobic alpha helices thread back and forth
through the membrane. Other peptide regions extend

outside the membrane, containing charged and polar
amino acids that interact favorably with water. Figure 3.7
shows the LeuT charge distribution. Hydrophobic amino
acid residues (white) make the protein soluble in the membrane, while portions with negative charge (red) and positive charge (blue) lock the protein in.

Transport across the Cell Membrane

The cell membrane acts as a barrier to keep water-soluble
proteins and other cell components within the cytoplasm.
But how do nutrients from outside get into the cell—and
how do secreted products such as toxins get out? Specific
membrane proteins transport molecules across the membrane between the cytoplasm and the outside. Selective
transport is essential for cell survival; it means the ability
to acquire scarce nutrients, exclude waste, and transmit signals to neighbor cells.
Passive diffusion. Small uncharged molecules, such as
O2 , CO2 , and water, easily permeate the membrane.
Some molecules, such as ethanol, also disrupt the
membrane—an action that can make such molecules
toxic to cells. By contrast, large, strongly polar molecules
such as sugars, and charged molecules such as amino
acids, generally cannot penetrate the hydrophobic interior of the membrane, and thus require transport by specific proteins. Water molecules permeate the membrane,
but their rate of passage is increased by protein channels
called aquaporins.

Na+/Leucine cotransporter (LeuT)
Extracellular space
(hydrophilic)

FIGURE 3.7

 A cell membrane–
embedded transport protein: the
LeuT sodium/leucine cotransporter
of Aquifex bacteria. The protein

Approx. 4 nm

Membrane
(hydrophobic)

1 µm

Intracellular space
(hydrophilic)

Negative charge

Positive charge

complex carries leucine across the cell
membrane into the cytoplasm, coupled
to sodium ion influx. (PDB code: 3F3E)
Inset: Aquifex aeolicus grows at 96°C in
hot springs. Source: Karl Stetter and Reinhardt

Rachel, U. Regensburg, Germany.

STETTER AND R. RACHEL, UNIVERSITY OF
REGENSBURG, GERMANY

86

CHAPTER 3
Osmosis. Most cells maintain a concentration of total sol-

utes (molecules in solution) that is higher inside the cell
than outside. As a result, the internal concentration of
water is lower than the concentration outside the cell.
Because water can cross the membrane but charged solutes cannot, water tends to diffuse across the membrane
into the cell, causing the expansion of cell volume, in a
process called osmosis. The resulting pressure on the cell
membrane is called osmotic pressure (see figure in Appendix 1). Osmotic pressure will cause a cell to burst, or lyse,
in the absence of a countering pressure such as that provided by the cell wall. That is how bacteria are killed by
penicillin, which disrupts cell wall synthesis.
Membrane-permeant weak acids and bases. A special case of movement across cell membranes is that
of membrane-permeant weak acids and weak bases
(Fig. 3.8), which exist in equilibrium between charged
and uncharged forms:

Weak acid: HA H+ + A–
Weak base: B + H 2O BH+ + OH–
Membrane-permeant weak acids and weak bases cross the
membrane in their uncharged form: HA (weak acid) or B
(weak base). On the other side, entering the aqueous cytoplasm, the acid dissociates (HA to A– and H+) or the base
reassociates with H+ (B to BH+). In effect, membranepermeant acids conduct acid (H+) across the membrane,



CELL STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION



87

causing acid stress; similarly, membrane-permeant bases
conduct OH– across the membrane, causing alkali stress.
If the H+ concentration (acidity) outside the cell is greater
than inside, it will drive weak acids into the cell.
Many key substances in cellular metabolism are
membrane-permeant weak acids and bases, such as acetic acid. Most pharmaceutical drugs—therapeutic agents
delivered to our tissues via the bloodstream—are weak
acids or bases whose uncharged forms exist at sufficiently low concentration to cross the membrane without
disrupting it. Examples of weak acids that deprotonate
(acquiring negative charge) at neutral pH include aspirin
(acetylsalicylic acid) and penicillin (Fig. 3.8A). Examples
of weak bases that protonate (acquiring positive charge)
at neutral pH include Prozac (fluoxetine) and tetracycline
(Fig. 3.8B).
Thought Question

3.3 Amino acids have acidic and basic groups that can dissociate. Why are they not membrane-permeant weak acids
or weak bases? Why do they fail to cross the phospholipid
bilayer?

Transmembrane ion gradients. Molecules that carry a

fi xed charge, such as hydrogen and sodium ions (H+ and
Na+), cannot cross the phospholipid bilayer. Such ions

A.
Protonated weak acid (HA) crosses membrane. Deprotonated from
(A”) does not.

Membranesoluble

O

O
C

OH
O

C

CH3

Watersoluble

C O– + H+
…

H3C

O

O
CH3 C
S

O
C

OH

O

_

+ H+

N
O
O

Aspirin

NHC
Penicillin

R

B.
N
HO CH3
F3C

O CHCH2CH2NHCH3 + H+

+

FIGURE 3.8

Prozac (fluoxetine)

H

NH2CH3
…

Membranesoluble

CH3

H3C

Weak base (B) crosses membrane. Protonated weak base
(BH+) does not.

Watersoluble

+ H+

H3C

+

N

CH3
H

OH
NH2

OH O HO

O
OH
Tetracycline

O

 Common drugs are membrane-permeant weak acids and bases. In its charged form (A– or BH+), each drug is soluble
in the bloodstream. The uncharged form (HA or B) is hydrophobic and penetrates the cell membrane.



PART 1

A.
H



THE MICROBIAL CELL

H

H

H

C

C

C

O
O– P

O

H

H

C

C

C

O

O

H

C OC O

H

P

O–

O

O
H

C.

H

1 µm

Cardiolipin

O

OH
O

B.

H

C
H

H

H

C

C

O

O

H

C OC O

TATYANA ROMANTSOV, ET AL. 2007. MD MICROBIOL 64:1455

88

DNA
(DAPI stain)

Cardiolipin (diphosphatidylglycerol)

FIGURE 3.9

Cardiolipin localizes to the poles. A. Cardiolipin is a double phospholipid joined by a third glycerol. B. A space-filling
model of cardiolipin shows its triangular shape. C. Cardiolipin localizes to the bacterial cell poles, as shown by microscopy with a cardiolipinspecific fluorophore.


usually exist in very different concentrations inside and
outside the cell. An ion gradient (ratio of ion concentrations) across the cell membrane can store energy for nutrition or to drive the transport of other molecules. Inorganic
ions require transport through specific transport proteins, or transporters. So, too, do organic molecules that
carry a charge at cytoplasmic pH, such as amino acids and
vitamins. Transport may be passive or active. In passive
transport, molecules accumulate or dissipate along their
concentration gradient. Active transport—that is, transport from lower to higher concentration—requires cells
to spend energy. A transporter protein obtains energy
for active transport by cotransport of another substance
down its gradient from higher to lower concentration, or
by coupling transport to a chemical reaction (discussed in
Chapter 4).

Membrane Lipid Diversity

Membranes require a uniform thickness and stability to
maintain structural integrity and function. So why do individual membrane lipids differ in structure? Different environments favor different forms of membrane lipids. For
example, lipid structure helps determine whether an organism can grow in a hot spring, or whether it can colonize
human lungs.
Environmental stress. Starvation stress increases bacte-

rial production of lipids with an unusual type of phosphoryl head group. Cardiolipin, or diphosphatidylglycerol,

is actually a double phospholipid linked by a glycerol
(Fig. 3.9A). Cardiolipin concentration increases in bacteria grown to starvation or stationary phase (discussed
in Chapter 4). Within a cell, cardiolipin does not diffuse
at random; it concentrates in patches called “domains”
near the cell poles. The polar localization of cardiolipin
was demonstrated by fluorescence microscopy, in which a
cardiolipin-specific fluorophore localized to the poles of
E. coli (Fig. 3.9B). The “wedge” shape of cardiolipin, with
its narrow head group and wide fatty acid group, is thought
to form concave domains of lipid that stabilize the curve
of the polar membrane. Cardiolipin may enhance the formation of smaller cells during starvation. How does this
benefit the cell? At the cell pole (Fig. 3.9C), cardiolipin
binds certain environmental stress proteins, such as a protein that transports osmoprotectants when the cell is under
osmotic stress. Thus, a phospholipid can have specific functions associated with specific membrane proteins.
The fatty acid component of phospholipids also varies.
The most common bacterial fatty acids are hydrogenated
chains of varying length, typically between 6 and 22 carbons. But some fatty acid chains are partly unsaturated
(possess one or more carbon-carbon double bonds). Most
unsaturated bonds in membranes are cis, meaning that both
alkyl chains are on the same side of the bond, so the unsaturated chain has a “kink,” as in the cis form of oleic acid
(Fig. 3.10). Because the kinked chains do not pack as closely
as the straight hydrocarbon chains do, the membrane is
more “fluid.” This is why, at room temperature, unsaturated
vegetable oils are fluid, whereas highly saturated butterfat

CHAPTER 3
Palmitic
acid

Oleic
acid (trans)

HO

HO
O

Oleic
acid (cis)

Cyclopropane
fatty acid

HO
O



CELL STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION

HO
HO

OH
OH



OH
OH

HO
HO

89

OH
OH

HO
O

O

HO
HO

FIGURE 3.10

HO
HO



FIGURE 3.11

Phospholipid side chains.



OH
OH

HO
HO

OH
OH

Hopanoids add strength to membranes.

Hopanoids limit the motion of phospholipid tails, thus stiffening the
membrane.

is solid. The enhanced fluidity of a kinked phospholipid
link, C–O–C (Fig. 3.12). Ethers are much more stable than
improves the function of the membrane at low temperature;
esters, which hydrolyze easily in water. This is one reason
hence, bacteria can respond to cold and heat by increasing
why some archaea can grow at higher temperatures than all
or decreasing their synthesis of unsaturated phospholipids.
other forms of life. Another modification is that archaeal
Another interesting structural variation is cyclizahydrocarbon chains are branched terpenoids, polymeric
tion of part of the chain to form a stiff planar ring with
structures derived from isoprene, in which every fourth cardecreased fluidity. The double bond of unsaturated
bon extends a methyl branch. The branches strengthen the
fatty acids can incorporate a carbon from S-adenosylmembrane by limiting movement of the hydrocarbon chains.
L-methionine to form a three-membered ring, generatThe most extreme hyperthermophiles, which live
ing a cyclopropane fatty acid (Fig. 3.10). Bacteria convert
beneath the ocean at 110°C, have terpenoid chains linked
unsaturated fatty acids to cyclopropane during starvation
at the tails, forming a tetraether monolayer. In some speand acid stress, conditions under which membranes require
cies, the terpenoids cyclize to form cyclopentane rings.
stiffening. Cyclopropane conversion is an important factor
These planar rings stiffen the membrane under stress to an
in the pathogenesis of Mycobacterium tuberculosis and in
even greater extent than the cyclopropyl chains of bacteria.
the acid resistance of food-borne toxigenic E. coli.
For more on archaeal cells, see Chapter 19.
In addition to phospholipids, membranes include planar
molecules that fill gaps between hydrocarbon
chains. These stiff, planar molecules reinforce
O
the membrane, much as steel rods reinforce
O
concrete. In eukaryotic membranes, the rein- HO
Glycerol diether
forcing agents are sterols, such as cholesterol.
In some bacteria, the same function is filled by
Diethers condensed here
OH
pentacyclic (five-ring) hydrocarbon derivatives
O
O
called hopanoids, or hopanes (Fig. 3.11).
O
O
Like cholesterol, hopanoids fit between the HO
fatty acid side chains of membranes and limit
Diglycerol tetraether
their motion, thus stiffening the membrane.
Hopanoids appear in geological sediments,
Isoprene cyclized to cyclopentane
H2C O
where they indicate ancient bacterial decompo_
CH2 OH
sition; they provide useful data for petroleum
O
HC O
exploration.
O CH
O

O P

_

Archaea have unique membrane lipids. The

membrane lipids of archaea differ fundamentally from those of bacteria and of eukaryotes.
All archaeal phospholipids replace the ester link
between glycerol and fatty acid with an ether

CH2

O

O
Cyclopentane rings

FIGURE 3.12

CH2

 Terpene-derived lipids of archaea. In archaea, the hydrocarbon chains are ether-linked to glycerol, and every fourth carbon has a methyl
branch. In some archaea, the tails of the two facing lipids of the bilayer are fused,
forming tetraethers; thus, the entire membrane consists of a monolayer.

90



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

Interestingly, both hopanoids and cholesterol are synthesized from the same precursor molecules as the unique lipids of archaea (Fig. 3.13). It may be that hopanoids and
cholesterol persist in bacteria and eukaryotes as derivatives
of lipids that were once possessed by a common ancestor of
all three domains.

FIGURE 3.13

 Synthesis
of terpene-derived lipids.

Isoprene
OH
O P

Archaea synthesize their
membrane lipids from
isoprene chains, to form
terpenoids such as squalene.
In bacteria and eukaryotes,
squalene is converted to cholesterol; and in some bacteria,
squalene cyclizes to form
hopanes (hopanoids).

O
O

P

O–

O
OH
Isopentenyl pyrophosphate

To Summarize

OH
O P















The cell membrane consists of a phospholipid bilayer
containing hydrophobic membrane proteins. Membrane
proteins serve diverse functions, including transport,
cell defense, and cell communication.
Small uncharged molecules, such as oxygen, can penetrate the cell membrane by diffusion.
Membrane-permeant weak acids and weak bases exist
partly in an uncharged form that can diffuse across the
membrane and increase or decrease, respectively, the H+
concentration within the cell.
Polar molecules and charged molecules require
membrane proteins to mediate transport. Such
facilitated transport can be active or
passive.
Ion gradients generated by membrane pumps store energy for
cell functions. Active transport HO
(up the concentration gradient)
requires input of energy, whereas
passive transport (down a gradient) does not.
Diverse fatty acids are found in different microbial species and in microbes
adapted to different environments.

O P

O–

O
OH
Geranyl pyrophosphate (terpene)
Double length with
saturated double bonds
Squalene
(6 isoprene = triterpene)

CH2

OH

O CH
O

CH2

Branched lipid ether
(archaeal membranes)
O
Squalene epoxide
Cyclization
H

H

H
H

H

H
H

Cholesterol

Archaeal membranes have ether-linked terpenoids,
which confer increased stability at high temperature and
extreme acidity. Some archaea have diglycerol tetraethers, which form a monolayer.

3.3

O

The Cell Wall and
Outer Layers

How do bacteria and archaea protect their cell membrane? For most species, the cell envelope includes at least
one structural supporting layer, like an external skeleton,
located outside the cell membrane. The most common

Hopane

structural support is the cell wall (see Fig. 3.1). Many species possess additional coverings, such as an outer membrane or an S-layer. Nevertheless, a few prokaryotes, such
as the mycoplasmas, have a cell membrane with no outer
layers, depending on host fluids for osmotic balance. Some
archaea with only a cell membrane grow in extreme acid
(pH zero); how they survive is unknown.

The Cell Wall Is a Single Molecule

The bacterial cell wall, also known as the sacculus, consists of a single interlinked molecule that envelops the cell.
The sacculus has been isolated from E. coli and visualized
by TEM; in Figure 3.14A, the isolated sacculus appears
flattened on the sample grid like a deflated balloon. Its

CHAPTER 3
A.



CELL STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION



91

FIGURE 3.14

 The peptidoglycan sacculus and peptidoglycan cross-bridge formation. A. Isolated sacculus from Esch-

FEMS MICROBIOLOGY REVIEWS/OXFORD
JOURNALS. 32(2): 149, FIG 3A

erichia coli (TEM). B. A disaccharide unit of glycan has an attached
peptide of four to six amino acids.

5 µm

N-Acetylglucosamine N-Acetylmuramic acid

B.
H
HO

CH2OH
O
OH H

H
O

C

H
CH3

O
m-Diaminopimelic
D-Alanine
acid

G
M

H3C

G
L-Alanine
D-Glutamic

CH NH
COOH

L-Alanine

acid

C

acid

O

O

M

D-Glutamic

C

NH

C

CH3

C

CH

O

O
H
HO

CH2OH
O
OH
H

H

H
O

H

H

NH
C

CH2OH
O OH

H
CH3

O
N-Acetylglucosamine

NH

CH C

NH

CH

(CH2)2

(CH2)3

O
L-Alanine

O
D-Glutamic

acid

H

NH
C

COOH

COOH

CH C

NH

CHCH3

C

CH NH

C

CH3

O

CH2

NH

CH3

CH3

O

COOH

CH2

m-Diaminopimelic acid

NH

L-Alanine

(CH2)2

CH2

H

C
O

O
CH NH

H

H

NH

H

CH2OH
O OH

CHCOOH
H3C

CH C

NH

CH

NH
C O

Peptide cross-bridge
forms with release of
D-alanine. Blocked by
penicillin.

O
m-Diaminopimelic
acid

H3C

D-Alanine

Vancomycin binds
D-Ala-D-Ala and blocks
cross-bridge formation.

+

NH2

CH

O–
C O

Terminal D-alanine
was released.

CH3

O
N-Acetylmuramic acid

geometrical structure encloses maximal volume with minimal surface area. The sacculus—unlike the membrane—is
a single-molecule cage-like structure, highly porous to ions
and organic molecules. The mesh grows by strand insertion
and elongation in arcs around the cell. The cage-like form
is not rigid; it is more like a flexible mesh bag with unbreakable joints. Turgor pressure within the enclosed cytoplasm
fills out the cell’s shape, such as a rod or a spherical coccus.
Peptidoglycan structure. Most bacterial cell walls are

composed of peptidoglycan, a polymer of peptide-linked

chains of amino sugars. Peptidoglycan is synonymous with
murein (“wall molecule”). The molecule consists of parallel polymers of disaccharides called glycan chains crosslinked with peptides of four amino acids (Fig. 3.14B).
Peptidoglycan is unique to bacteria, although some archaea
build analogous structures whose overall physical nature is
similar. (Archaeal cell walls are presented in Chapter 19.)
The long chains of peptidoglycan consist of repeating
units of a disaccharide composed of N-acetylglucosamine
(an amino sugar derivative) and N-acetylmuramic acid
(glucosamine plus a lactic acid group) (Fig. 3.14B). The

92



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

lactate group of muramic acid forms an amide link with the
amino terminus of a short peptide containing four to six
amino acid residues. The peptide extension can form crossbridges connecting parallel strands of glycan.
The peptide contains two amino acids in the unusual
D mirror form: D-glutamic acid and D-alanine. The third
amino acid, m-diaminopimelic acid, has an extra amine
group, which forms an amide link to a cross-bridged peptide. The amide link forms with the fourth amino acid of
the adjacent peptide, D-alanine (1) (Fig. 3.14B). The crossbridge forms by removal of a second D-alanine (2) at the
end of the chain. The cross-linked peptides of neighboring
glycan strands form the cage of the sacculus.

Note:

Amino acids have two forms that are mirror opposites,
D and L, of which only the L form is incorporated by ribosomes into
protein. The D-form amino acids, however, are used by microbes
for many nonprotein structural molecules.

The details of peptidoglycan structure vary among bacterial species. Some Gram-positive species, such as Staphylococcus aureus (a cause of toxic shock syndrome), have
peptides linked by bridges of pentaglycine instead of the
D -alanine link to m-diaminopimelic acid. In Gram-negative
species, the m-diaminopimelic acid is linked to the outer
membrane, as discussed shortly.
Peptidoglycan synthesis as a target for antibiotics. Syn-

thesis of peptidoglycan requires many genes encoding
enzymes to make the special sugars, build the peptides,

A.
Dispersed zonal growth (E. coli, Bacillus)

and seal the cross-bridges. Many of these enzymes bind
the antibiotic penicillin and are thus known as penicillinbinding proteins. Because peptidoglycan is unique to bacteria, enzymes of peptidoglycan biosynthesis make excellent
targets for new antibiotics (see Fig. 3.14B). For example,
the transpeptidase that cross-links the peptides is the target of penicillin. Vancomycin, a major defense against Clostridium difficile and drug-resistant staphylococci, prevents
cross-bridge formation by binding the terminal D-AlaD-Ala dipeptide. Vancomycin binding prevents release of
the terminal D-alanine.
Unfortunately, the widespread use of such antibiotics
selects for evolution of resistant strains. One of the most
common agents of resistance is the enzyme beta-lactamase,
which cleaves the lactam ring of penicillin, rendering it ineffective as an inhibitor of transpeptidase. In a different mechanism, strains resistant to vancomycin contain an altered
enzyme that adds lactic acid to the end of the branch peptides in place of the terminal D-alanine. The altered peptide
is no longer blocked by vancomycin. As new forms of drug
resistance emerge, researchers continue to seek new antibiotics that target cell wall formation (discussed in Chapter 27).
How does peptidoglycan grow, overall, throughout
the elongating cell? Interestingly, different kinds of bacteria have evolved to organize their cell wall growth differently. Yves Brun and his student Erkin Kuru, at Indiana
University, devised an ingenious way to reveal the growth
pattern (Fig. 3.15). Kuru designed D-amino acids with fluorophores attached that the growing cell wall incorporates.

Pulse label (5% doubling time)

B.

Wall synthesis direction
Bacillus

Streptomyces

© JEAN-FRANC
̦OIS GOUT

Micrococcus luteus
Polar growth (Actinomycetes, Rhizobiales)

KURU E., ET AL. 2012. ANGEW CHEM INT ED ENGL. 51:1251.

Septal zonal growth (Streptococcus, Staphylococcus)

FIGURE 3.15

 Peptidoglycan growth in
different species. A. Different species of bac-

teria synthesize new peptidoglycan in dispersed
zones, at the septum only, or at the poles.
Fluorescent D-amino acids are added for short
periods (pulse labeling) to reveal the growth
zones. B. Erkin Kuru, in the laboratory of Yves
Brun at Indiana University, devised the fluorescent D-amino acids to probe cell wall growth.

CHAPTER 3

Thought Question

3.4 What other ways can you imagine that bacteria might
mutate to become resistant to vancomycin?

COURTESY OF BENOÎT ZUBER/MRC
LABORATORY OF MOLECULAR BIOLOGY

COURTESY OF BENOÎT ZUBER/MRC LABORATORY
OF MOLECULAR BIOLOGY



93

Most bacteria have additional envelope layers that provide
structural support and protection from predators and host
defenses (Fig. 3.16). Additional molecules are attached to
the cell wall and cell membrane, and some thread through
the layers. Here we present the envelope composition of
three major kinds of bacteria, two of which (Firmicutes and
Proteobacteria) are distinguished by the Gram stain. The
third, Mycobacteria, is distinguished by the acid-fast stain
(discussed in Chapter 2).


Peptidoglycan
Cell membrane

CELL STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION

Cell Envelope of Bacteria

Because these are D-amino acids and not L-amino acids, ribosome-directed translation does not use them. Thus, the fluorophores label only cell wall, not proteins. Kuru found that
bacteria such as E. coli and Bacillus subtilis synthesize cell wall
in zones dispersed throughout the cell. Gram-positive cocci,
however, such as Streptococcus and Staphylococcus, synthesize
cell wall only at the midpoint (or septum), where the cell is
about to fission (discussed in the next section). Still other
bacteria, such as the actinomycete Streptomyces, form new cell
wall only at the poles.

A. Firmicutes (Gram-positive)



Firmicutes (Gram-positive) have a thick cell wall with
3–20 layers of peptidoglycan, interpenetrated by teichoic
acids. The phylum Firmicutes consists of Gram-positive
species such as Bacillus thuringiensis and Streptococcus
pyogenes, the cause of strep throat.

B. Proteobacteria (Gram-negative)
Outer membrane
Peptidoglycan
Inner membrane
50 nm

50 nm

Glycosyl
chains

LPS
Porin

Outer
membrane

S-layer

Teichoic
acids
Lipoproteins

Peptidoglycan
Periplasm

Cell
membrane

Inner
membrane

Membrane
proteins

FIGURE 3.16  Cell envelope: Gram-positive (Firmicutes) and Gram-negative (Proteobacteria). A. Firmicutes (Gram-positive)
cells have a thick cell wall with multiple layers of peptidoglycan, threaded by teichoic acids. A inset: Gram-positive envelope of Bacillus subtilis
(TEM). B. Proteobacteria (Gram-negative) cells have a single layer of peptidoglycan covered by an outer membrane; the cell membrane is
called the inner membrane. B inset: Gram-negative envelope of Pseudomonas aeruginosa (TEM).

94



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

Proteobacteria (Gram-negative) have a thin cell wall
with one or two layers of peptidoglycan, enclosed by an
outer membrane. The phylum Proteobacteria consists
of Gram-negative species such as Escherichia coli and
nitrogen-fixing Sinorhizobium meliloti.



FIGURE 3.17

 Teichoic
acids. Teichoic acids in

HO

the Gram-positive cell wall
consist of glycerol or ribitol
phosphodiester chains.

O

CH2

Mycobacteria of the phylum Actinomycetes have a
complex multilayered envelope that includes defensive
structures such as mycolic acids. Examples include Mycobacterium tuberculosis, the cause of tuberculosis, and
M. leprae, the cause of leprosy.



P

O
H C

O

R

H2C

O

R = D-Ala, D-Lys,
or sugar

HO

P

O

O

CH2

Note that other important kinds of bacteria, such as cyanobacteria and spirochetes, have very different envelopes.
These different envelope structures may stain Grampositive, Gram-negative, or variable (discussed in
Chapter 18). Archaea have yet other diverse kinds of
envelopes that cannot be distinguished by Gram stain
(see Chapter 19).

H C

O

H2C

O

HO

P

O

R

Glycerol

O

CH2
H C

O

H2C

O

R

Thought Question

Firmicute Cell Envelope—Gram-Positive

A section of a Firmicute cell envelope (Gram-positive) is
shown in Figure 3.16. The multiple layers of peptidoglycan are reinforced by teichoic acids threaded through
its multiple layers (Fig. 3.17). Teichoic acids are chains
of phosphodiester-linked glycerol or ribitol, with sugars
or amino acids linked to the middle –OH groups. The

tough surface layer called the S-layer. Figure 3.18 shows
the S-layer of Lysinibacillus sphaericus, a Gram-positive

C.

80 nm

TOBIAS GÜNTHER, ET AL. 2014. RSC ADVANCES 4:51156.

6 µm

FIGURE 3.18

S-layer. Free-living bacteria and archaea often possess a

B.

TOBIAS GÜNTHER, ET AL. 2014. RSC ADVANCES 4:51156.

A.

negatively charged cross-threads of teichoic acids, as well
as the overall thickness of the Gram-positive cell wall, help
retain the Gram stain.
How does the cell wall attach extracellular structures?
Gram-positive bacteria have a type of enzyme called “sortase” that forms a peptide bond from a cell wall cross-bridge
to a protein extending from the cell. Proteins attached by
sortases can help the cell acquire nutrients, or help the cell
adhere to a substrate. Sortases are now used in the protein
engineering industry.

 S-layer of Lysinibacillus bacteria. A. Lysinibacillus imaged by atomic force microscopy (AFM). B. S-layer surface imaged
by AFM. C. Computational model of S-layer based on cryo-EM.

LUIS COMOLLI

3.5 Figure 3.16 highlights the similarities and differences
between the cell envelopes of Gram-negative and Grampositive bacteria. What do you think are the advantages
and limitations of a cell’s having one layer of peptidoglycan
(Gram-negative) versus several layers (Gram-positive)?

CHAPTER 3
A. Gram-negative envelope



CELL STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION

95



LPS

Outer membrane
0.5 µm

O

O

CH2

CH

NH
CH2

S

Cys

Murein lipoprotein (aa)65
Lys

D-Ala

NH

COOH

Peptidoglycan

FIGURE 3.19

Terminal D-Ala
removed

m-A2pm

NH2

D-Glu

Periplasm



Gram-negative cell envelope.

A. Murein lipoprotein has an N-terminal cysteine triglyceride
inserted in the inward-facing leaflet of the outer membrane.
The C-terminal lysine forms a peptide bond with the
m-diaminopimelic acid of the peptidoglycan (murein) cell
wall. B. Lack of murein lipoprotein in mutant Salmonella
causes the outer membrane to balloon out (arrow), when
the cell tries to divide (TEM).

L-Ala

GlcNAc

MurNAc

GlcNAc

MurNAc

Inner membrane
(cell membrane)

bacterium found on the surface of beets and carrots. The
S-layer is a crystalline sheet of thick subunits consisting
of protein or glycoprotein (proteins with attached sugars). Each subunit contains a pore large enough to admit
a wide range of molecules (Fig. 3.18). As modeled by
cryo-EM tomography (see Chapter 2), the S-layer proteins are arranged in a highly ordered array, either hexagonally or tetragonally. The S-layer is rigid, but it also
flexes and allows substances to pass through it in either
direction. S-layers help pathogens such as Bacillus anthracis bind and attack host cells. An S-layer contributes to
biofi lm formation (the periodontal bacterium Tannerella
forsythia) and swimming (the aquatic cyanobacterium
Synechococcus species).
The functions of the S-layer are hard to study in the laboratory because the S-layer is often lost by bacteria after
repeated subculturing. Traits commonly diminish in the
absence of selective pressure for genes encoding them—
a process called reductive evolution (discussed in Chapter 17). For example, the mycoplasmas are close relatives
of Gram-positive bacteria that have permanently lost their
cell walls, as well as the S-layer. Mycoplasmas have no
need for cell walls, because they are parasites living in host

environments, such as the human lung, where they are protected from osmotic shock.
Capsule. Another common extracellular structure is the

capsule, a slippery layer of loosely bound polysaccharides.
The capsule of pathogens such as Staphylococcus aureus can
prevent phagocytosis by white blood cells, thereby enabling
the pathogen to persist in the blood.

Thought Question

3.6 Why would laboratory culture conditions select for evolution of cells lacking an S-layer?

Proteobacterial Cell Envelope—
Gram-Negative

A cell envelope of Proteobacteria (Gram-negative) is
shown in Figures 3.16B and 3.19. The envelope includes
one or two layers of peptidoglycan covered by an outer
membrane. The Gram-negative outer membrane confers defensive abilities and toxigenic properties on many
pathogens, such as Salmonella species and enterohemorrhagic E. coli (strains that cause hemorrhaging of the
colon). Between the outer and inner (cell) membranes,
the aqueous compartment (containing the cell wall) is
called the periplasm.
Lipoprotein and lipopolysaccharide (LPS). The inwardfacing leaflet of the outer membrane has a phospholipid
composition similar to that of the cell membrane (which

JOAN FUNG, ET AL. 1978. J. BACTERIOL. 133:1467

B.

96



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

in Gram-negative species is called the inner membrane
or inner cell membrane). The outer membrane’s inwardfacing leaflet includes lipoproteins that connect the
outer membrane to the peptide bridges of the cell wall.
The major lipoprotein is called murein lipoprotein, also
known as Braun lipoprotein (Fig. 3.19A). Murein lipoprotein consists of a protein with an N-terminal cysteine
attached to three fatty acid side chains. The side chains
are inserted in the inward-facing leaflet of the outer membrane. The C-terminal lysine forms a peptide bond with
the m-diaminopimelic acid of peptidoglycan (murein).
What happens to a mutant cell that fails to make murein
lipoprotein? As the cell grows and divides, it fails to attach
its outer membrane to the growing cell wall, causing the
outer membrane to balloon out in the region where the
daughter cells separate (Fig. 3.19B).
The outward-facing leaflet of the outer membrane
has very different lipids from the inner leaflet. The main
outward-facing phospholipids are called lipopolysaccharide (LPS) (Fig. 3.20). LPS is of crucial medical importance because it acts as an endotoxin. An endotoxin is a
cell component that is harmless as long as the pathogen

B.

A.

O antigen
polysaccharide

remains intact; but when released by a lysed cell, endotoxin
overstimulates host defenses, inducing potentially lethal
endotoxic shock. Thus, antibiotic treatment of an LPScontaining pathogen can kill the cells but can also lead to
death of the patient.
The membrane-embedded anchor of LPS is lipid A,
a molecule shaped like a six-legged giraffe (Fig. 3.20A).
The lipid A moiety is the endotoxic part of LPS. The molecule’s six fatty acid “legs” have shorter chains than those of
the inner cell membrane, and two pairs are branched. The
fatty acids have ester or amide links to the “body,” a dimer
of glucosamine (an amino sugar also found in peptidoglycan). Analogous to the glycerol of glyceride phospholipids,
each glucosamine has a phosphoryl group whose negative
charge interacts with water. One glucosamine extends the
long “neck” of the core polysaccharide, a sugar chain that
reaches far outside the cell (Fig. 3.20B). The core polysaccharide consists of five to ten sugars with side chains
such as phosphoethanolamine. It extends to an O antigen or O polysaccharide, a chain of as many as 200 sugars.
The O polysaccharide may be longer than the cell itself.
These chains of sugars form a layer that helps bacteria
resist phagocytosis by white blood cells. The combination
of sugar units in the O antigen varies greatly among different strains and species of Gramnegative bacteria.

LPS =
lipopolysaccharide

Core
polysaccharide

Disaccharide
diphosphate

Lipid A
O
HO P O
O
O
O

O
O

O

O
HO
NH
O
O
O
O

HO

O
O

O

Repeating
unit

NH O P OH

HO
Fatty
acids

Core
polysaccharide

–

PO4
PO4–

–
–

PO4

PO4–
PO4–

Lipid A

FIGURE 3.20  Lipopolysaccharide (LPS). A. Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) consists of core
polysaccharide and O antigen linked to a lipid A. Lipid A consists of a dimer of phosphoglucosamine esterified or amidated to six fatty acids. B. Repeating polysaccharide units of O antigen
extend from lipid A.

Outer membrane proteins. The
outer membrane contains unique
proteins not found in the inner
membrane. Outer membranes contain a class of transporters called
porins that permit the entry of
nutrients such as sugars and peptides (Fig. 3.21). Outer membrane
porins such as OmpF have a distinctive cylinder of beta sheet conformation (reviewed in eAppendix 1),
also known as a beta barrel. A typical outer membrane porin exists as a
trimer of beta barrels, each of which
acts as a pore for nutrients.
Outer membrane porins have
limited specificity, allowing passive uptake of various molecules—
including antibiotics such as
ampicillin. Ampicillin is a form of
penicillin, which must get through
the outer membrane to access the
cell wall in order to block the formation of peptide cross-bridges. Ampicillin contains two charged groups
and is thus unlikely to diffuse

CHAPTER 3



CELL STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION



97

hostile environment for Gram-positive bacteria, which lack
an outer membrane.
OmpF porin trimer

Periplasm. The outer membrane is porous to most ions and

many small organic molecules, but it prevents the
passage of proteins and other macromolecules.
Thus, the region between the inner and
Beta barrel
outer membranes of Gram-negative cells,
inc
including the cell wall, defi nes a separate
membrane-enclosed
compartment
Arg42
Arg82
of the cell known as the periplasm
(see Fig. 3.19). The periplasm
Arg132
contains specific enzymes and
nutrient transporters not found
within the cytoplasm, such as
Ampicillin
Glu117
periplasmic transporters for
sugars, amino acids, or other
nutrients. Periplasmic proteins
are subjected to fluctuations
+
in pH and salt concentration,
+
because
the outer membrane
–
–
is porous to ions. Some periplasmic proteins help refold
proteins unfolded by oxidizing
agents or by acidification.
Overall, the outer membrane,
periplasm,
inner membrane, and

FIGURE 3.21 OmpF porin transports ampicillin. This model of the OmpF trimer is
cytoplasm define four different celbased on X-ray crystallography. (PDB code: 2OMF) Within each tubular porin monomer, charged
amino acid residues contact ampicillin. Source: Modified from Ekaterina M. Nestorovich et al. 2002. PNAS
lular compartments within a Gram99:9789–9794.
negative cell: two membrane-soluble
compartments (outer and inner membrane), and two aqueous compartments (periplasm and cytoplasm). Each type of
cellular protein is typically found in only one of these locathrough a lipid bilayer. But the molecule crosses the
tions. For example, the proton-translocating ATP synthase is
E. coli outer membrane by passing through OmpF, where
found only in the inner membrane fractions, whereas sugarits charged groups are attracted to charged amino acid
accepting porins are only in the outer membrane.
residues extending inside the porin (Fig. 3.21). AmpiS-layer and capsule. Some Gram-negative bacteria also
cillin’s positively charged amine group is attracted to the
form an S-layer and/or a capsule exterior to the outer memcarboxylate of glutamate-117, and its negatively charged
brane. For example, an S-layer is found in Caulobacter, an
carboxylate is attracted to the arginine amines. Experiaquatic proteobacterium; and in species of the genus Camments demonstrating ampicillin passage through OmpF
pylobacter, which cause diarrheal disease and systemic infecare described in eTopic 3.2.
tions of immunocompromised patients. A capsule is found
If porins can admit dangerous molecules as well as nutriin virulent strains of Haemophilus influenzae, which was
ents, should a cell make porins or not? In fact, cells express
the leading cause of childhood meningitis before developdifferent outer membrane porins under different environment of the Hib vaccine (see Chapter 24).
mental conditions. In a dilute environment, cells express
porins of large pore size, maximizing the uptake of nutrients. In a rich environment—for example, within a host—
cells down-regulate the expression of large porins and
Thought Question
express porins of smaller pore size, selecting only smaller
3.7 Why would proteins be confined to specific cell locanutrients and avoiding the uptake of toxins. For examtions? Why would a protein not be able to function everyple, the porin regulation system of Gram-negative bacteria
where in the cell?
enables them to grow in the colon containing bile salts—a

98



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

Mycobacterial Cell Envelope

The thick mycobacterial cell wall offers physical protection comparable to the cell wall of Gram-positive bacteria.
Exceptionally complex cell envelopes are found in actiIn mycobacteria, the peptidoglycan is linked to chains of
nomycetes, a large and diverse family of soil bacteria that
galactose, called galactans. The galactans are attached to
produce antibiotics and other industrially useful prodarabinans, polymers of the five-carbon sugar arabinose.
ucts (discussed in Chapter 18). The most complex enveThe arabinan-galactan polymers are known as arabinogalopes known are those of actinomycete-related bacteria,
lactans. Arabinogalactan biosynthesis is inhibited by two
the mycobacteria. Mycobacteria include the famous pathomajor classes of anti-tuberculosis drugs: ethambutol and
gens Mycobacterium tuberculosis (the cause of tuberculosis)
the benzothiazinones.
and Mycobacterium leprae (the cause of leprosy). The mycoThe ends of the arabinan chains form ester links to
bacterial envelope includes features of both Gram-positive
mycolic acids (uncharged mycolates). Mycolic acids provide
and Gram-negative cells, as well as structures unique to
the basis for acid-fast staining, in which cells retain the dye
mycobacteria (Fig. 3.22).
carbolfuchsin, an important diagnostic test for mycobacteria
and actinomycetes (described in Chapter 28). Mycolic acids
contain a hydroxy acid backbone with two hydrocarbon
chains—one comparable in length to typical membrane lipPhenolic
ids (about 20 carbons), the other about threefold longer.
glycolipid
The long chain includes ketones, methoxyl groups, and
The capsule consists
cyclopropane rings. Hundreds of different forms are
Phospholipid
of glycolipids and
known. The mycolic acids form a bilayer interleaved
sugar mycolates.
with sugar mycolates—a kind of outer membrane,
analogous to the Gram-negative outer membrane.
This mycolate layer even contains porins homologous
Capsule
to Gram-negative beta barrel porins such as OmpA. Other
mycolate-embedded proteins include virulence factors such
as fibronectin-binding protein (Fbp). Fbp enhances the ability of M. tuberculosis to invade macrophages.
The outer ends of the sugar mycolates are interleaved
Sugar
mycolate
with
phenolic glycolipids, which include phenol groups
Fibronectinbinding
linked to sugar chains. The extreme hydrophobicity of the
protein
Porin
phenol derivatives generates a waxy surface that prevents
Fbp
phagocytosis by macrophages. Overall, the thick, waxy
envelope excludes many antibiotics and offers exceptional
protection from host defenses, enabling the pathogens of
OmpA
tuberculosis and leprosy to colonize their hosts over long
Tb
Mycolic acids
periods. However, the thick envelope also retards
(attached to
uptake of nutrients. As a result, M. tuberculosis and
arabinan)
M. leprae grow extremely slowly and are a challenge
Cell wall
to culture in the laboratory.
core

Ethambutol blocks
synthesis.

Arabinan

Galactan
Peptidoglycan
Cell
membrane

FIGURE 3.22

 Mycobacterial envelope structure. A
complex cell wall includes a peptidoglycan layer linked to a chain
of galactose polymer (galactan) and arabinose polymer (arabinan).
Arabinan forms ester links to mycolic acids, which form an outer
bilayer with phenolic glycolipids.

Bacterial Cytoskeleton

In eukaryotes, cell shape has long been known to be maintained by a cytoskeleton of protein microtubules and filaments (reviewed in eAppendix 2). But what determines
the shape of bacteria? We saw earlier that bacterial shape
is in part maintained by the cell wall and the resulting turgor pressure. But research over the past decade
shows that bacteria also possess protein cytoskeletal
components—and remarkably, some of them are homologous to eukaryotic cytoskeletal proteins. For example, the
cell division protein FtsZ is a homolog of the eukaryotic
protein tubulin (the subunit of eukaryotic microtubules).

2 µm

Wild type

FIGURE 3.23



99

A.
Staphylococcus FtsZ (Z-ring)

FtsZ (Z-ring)

FtsZ
1 µm

B.
Escherichia coli: FtsZ and MreB

FtsZ

creS
M. CABEEN, ET AL. 2010. J. BACTERIOL. 192:3368.

B.

2 µm



Cytoskeletal mutants. Wild-type cells

compared with mutants in Bacillus subtilis (A; fluorescence
microscopy) and Caulobacter crescentus (B; DIC microscopy).

Another bacterial cytoskeletal protein, MreB, is a homolog
of the eukaryotic microfilament protein actin.
The bacterial cytoskeletal proteins are revealed by gene
defects that drastically alter the cell shape. For example,
Figure 3.23A compares wild-type cells of Bacillus subtilis with cells containing mutations in three mreB homologs (mreB, mreI, and mreBH). The wild-type cells have
a defined rod shape, whereas the mutant shape is round
and undefined. The mutant lacks the MreB complex that
regulates peptidoglycan synthesis and thereby defines the
rod-shaped cell. Another example of a shape-altering mutation affects the comma-shaped cell of Caulobacter crescentus (Fig. 3.23B). A mutation in gene creS results in cells
that are straight instead of curved. The creS gene expresses
the cytoskeletal protein CreS (crescentin).
How do the various cytoskeletal proteins work together
to generate the overall shape of a bacterial cell? The functions of cytoskeletal proteins are probed by fluorescent protein fusions (Fig. 3.24). In both spherical bacteria (cocci)
and rod-shaped bacilli, the FtsZ complex Z-ring determines the cell diameter. Elongation of a rod-shaped cell
requires polymerization of a second cytoskeletal protein,
MreB (Fig. 3.24B). MreB localizes in arc-shaped patches,
just beneath the cell membrane of the rod-shaped cell. Some
models propose a helical coil of MreB around the entire
cell, but more recent data indicate arcs of MreB driven by

Q. SUN AND W. MARGOLIN. 1998.
J. BACTERIOL. 180:2050.

Membrane stain,
Nile red

CELL STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION

1 µm

PURVA VATS AND LAWRENCE
ROTHFIELD. 2007. PNAS
104:17795–17800

mreB, mreI, mreBH

Wild type



MreB
C.
Caulobacter crescentus: FtsZ, MreB and crescentin

Crescentin

Crescentin

1 µm

FIGURE 3.24

 Shape-determining proteins. A. Cell diameter
is maintained by FtsZ polymerization to form the Z-ring. B. Elongation of a rod-shaped cell requires Mre proteins. MreB polymerizes
around an E. coli cell (MreB-YFP fluorescence) along with a Z-ring
of FtsZ (fluorescent anti-FtsZ antibody). C. Crescent-shaped cells
possess a third shape-determining protein, CreS (crescentin), which
polymerizes along the inner curve of the crescent. Crescentin protein
fused to green fluorescent protein (CreS-GFP) localizes to the inner
curve of Caulobacter crescentus. Membrane-specific stain FM4-64
(red fluorescence) localizes to the membrane around the cell.

elongating strands of cell wall. If the rod shape is curved
(called a vibrio, or crescent shape), the third cytoskeletal protein, crescentin, polymerizes along the inner curve of the
crescent (Fig. 3.24C). The cell’s outer curve is visualized
by a membrane-specific fluorophore. These cytoskeletal proteins, and their variants that have evolved in other species,
work together within cells to generate the shapes of bacteria.

To Summarize






The cell wall maintains turgor pressure. The cell wall
is porous, but its network of covalent bonds generates
turgor pressure that protects the cell from osmotic shock.
The Gram-positive cell envelope has multiple layers of
peptidoglycan, threaded by teichoic acids.
The S-layer of proteins is highly porous but can prevent
phagocytosis and protect cells in extreme environments.
In archaea, the S-layer serves the structural function of a
cell wall.

NORA AUSMEES, ET AL. 2003.
CELL 115:705.

A.

H. STRAHL, ET AL. 2013. NATURE COMMUNICATIONS. 5:3442.

H. STRAHL, ET AL. 2013. NATURE COMMUNICATIONS. 5:3442.

CHAPTER 3











PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

The capsule, composed of polysaccharide and glycoprotein filaments, protects cells from phagocytosis. Either
Gram-positive or Gram-negative cells may possess a
capsule.
The Gram-negative outer membrane regulates nutrient uptake and excludes toxins. The outer membrane
contains LPS and protein porins of varying selectivity.
The mycobacterial cell wall includes features of both
Gram-positive and Gram-negative cells. The arabinogalactan layer adds thickness to the cell wall. The
mycolate outer membrane and phenolic glycolipids limit
uptake of nutrients and antibiotics.
The bacterial cytoskeleton includes proteins that regulate cell size, play a role in determining the rod shape of
bacilli, and generate curvature in vibrios.

3.4

a filamentous nucleoid region that extends through the
cytoplasm. In contrast, the nucleus of the eukaryotic cell,
only a fraction of which is visible in the figure, is many
times larger than the entire bacterial cell, and the chromosomes it contains are separated from the cytoplasm by the
nuclear membrane.

DNA Is Organized in the Nucleoid

All living cells on Earth possess chromosomes consisting
of DNA. The genetic functions of microbial DNA are discussed in detail in Chapters 7–12. Here we focus on the
physical organization of DNA within the nucleoid of bacterial and archaeal cells (Fig. 3.26A).
A.

Ribosomes

The Nucleoid and
Cell Division

How are DNA and its expression machinery organized
within the cell? Bacteria organize their DNA very differently from eukaryotes. For example, Figure 3.25 shows
enteropathogenic E. coli cells growing upon a cultured
human cell. Enteropathogenic E. coli (EPEC) are diarrheal
pathogens that cause the host cell to form actin “pedestals” where the bacteria inject toxins (discussed in Chapter 25). In this thin-section TEM, each bacterium contains

Nucleoid

01µ
0.1
µm
m

Cell membrane
Endoplasmic
reticulum
Nuclear
membrane

B.
Human
n
cell

DNA

DNA origin

R. P. RABINOWITZ AND M. S. DONNENBERG

Envelope
Cytoplasm E. colilii
Nucleoid

1 µm

FIGURE 3.25



Bacterial nucleoid and eukaryotic nucleus..

Enteropathogenic Escherichia coli bacteria attached to the surface
e
of a tissue-cultured human cell (TEM). The human cell has a welldefined nucleus delimited by a nuclear membrane, whereas the
E. coli nucleoid DNA extends throughout the cell.

DNA-binding
protein

FIGURE 3.26



DNA domain

The nucleoid is organized in domains.

A. The E. coli nucleoid appears as clear regions that exclude the
dark-staining ribosomes and contain DNA strands (cryo-TEM).
B. The nucleoid forms chromosome loops called domains, which
radiate from the center.

E. KELLENBERGER, ET AL. 1992. FEMS MICROBIOL. LETT. 79:361–370

100

CHAPTER 3

Note:

In bacteria and archaea, the genome typically consists of
a single circular chromosome, but some species have a linear chromosome or multiple chromosomes. In this chapter we focus on the
simple case of a single circular chromosome.

In a bacterial cell the DNA is organized in loops called
domains. The DNA domains extend throughout the cytoplasm. The midpoint on the DNA is the origin of replication,
which is attached to the cell envelope at a point on the cell’s
equator, halfway between the two poles (Fig. 3.26B). At
the origin, the DNA double helix is melted open by binding
proteins, and then DNA polymerase synthesizes new strands
in both directions (bidirectionally). The origin and other
aspects of DNA replication are covered in detail in Chapter 7.
How does all of the cell’s DNA fit neatly into the nucleoid? In some bacteria, the domains loop back to the center of
the cell, near the origin of replication. Within the domains,
the DNA is compacted by supercoils. Supercoils (or superhelical turns) are extra twists in the chromosome, beyond those
inherent in the structure of the DNA double helix (discussed
in Chapter 7). The supercoiling causes portions of DNA to
double back and twist upon itself, resulting in compaction of
the chromosome. Supercoils are generated by enzymes such
as gyrase, a major target for antibiotics such as quinolones.
DNA is also compacted by DNA-binding proteins (see
Fig. 3.26B). Some binding proteins, such as H-NS and
HU, also function as regulators of gene expression. Binding proteins can respond to the state of the cell; for example, under starvation conditions, when most RNA synthesis
ceases, the binding protein Dps is used to organize the
DNA into a protected crystalline structure. Such “biocrystallization” by Dps and related proteins may be a key to the
extraordinary ability of microbes to remain viable for long
periods in stationary phase or as endospores.
Rifampin blocks
RNA synthesis.

CELL STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION



101

Note:

In biology, the word “domain” is used in several different
ways, each referring to a defined portion of a larger entity.

 DNA domains of the nucleoid are distinct loops of DNA that

extend from the origin.

 Protein domains are distinct functional or structural regions of

a protein.

 Lipid domains are clusters of one type of lipid within a membrane.
 Taxonomic domains are genetically distinct classes of organ-

isms, such as Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya.

Transcription and Translation

The information encoded in DNA is “read” by the processes
of transcription and translation to yield gene products. The
initial product of a gene is a single strand of ribonucleic
acid (RNA), produced when DNA is transcribed by RNA
polymerase (Fig. 3.27). In some cases, the newly made
RNA has a function of its own, such as being one of the
RNA components of a ribosome, the cell’s protein-making
machine. For most genes, however, the RNA is a messenger
RNA (mRNA) that immediately binds to a ribosome for
translation. A growing bacterial cell typically invests 40% of
its energy in the translation of mRNA by ribosomes. The
ribosome, with its large number of protein and RNA components, is probably the most complex subcellular machine
to be discovered. Because of its complexity, the ribosome is
targeted by many kinds of antibiotics, such as tetracyclines.
The process of translation is discussed further in Chapter 8.
Coupling of transcription and translation. In bacteria and
archaea, translation is tightly coupled to transcription;
the ribosomes bind to mRNA and begin translation even
before the mRNA strand is complete. Thus, a growing bacterial cell is full of mRNA strands dotted with ribosomes

RNA polymerase

Opening to secondary
channel for ATP, GTP,
CTP, UTP
Transfer RNA

DNA



Nascent
RNA

Erythromycin blocks
peptide elongation by
binding 50S subunit.

Tetracycline
blocks tRNA
by binding
30S subunit.

50S
Ribosome

30S

Correctly
folded protein
Peptide exit
channel

Incoming
amino acid

Peptide
chain

RNA spontaneously
forms hairpin loops.

FIGURE 3.27



RNA synthesis is coupled to protein synthesis. As the DNA sequence is transcribed into a strand of messenger RNA,

ribosomes already start translating the RNA to synthesize proteins.

102
102



PART
P
ART
AR
T1



THE
T HE MICROBIAL
M IC
ICRO
ROBI
BIAL
AL C
CELL
ELL
EL
L

Ribosome

SRP

Protein

Origin of replication

Compaction

Expansion
RNA

DNA-binding
proteins

Origin

Terminator sequence
Origin of
replication
DNA origin replicates
and migrates.

Terminator
sequence

DNA

Two replisomes
DNA replication
continues bidirectionally.

FIGURE 3.28



Coupling protein synthesis and secretion..

Bacterial transcription of DNA to RNA is coordinated with transla-tion of RNA to make proteins. Growing peptides destined for the
membrane bind the signal recognition particle (SRP) for insertion
n
into the membrane.

(Fig. 3.28). In rapidly growing bacteria, the DNA is tranan-scribed and the messenger RNA translated to proteins, while
hilee
the DNA itself is being replicated. This remarkable coordirdi-nation of replication, transcription, and translation explains
ainss
why some bacterial cells can divide in as little as 10 minutes.
tes..
By contrast, how do eukaryotes organize DNA replicaica-tion and gene expression? Eukaryotes replicate their DNA
NA
A
during S phase of the cell cycle, while expressing mostt
genes and proteins during G phase of interphase (reviewed
wed
d
in eAppendix 2). Within the nucleus, nascent (elongating)
ng))
mRNA is translated by ribosomes, which check the tranan-script for errors and target faulty transcripts for destrucuc-tion (see Reid and Nicchitta, 2012, J. Cell Biology 197:7).
:7)..
However, the majority of eukaryotic mRNA is translated
ted
d
outside the nucleus, in the cytoplasm. Whereas bacteria
eriaa
coordinate their DNA replication and gene expression,
on,
eukaryotes separate these processes both spatially (nucleus
eus
versus cytoplasm) and temporally (different growth phases).
es)
s).
Inserting proteins into the membrane. Some of the newly
translated proteins are destined for the membrane or for
secretion outside the cell. Proteins destined for membrane
insertion must be hydrophobic and hence are poorly soluble
in the aqueous cytoplasm where their mRNA is translated.
How can proteins that are insoluble in water be folded correctly in the cytoplasm? In prokaryotes, membrane proteins
and secreted proteins are synthesized in association with
the cell membrane (Fig. 3.28). This coupling of transcription and translation to membrane insertion has the effect of
expanding the nucleoid into distal parts of the cell, partly
counteracting the condensation of DNA by DNA-binding

DNA starts next round.

Septum forms.

Division into two cells

FIGURE 3.29



Replisome movement within a dividing cell.

The DNA origin-of-replication sites (green) move apart in the expanding cell as the two replisomes (yellow) stay near the middle, where
they replicate around the entire chromosome, completing the terminator sequence last (red). Source: Ivy Lau et al. 2003. Mol. Microbiol. 49:731.

proteins. Membrane protein maturation and secretion are
discussed in Chapter 8.

Cell Division

How does a growing bacterial cell divide, or fission, into
daughter cells? Bacterial cell fission requires highly coordinated growth and expansion of all the cell’s parts. Unlike
eukaryotes, prokaryotes synthesize RNA and proteins
continually while the cell’s DNA undergoes replication.

CHAPTER 3

Note:

Each replisome contains two DNA polymerases (for
leading and lagging strands). Each dividing nucleoid requires two
replisomes (for bidirectional replication), and thus four DNA polymerases overall.

Within the cell, replication proceeds outward in both
directions around the genome. Thus, bidirectional replication requires two replisomes, one for each replicating fork.
Fluorescent probes show that two replisomes are located near
the middle of the growing cell (Fig. 3.29). Each replisome
forms a replicating fork that directs two daughter strands of
DNA toward opposite poles. The two copies of the DNA
origin of replication (green in the figure), attached to the
cell envelope, move apart as the cell expands. The termination site (red) remains in the middle of the cell, where the
two replisomes continue replication at both forks. Finally, as
the termination site replicates, the two replisomes separate

103

Septation Completes Cell Division

For the cell to divide, DNA replication must be complete.
Replication of the DNA termination site triggers growth
of the dividing partition of the envelope, called the septum (plural, septa). The septum grows inward from the
sides of the cell, at last constricting and sealing off the two
daughter cells. This process is called septation. Septation
and envelope extension require rapid biosynthesis of all
envelope components, including membranes and cell wall.
Recall how the lack of murein lipoprotein connecting the
outer membrane to the cell wall causes deformation at septation (see Fig. 3.19B). The biosynthetic enzymes required
for cell division are all of great interest as antibiotic targets.
Cell wall biosynthesis poses an interesting theoretical problem: How is it possible to expand the covalent network of
the sacculus without breaking links to insert new material,
thus weakening the wall? The answer remains unclear.
Septation of spherical cells. In spherical cells (cocci), such
as Staphylococcus aureus, the process of septation generates
most of the new cell envelope to enclose the expanding
cytoplasm (Fig. 3.30). Furrows form in the cell envelope,

C.

200 nm

AHMED TOUHAMI, ET AL. 2004. J. BACTERIOL. 186:3286

200 nm



from the DNA. At each new origin site, however, two pairs
of new replisomes have formed. In a fast-growing cell, the
new origin sites begin a second round of replication, even
before termination of the previous round.
Note that the contents of the cytoplasm and envelope
must expand coordinately with DNA replication for the
cell to generate progeny equivalent to the parent. In a rodshaped cell, the cell envelope and cell wall must elongate
in a process coordinated by cytoskeletal proteins so as to
maintain progeny of even girth and length. As discussed
earlier, the girth and length of the elongating cell depend
on shape-determining proteins such as FtsZ and MreB.

B.

AHMED TOUHAMI, ET AL. 2004. J. BACTERIOL. 186:3286

A.

CELL STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION

200 nm

FIGURE 3.30  Septation in Staphylococcus aureus. A. Furrows appear in the cell envelope, all around the cell equator, as new cell
wall grows inward (TEM). B. Two new envelope partitions are complete. C. The two daughter cells peel apart. The facing halves of each cell
contain entirely new cell wall.

AHMED TOUHAMI, ET AL. 2004. J. BACTERIOL. 186:3286

Bacterial DNA replication is coordinated with the expansion of the cell wall and ultimately the separation of the cell
into two daughter cells. Bacteria do not undergo mitosis
or meiosis (these eukaryotic processes are reviewed in eAppendix 2). Bacterial DNA replication is outlined here as it
relates to cell division; the molecular details of the process
are discussed in Chapter 7.
Replication begins at the origin of replication
(Fig. 3.29 ), a unique DNA sequence in the chromosome. At the origin sequence, the DNA double helix begins
to unzip, forming two replication forks. At each replication fork, DNA is synthesized by DNA polymerase. The
complex of DNA polymerase with its accessory components
is called a replisome. The replisome actually includes two
DNA polymerase enzymes: one to replicate the “leading
strand,” the other for the “lagging strand.” The lag time is
short compared with the overall time of replication; thus,
as the replisome travels along the DNA, it converts one
helix into two progeny helices almost simultaneously.



104



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

KWANGSHIN KIM/PHOTO RESEARCHERS, INC.

were called fts for “fi lamentation temperature
sensitive” because their mutation is temperature sensitive. The temperature-sensitive cells
divide normally at a “permissive” temperature
but fail to septate at the “restrictive” temperature, forming long fi laments. Temperaturesensitive mutants offer the researcher a way
to grow and study bacteria that have severe
defects in cell growth.

0.5 µm

FIGURE 3.31  Septation orientation determines the
arrangement of progeny cells. For Micrococcus tetragenus,

septation in two planes generates a tetrad (TEM with negative stain).



in a ring all around the cell equator, as new cell wall grows
inward. The wall material must consist of two separable
partitions. When the partitions are complete, the two progeny cells peel apart. The facing halves of each cell consist of
entirely new cell wall.
The spatial orientation of septation has a key role in
determining the shape and arrangement of cocci. If the
cell always septates in parallel planes, as in Streptococcus
species, cells form chains (Fig. 3.30). If, however, the
cell septates in random orientations, or if cells reassociate loosely after septation, they form compact hexagonal
arrays similar to the grape clusters portrayed in classical paintings—hence the Greek-derived term staphylococci (staphyle means “bunch of grapes”). Such clusters
are found in colonies of Staphylococcus aureus. If subsequent septation occurs at right angles to the previous division, the cells may form tetrads and even cubical octads
called “sarcinae” (singular, sarcina). Tetrads are formed by
Micrococcus tetragenus, a cause of pulmonary infections
(Fig. 3.31).



Septation of rod-shaped cells. In rod-shaped cells, unlike

cocci, cell division requires the envelope to elongate before
septation, followed by the formation of a new polar envelope for each progeny cell. The process of septation involves
an intricate series of molecular signals that is at the frontier
of current research. Mutations in a gene such as ftsZ cause
E. coli to form long fi laments instead of dividing normally.
This fi lamentation results from a failure to form a septum
between cells. The mutant genes causing this behavior





To Summarize


DNA is organized in the nucleoid. The
bacterial DNA is generally attached to the
envelope at the origin of replication, on
the cell’s equator. Loops of DNA called
domains are supercoiled and bound to
DNA-binding proteins.

During transcription, the ribosome translates RNA
to make proteins. Proteins are folded by chaperones
and in some cases secreted at the cell membrane.
Membrane-inserted proteins are translated at the
membrane. The coupling of transcription, translation,
and membrane insertion expands the nucleoid into distal parts of the cell.
DNA is replicated bidirectionally by the replisome.
During bacterial DNA replication, genes continue transcription and translation.
Cell expansion and septation are coordinated with
DNA replication. Septation may occur in one plane
(forming a chain of cells) or at right angles to the previous septation (forming a tetrad).

3.5

Cell Polarity and Aging

Are bacterial cells symmetrical? Some bacteria have different structures at either pole, and their cell division generates
two different cell types. But even superficially symmetrical
bacilli such as E. coli show underlying chemical and physical asymmetry. The two cell poles differ in their origin and
age—a phenomenon called polar aging. Polar aging has
surprising consequences for the interactions of bacteria
with their environment and for antibiotic resistance.

Bacterial Cell Differentiation

Bacteria whose poles have different structures generate
two different forms of progeny. The wetland bacterium

CHAPTER 3

Free-swimming
C. crescentus

YVES BRUN, INDIANA UNIVERSITY

2 µm

Stalked
cell

CELL STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION

FIGURE 3.32

 Asymmetrical cell division: a model for
development. A swarmer cell of Caulobacter crescentus loses its

flagellum and grows a stalk. The stalked cell divides to produce a
swarmer cell (TEM).

Caulobacter crescentus has one plain pole and one pole
with either a f lagellum or a cytoplasmic extension called
a stalk (Fig. 3.32). A f lagellated cell swims about freely
in an aqueous habitat, such as a pond or a sewage bed.
After swimming for about half an hour, if the bacterium
finds a place with enough nutrients, the cell sheds its
f lagellum and replaces it with a stalk. The stalked cell

C.

© JASON VARNEY/ VARNEYPHOTO.COM

2 µm

B. Cells express TipN-GFP

DIC

Time

2 µm

Old

New
Old
Old

HUBERT LAM AND CHRISTINA JACOBS-WAGNER.

FIGURE 3.33

TipN-GFP
New

105

HUBERT LAM, ET AL. 2006. CELL
124:1011

A. Caulobacter mutants lack gene for TipN

TipN-GFP



attaches to sediment and then immediately starts to
replicate its DNA and divides, producing a f lagellated
daughter cell, as well as a daughter cell containing the
original stalk.
How does C. crescentus organize itself to produce two
different cell types, each with a different organelle at one
pole? The process is a rudimentary form of cell differentiation, comparable to the differentiation processes
that animal cells undergo in the embryo. The process
has been studied through genetic analysis (introduced in
Section 3.1).
The C. crescentus life cycle is governed by regulator proteins such as TipN, studied by students of Christine JacobsWagner at Yale University (see eTopic 3.3). Mutants lacking
TipN make serious mistakes in development. Instead of
making a single flagellum at the correct cell pole, the cell
makes multiple flagella at various locations, even on the
stalk (Fig. 3.33A). Jacobs-Wagner proposed that TipN is
a landmark protein that correctly marks the site of a new
cell pole, and the polar placement of flagella. Figure 3.33B
shows cells expressing TipN fused to GFP, which is then
detected by fluorescence. The fluorescent TipN-GFP localizes to the cell pole opposite the stalk. As the cell prepares
to divide, TipN leaves the pole, delocalizing around the
cell; but it relocalizes at the septum, where the new poles
appear.

Swarmer

Stalk
Holdfast





A landmark protein for the cell pole.

A. Caulobacter mutants lacking TipN protein make mistakes:
flagella grow out of stalks, or at the stalked pole (fluorescence
microscopy). B. The protein TipN appears at the pole of a Caulobacter stalk cell, visualized as TipN-GFP [differential interference
contrast microscopy (DIC) and fluorescence microscopy]. As the
cell grows, TipN delocalizes and then localizes again at the septum.
Septation yields two daughter cells with TipN at the pole of each.
C. Christine Jacobs-Wagner, winner of the American Society
for Microbiology’s Eli Lilly Award for her studies of Caulobacter
development.

106



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

FIGURE 3.34

 Cell cycle of
Caulobacter. A swarmer cell loses

its flagellum and grows a stalk. PodJ
protein (purple) is at the flagellar
pole, while DivJ protein (red) is at
the stalk. TipN (yellow) is found at
“new” poles (newly septated). TipN
delocalizes and then localizes at the
cell equator, midway between poles.
The pole with PodJ grows a flagellum. The cell septates, forming two
new poles, each containing TipN. The
stalked cell still has DivJ at the stalk,
and the new swarmer cell has PodJ
at the flagellum. Source: Modified from

Flagellum

Pili

Swarmer cell
TipN

Flagellum is lost;
stalk grows.

PodJ

PodJ (flagellum)
DivJ (stalk)
TipN (new pole)
Stalked cell

Holdfast
Stalk
Old pole

New pole

Old pole

DivJ

PodJ moves
to opposite
pole with TipN.

TipN concentrates
at both new poles.

Melanie Lawler and Yves Brun. 2006. Cell
124:891.

Predivisional cell

TipN
delocalizes.

Flagellum grows
at pole with PodJ.

TipN localizes
to septum.

Cell development involves many such proteins working together. Figure 3.34 shows how TipN interacts
with two other polar proteins: the f lagellar marker PodJ,
and the stalk marker DivJ. Each young cell (swarmer cell
at top of cycle) has a new pole containing TipN. PodJ
migrates to the pole with TipN. The stalk marker DivJ is
produced at the pole where PodJ was previously. These
redistributions of proteins cause the f lagellated swarmer
cell to lose its f lagellum, replacing it with a stalk as the
cell settles in a favorable environment. As the stalked cell
grows, TipN delocalizes around the cell; then it localizes
again at the middle, where the cell septates and divides.
Once division is complete, TipN concentrates at both
new poles. As PodJ moves to the new pole, that pole
grows a f lagellum. Overall, throughout the cycle a series
of polar proteins localize and delocalize to define the
polar functions.
Thought Question

3.8 Figure 3.33 presents data from an experiment that
allows the function of the TipN protein of Caulobacter to be
visualized by microscopy. Can you propose an experiment with
mutant strains of Caulobacter to test the hypothesis that one
of the proteins shown in Figure 3.34 is required for one of the
cell changes shown?

Polar Aging

Does an apparently symmetrical cell such as E. coli actually
show polar differences? In fact, the actual process of cell
division generates daughter cells with chemically different
poles (Fig. 3.35). Each cell starts out with one “old” pole
(red in the figure) and one “new” pole (blue) where the
parental cell septated. As the next cell divides, two daughter
cells form, each with another “new” pole. But meanwhile,
the “old” poles continue to age. With each generation, the
polar cell wall material degrades slightly, increasing the
chance of cell lysis. In a population of E. coli under environmental stress, at each cell division some members of the
population die—of polar old age.
The cause of polar aging in stressed E. coli is the preferential accumulation of protein aggregates, which are
nonfunctional and cannot be unfolded or degraded. For
unknown reasons, proteins aggregate more frequently
under a stress condition, such as low pH, or the presence
of an antibiotic. Proteins damaged by a stress condition are
packed away in the cell’s older pole, allowing the new-pole
cells to remain intact and grow faster.
Why does polar aging matter? One consequence of polar
aging is that cells of different polar ages may differ in their
resistance to antibiotics. This phenomenon could cause
problems for antibiotic therapy, as discussed in Special
Topic 3.1. Mycobacterium tuberculosis shows an extreme

CHAPTER 3



CELL STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION



107

To Summarize
New pole

0

1

Old pole



Cell growth

Beginning of cell division


New pole
is now old.



Old pole

New poles

Old pole



New poles
are now old.


FIGURE 3.35  Bacterial cell division generates cells with
an old pole and a new pole. Succeeding generations have cells

with diverse combinations of new poles (blue), old poles (red), and
very old poles (two or more generations, also red). Source: Eric Stewart,

The poles of a bacterial cell may
differ in form and function. Caulobacter crescentus has one plain pole,
and one pole that has either a flagellum
or a stalk. A stalked cell fissions to produce one stalked cell and one flagellar
cell.
The two bacterial poles differ in age.
One pole arises from the septum of the
parental cell, whereas the other pole
arises from a parental pole.
In E. coli, successive cell divisions
yield progeny with a mixture of
polar ages. Cells with a very old pole
may cease replication and die.
Polar aging is increased by stress.
Environmental stress, such as an
antibiotic or low pH, causes protein
aggregates to collect at the cell’s older
pole.
In actinomycetes and mycobacteria,
cells extend at the poles, which alternate between fast and slow extension.
Mycobacterial cells can thus reverse
polar aging.

et al. 2005. PLoS Biol. 3:e45

3.6
version of alternate polar aging that generates variable resistance to antibiotics. The result may give tuberculosis bacteria the opportunity to “try out” resistance to various
antibiotics applied in chemotherapy.
Gram-positive bacteria show other adaptations of polar
asymmetry. Spore formers such as Bacillus species can
undergo an asymmetrical cell division to form an endospore at one end. In this process, one daughter nucleoid
forms an inert endospore capable of remaining dormant
but viable for many years (discussed in Chapter 4). Other
species expand their cells by extending one pole only. The
actinomycete Corynebacterium glutamicum, a soil bacterium useful for industrial production, has its replisome
at one cell pole. In Corynebacterium, as DNA replication
begins, a second replisome moves to the opposite pole,
while new cell wall forms at the poles. Unequal or unipolar cell extension is common among actinomycetes and
mycobacteria.

Specialized Structures

We have introduced the major structures that all cells need
to contain and organize their contents, maintain their
DNA, and synthesize new parts. Besides these fundamental structures, different species have evolved specialized devices adapted to diverse metabolic strategies and
environments.

Thylakoids, Carboxysomes,
and Storage Granules

Photosynthetic bacteria, also called phototrophs, produce
food and oxygen for marine and aquatic ecosystems. In the
water, phototrophs must collect as much light as possible
to drive photosynthesis (see Section 14.6). To maximize
the collecting area of their photosynthetic membranes,
phototrophs have evolved specialized systems of extensively folded intracellular membrane called thylakoids

108



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

SPECIAL TOPIC 3.1, , Senior Cells Make Drug-Resistant Tuberculosis
Tuberculosis, caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis, is a
global health problem—amplified by the specter of resistance to nearly every known antibiotic. Effective treatment
of tuberculosis can require months or years of therapy with
multiple antibiotics, and when treatment lapses, resistant
strains appear. How do cells become resistant so fast? The
secret may lie in the diversity of growth phenotypes that arise
from the unusual course of cell division in mycobacteria. The
diverse growth states cause different cells to resist different
antibiotics.
At the Harvard School of Public Health, microbiologist
Sarah Fortune (Fig. 1A) and her students designed an experiment to test the hypothesis that different growth states of
mycobacteria have different antibiotic sensitivities. First, Fortune established a way to grow the bacteria in a microfluidic
chamber. The chamber contains ridges to keep the growing cells in place during many hours of perfusion with fresh
medium. The chamber was used to observe growth starting
with a single isolated cell of M. tuberculosis, or of M. smegmatis, a nonpathogenic model organism with very similar growth
traits.
In Figure 1B, a single septating cell is labeled with a green
fluorophore, while new cell growth appears red. If this cell
were E. coli, what would happen? The newly septated E. coli
B.
2h

1h

3h

COURTESY OF HARVARD SCHOOL OF PUBLIC HEALTH

*
*
*

*

4h

*
*

New pole
Growth tip

5h

*
*

*

Old
pole

* New
pole
New
pole

*

*
*

*

*
*

*

*

*

6h

*

*

*

*

*

*

Old
pole

FIGURE 1

 Mycobacteria grow by extending the old pole. A. Sarah Fortune studies how mycobacteria show age-related differences in antibiotic resistance. B. Mycobacterium smegmatis cells extend the old poles (1 h to 4 h), and then start extending the new poles.

(Fig. 3.36A). Thylakoids consist of layers of folded sheets
(lamellae) or tubes of membranes packed with chlorophylls
and electron carriers. Cyanobacteria containing thylakoids structurally resemble eukaryotic chloroplasts, which
evolved from a common ancestor of modern cyanobacteria.
The thylakoids conduct only the “light reactions” of photon absorption and energy storage. The energy obtained is

rapidly spent to fix carbon dioxide—a process that occurs
within carboxysomes. Carboxysomes are polyhedral, protein-covered bodies packed with the enzyme Rubisco for
CO2 fixation.
How do phototrophs keep themselves at the top of
the water column? Gas vesicles increase buoyancy and
keep the cell afloat. Figure 3.36B shows a cross section

ALDRIDGE, ET AL. 2012. SCIENCE 335:100–103

A.

cells would each expand throughout, like a balloon, and septate again. But the mycobacterial cell does no such thing.
Instead, each cell extends only at its old pole (2 h). Once
growth from the old poles is complete, the cell divides (5 h)
and the “new poles” start to elongate. In other words, each
cell alternates between elongating from an old pole and then
elongating from the opposite pole.
The process of alternating pole extension yields classes of
cells that differ in their growth traits (Fig. 2A). The daughter
cell arising from the rapidly extended pole is called an “accelerator.” The daughter cell left behind at the alternate pole
(composed mainly of old material) is called an “alternator.”
The alternator cell delays a generation and then extends its
older pole. The alternator grows more slowly than the accelerator. Differing in both growth rate and size, the alternator
and accelerator cells were expected to show distinctly different patterns of metabolism. These metabolic states are
assigned age classes: age 1 and age 2, respectively.
In the next generation, division of the alternator cell again
yields cells of the classes age 1 and age 2. But division of the
accelerator cell yields a superaccelerator that extends even
faster than the parent; this metabolic class is called age 3.
Figure 2B shows some of the data that demonstrate the statistical differences in growth rate among cells observed in

CHAPTER 3

A.



CELL STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION



109

B.
Age 1

2.0

Accelerator

Alt

Age 2

Acc
Acc

Alt

Acc

Acc

Alt

Alt

Acc

Age 2

Age 1

Age 1

Age 3

BREE ALDRIDGE, ET AL. 2012. SCIENCE 335:100

Alt

Age 1

1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
Age 1 (Alt)

0.6

Age 2 (Acc)

0.4
0.2

Age 3 (Acc)
A

B

C

D

E

Microcolony

BREE ALDRIDGE, ET AL. 2012. SCIENCE 335:100

Alternator

Elongation rate (µm/h)

1.8

FIGURE 2

 Mycobacteria with older poles grow faster. A. Mycobacterial cells extend first the older pole (accelerator cell, Acc)
and then the newer pole (alternator cell, Alt). B. Cells with older poles (age 2, age 3) extend faster than cells with newer poles (age 1).
Extension rates also vary greatly within each age class.

the three age classes. Subsequent cell divisions of age 3 cells
yield mixed data, Fortune reports; at some point, an unknown
mechanism resets the growth rate to that of the ancestral
cell. Thus, mycobacterial cells (unlike E. coli) can reverse polar
aging.
How do these different cell types respond to antibiotics?
Fortune compared the survival rates of alternator and accelerator cells. Alternator cells showed greater resistance to the
antibiotics cycloserine and meropenem, which inhibit peptidoglycan synthesis. This makes sense because alternator cells
form relatively small amounts of cell wall, compared to the
rapidly extending accelerator cells. On the other hand, accelerator cells were more resistant to rifampicin, which inhibits
RNA polymerase. The rifampicin sensitivity of alternator cells
might be explained by the rapid RNA turnover required to initiate extension of the alternate pole.
Overall, we see that the “senior cells” from mycobacterial
cell division play distinctive roles in generating antibiotic resis-

of Microcystis, a cyanobacterium that forms toxic algal
blooms in lakes polluted by agricultural runoff. Microcystis shows typical gas vesicles, which are protein vacuoles
that trap and collect gases such as hydrogen or carbon
dioxide produced by the cell’s metabolism. Each vesicle is
a tube with two conical ends. The tubes pack in hexagonal arrays.

tance. And the data scatter in Figure 2 suggests that other
factors besides polar age remain to be discovered. No doubt,
the mycobacterial cell cycle has further surprises in store for
medical researchers developing therapies to cure and curb
the spread of tuberculosis.

RESEARCH QUESTION
Which age class of M. tuberculosis (age 1 or age 3) do you think
would be more resistant to quinolones (which block gyrase
that supercoils DNA)? Or to TMC207 (which inhibits ATP synthase)? Propose experiments to test your hypotheses.
Aldridge, Bree B., Marta Fernandez-Suarez, Danielle Heller,
Vijay Ambravaneswaran, Daniel Irimia, et al. 2012. Asymmetry and aging of mycobacterial cells lead to variable
growth and antibiotic susceptibility. Science 335:100–103.

When light is scarce, phototrophs may digest their thylakoids for energy and as a source of nitrogen. Alternatively,
the cell may digest energy-rich materials from storage granules composed of glycogen or other polymers, such as
polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB) and poly-3-hydroxyalkanoate (PHA). PHB and PHA polymers are of interest as biodegradable plastics, and bacteria have been engineered to



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

FIGURE 3.36  Organelles
of phototrophs. A. The marine

B.

W. KILI AND F. PARTENSKY, BEDFORD INSTITUTE OF OCEANOGRAPHY

phototroph Prochlorococcus
marinus (TEM). Beneath the
envelope lie the photosynthetic double membranes called
thylakoids. Carboxysomes are
polyhedral, protein-covered
bodies packed with the Rubisco
enzyme for CO2 fixation.
B. Microcystis gas vesicles in
hexagonal arrays provide buoyancy, enabling the phototroph
to remain at the surface of the
water, exposed to light.

A.

ALYSSA MLOUKA, ET AL. 2004. JOURNAL OF BACTERIOLOGY 186:2355.

110

Thylakoids
Cell
envelope
Gas vesicles,
cross-section

Carboxysome

0.1 µm

produce them industrially. Similar storage granules are also
produced by nonphototrophic soil bacteria.
Another type of storage device is sulfur—granules
of elemental sulfur produced by purple and green phototrophs through photolysis of hydrogen sulfide (H 2S).
Instead of disposing of the sulfur, the bacteria store it
in granules, either within the cytoplasm (purple phototrophs) or as “globules” attached to the outside of the
cell. Sulfur-reducing bacteria also make extracellular sulfur
globules (Fig. 3.37). The sulfur may be usable as an oxidant when reduced substrates become available. And the
presence of potentially toxic sulfur granules may help cells
avoid predation.

Gas vesicles,
longitudinal
section

500 nm

A common adherence structure is the pilus (plural, pili),
also called fimbria (plural, fimbriae), which is constructed
of straight filaments of protein monomers called pilin.
For example, the sexually transmitted pathogen Neisseria
gonorrhoeae uses pili to attach to the mucous membranes
of the reproductive tract (Fig. 3.38). In Gram-negative
enteric bacteria, pili of a different kind, also called the sex
pili, attach a “male” donor cell to a “female” recipient cell
for transfer of DNA. This process of DNA transfer is called
conjugation. The genetic consequences of conjugation are
discussed in Chapter 9.

1 µm

FIGURE 3.37

COURTESY OF JUERGEN WIEGEL AND MANFRED ROHDE

In a favorable habitat, such as a running stream full of fresh
nutrients or the epithelial surface of a host, it is advantageous for a cell to adhere to a substrate. Adherence, the
ability to attach to a substrate, requires specific structures.

 External sulfur particles. Sulfur globules dot
the surface of Thermoanaerobacter sulfurigignens, an anaerobic
thermophilic bacterium that gains energy by reducing thiosulfate
(S2O32–) to elemental sulfur (S0).

1 µm

FIGURE 3.38  Pili are protein filaments for attachment. Neisseria gonorrhoeae, cause of the sexually transmitted
infection gonorrhea, use pili to attach to the host mucous membrane (SEM).

NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF BIOMEDICAL IMAGING AND BIOENGINERING/NIH

Pili, Stalks, and Nanotubes



CELL STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION



111

Another kind of attachment organelle is a membraneembedded extension of the cytoplasm called a stalk, seen
earlier in the stalked cell of Caulobacter (Fig. 3.32). The
tip of the stalk secretes adhesion factors called holdfasts,
which firmly attach the bacterium in an environment that
has proved favorable. A stalk and holdfast enable iron-oxidizing bacteria to form large orange biofilms. An example is
Gallionella ferruginea, an iron-oxidizing species that grows
long, twisted stalks (Fig. 3.39). The stalks of adherent Gallionella cells become coated by orange iron hydroxides, tinting aquatic streams contaminated by iron drainage.
Some kinds of bacterial structures, such as pili and
extracellular polysaccharides, connect cells to form
A.
2 µm

FIGURE 3.40
© 2013 FABISCH, BEULIG, AKOB AND KÜSEL/CREATIVE COMMONS

 Intercellular nanotubes. Bacillus subtilis
bacteria with intercellular connections called nanotubes, which pass
material from one cell to the next.

B.

multicellular communities called biofilms (discussed in
Chapters 4 and 10). Structures that connect the cells’
cytoplasm include intercellular nanotubes. Nanotubes are
extensions of cell envelopes that connect the cytoplasm
or periplasm between two different cells. Figure 3.40
shows how nanotubes interconnect cells of Bacillus subtilis. Nanotubes can transmit materials from one cell to
another—even between cells of different species. Unfortunately, viruses can generate nanotubes in their host cells
in order to transmit progeny viruses to a new cell without
exposure to the immune system.

Rotary Flagella

© MARIA FABISCH, 2009

What happens when the cell’s environment runs out of nutrients, or becomes filled with waste? In rapidly changing environments, cell survival requires motility, the ability to move
and relocate. Many bacteria and archaea can swim by means
of rotary flagella (singular, flagellum). Flagellar motility benefits the cell by causing the population to disperse,
decreasing competition. Motility also enables cells to swim
toward a favorable habitat (chemotaxis, discussed shortly.)

FIGURE 3.39  Gallionella sp. are iron-oxidizing, stalked
bacteria. A. The twisted filaments of Gallionella, taken from a slow-

moving freshwater stream at Audley in New South Wales, Australia.
B. Gallionella bacteria oxidize iron, coloring streams like this one—
Gessenbach Creek in Germany—orange because of metal pollution.

Flagellar motility. Flagella are helical propellers that

drive the cell forward like the motor of a boat. Howard
Berg at the California Institute of Technology originally
described the bacterial flagellar motor, which was the fi rst
rotary device to be discovered in a living organism. Different bacterial species have different numbers and arrangements of flagella. Peritrichous cells, such as E. coli and
Salmonella species, have flagella randomly distributed

G. P. DUBEY AND S. BEN-YEHUDA. 2011. CELL 144: 590–600

CHAPTER 3

112



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL
B.

a motor driven by the cell’s transmembrane
proton current—the same proton potential
that drives the membrane-embedded ATP
synthase (presented in Chapter 14). The
flagellar motor is embedded in the layers
of the cell envelope. The motor possesses
an axle and rotary parts, all composed of
specific proteins. For example, protein
MotB forms part of the ion channel whose flux of hydrogen ions powers rotation, similarly to the proton flux that
drives ATP synthase. Another protein, FliG, forms part of
the device that generates torque (rotary force). Much of
the motor’s structure and function was elucidated by Scottish microbiologist Robert Macnab (1940–2003) at Yale
University.
What kinds of experiments reveal the motor components? An example of an experiment dissecting the flagellar motor is shown in Figure 3.43. Japanese microbiologist
Tohru Minamino and colleagues constructed strains of
Salmonella enterica in which the gene encoding fluorescent
GFP is fused to a gene encoding a flagellar motor protein,
MotB or FliG. Fluorescence microscopy reveals the concentration of GFP fluorescence at one or two positions within
the cell (green dots). A second fluorophore, Alexa, is conjugated to an anti-flagellin antibody. The Alexa fluorescence
(red) reveals the flagellar filament. When the green and red
fluorescence images are merged, the red flagellar filaments
ROBERT MACNAB. 1976.
J. CLIN. MICROBIOL. 4:258

A.

CAMR/A. BARRY DOWSETT

5 µm

1 µm

FIGURE 3.41

 Flagellated Salmonella bacteria. A. Salmonella enterica has multiple flagella (colorized TEM). B. The flagella
collect in a bundle behind a swimming cell. Under dark-field microscopy, the cell body appears overexposed, about five times as large as
the actual cell.

around the cell (Fig. 3.41A). The flagella rotate together in
a bundle behind the swimming cell (Fig. 3.41B). Lophotrichous cells, such as Rhodospirillum rubrum, have flagella
attached at one or both ends. In monotrichous (polar) species, such as the Caulobacter swarmer cell (see Fig. 3.32),
the cell has a single flagellum at one end.
How does a rotary flagellum work? Each flagellum has a
spiral filament of protein monomers called flagellin (protein
FliC) (Fig. 3.42). The filament actually rotates by means of

DAVID DEROSIER/BRANDEIS UNIVERSITY

A.

FliC

Flagellum

B.

L ring

L ring

Outer membrane

P ring

P ring

Peptidoglycan

MotB
Rotor
C ring

H+

H+

Rotor

FIGURE 3.42  The flagellar
motor. A. The basal body, or motor,

of the bacterial flagellum (TEM). This
image is based on digital reconstruction,
in which electron micrographs of
purified basal bodies were rotationally
averaged. B. The flagellar motor. H+ flow
through the MotA-MotB complex drives
motor rotation.

MotB

Cell membrane

MS ring (FIIF)
–

MotA

+

–

+

–

–

+

FliG

+
–

–

MotA

FliG

H+

H+

C ring

Phase contrast

GFP

Alexa

CELL STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION

FliG - GFP

113

B.

Merge

MotB - GFP



YUSUKE MORIMOTO, ET AL. 2010. MOLECULAR MICROBIOLOGY 78:1117.

FliG = GFP

MotB = GFP

A.



COURTESY OF PROTONIC NANOMACHINE GROUP, OSAKA UNIVERSITY

CHAPTER 3

FIGURE 3.43  Flagellar motor proteins localized by fluorescence microscopy. A. Cells of Salmonella enterica express a GFP
fused to flagellar motor protein MotB or to FliG. Bright green dots (white arrows) indicate GFP-protein complexed with a flagellar motor. The
flagellar filament is visualized via the red fluorophore Alexa, conjugated to an anti-flagellin antibody. The merged image shows how each flagellar filament (red) extends from a motor containing either MotB or FliG (green, protein fused to GFP). B. Tohru Minamino, Osaka University,
investigates the structure and function of the flagellar motor.

appear to extend from the motor positions that contain
either MotB or FliG. Further experiments dissect the roles
of key amino acid residues in the function of these proteins.

Note:

Bacterial flagella differ completely from the whiplike
flagella and cilia of eukaryotes. Eukaryotic flagella are much larger
structures containing multiple microtubules enclosed by a membrane (shown in Chapter 20). They move with a whiplike motion,
powered by ATP hydrolysis all along the flagellum.

Magnetotactic bacteria are anaerobes or microaerophiles
(require low oxygen), which prefer the lower part of the
water column, where oxygen concentration is lowest. In the
northern latitudes, where Earth’s magnetic field lines point
downward, bacteria that are magnetotactic swim “downward” toward magnetic north.
Thought Question

3.9 How would a magnetotactic species have to behave if
Chemotaxis. How do cells decide where to swim? Most

flagellated cells have an elaborate sensory system for taxis,
the ability to swim toward favorable environments (attractant signals, such as nutrients) and away from inferior environments (repellent signals, such as waste products). Taxis
to specific chemicals is called chemotaxis. For chemotaxis,
the attractants and repellents are detected by a polar array
of chemoreceptors. Chemoreceptors act like a “nose,” telling the bacterium when it is swimming toward a source of
attractant such as a sugar or an amino acid.
Another form of chemotaxis is magnetotaxis, the ability
to sense and respond to magnetism. Found in pond water,
magnetotactic bacteria orient themselves along the Earth’s
lines of magnetic field. Magnetotactic bacteria can be collected from the environment by placing a magnet in a jar
of pond water; bacteria orienting by the field lines collect
nearby. The bacteria sense the magnetic field by means of
magnetosomes, microscopic membrane-embedded crystals of the magnetic mineral magnetite, Fe3O4 (shown in
the previous chapter, Fig. 2.44). The magnetosomes orient bacterial swimming toward the bottom of the pond.

it was in the Southern Hemisphere instead of the Northern
Hemisphere?

Chemotaxis requires a mechanism for the rotary flagella to
propel the cell toward attractants or away from repellents. This
movement is accomplished by flagellar rotation either clockwise or counterclockwise relative to the cell (Fig. 3.44A).
When a cell is swimming toward an attractant chemical, the
flagella rotate counterclockwise (CCW), enabling the cell to
swim smoothly for a long stretch. When the cell veers away
from the attractant, receptors send a signal that allows one
or more flagella to switch rotation clockwise (CW), against
the twist of the helix. This switch in the direction of rotation disrupts the bundle of flagella, causing the cell to tumble briefly and end up pointed in a random direction. The
cell then swims off in the new direction. The resulting pattern of movement generates a “biased random walk” in which
the cell tends to migrate toward the attractant (Fig. 3.44B).
How do bacteria connect their flagellar switching mechanism
to the signal reception of their chemoreceptors? The signal
transduction mechanism is explained in Chapter 10.

114



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

B.

A.
Counterclockwise
(CCW) rotation moves
cell toward attractant.

Attractant

CCW swim toward
attractant

Receptors
for
attractants

CW tumble
Clockwise (CW) rotation
stops forward motion, so
cell tumbles and changes
direction.

Swim toward
attractant

Random walk

FIGURE 3.44

 Chemotaxis. A. Flagella are oriented in a bundle
extending behind one pole. When the cell veers away from the attractant, the receptors send a signal that allows one or more flagella
to switch rotation from counterclockwise (CCW) to clockwise (CW).
This switched rotation disrupts the bundle of flagella, causing the
cell to tumble briefly before it swims off in a new direction. B. The
pattern of movement is a “biased random walk” in which the cell
sometimes moves randomly but overall tends to migrate toward the
attractant.

Besides motility and chemotaxis, surprisingly, flagella
have also evolved an alternate function: adherence of
cells to a substrate to begin forming a biofilm (discussed
in Chapter 4). Thus, an organism can evolve a structure
that serves one function but later evolves to serve another
function.

To Summarize




Thought Question

3.10 Most laboratory strains of E. coli and Salmonella com-



monly used for genetic research lack flagella. Why do you think
this is the case? How can a researcher maintain a motile strain?

In addition to flagellar rotation, other forms of bacterial
motility are just beginning to be understood. For example,
“twitching motility” is a process by which bacteria such as
Pseudomonas aeruginosa use pili to drag themselves across
a surface. Twitching motility is involved in biofilm formation (discussed in Section 4.5). Another kind of motility, called “gliding,” is observed in cyanobacteria and in
myxobacteria.





Phototrophs possess thylakoid membrane organelles
packed with photosynthetic apparatus and carboxysomes for carbon dioxide fixation. Gas vesicles provide
buoyancy in the water column.
Storage granules store sulfur or carbon polymers for
energy.
Adherence structures enable prokaryotes to remain
in an environment with favorable environmental factors. Major adherence structures include pili or fimbriae (protein filaments), and the holdfast (a cell
extension).
Flagellar motility involves rotary motion of helical
flagella.
Chemoreceptors and magnetosomes provide information that directs flagellar motility. Chemotaxis is
a mechanism by which the cell migrates up a gradient of an attractant substance or down a gradient of
repellents.

CHAPTER 4



BACTERIAL CULTURE, GROWTH, AND DEVELOPMENT



117

CHAPTER 4

Bacterial Culture, Growth, and Development

W

here do bacteria find food, and how do
they grow? Bacteria struggle to survive in
natural habitats because they constantly
compete for food. Over eons, however, evolution
has enabled bacteria to find new nutritional niches
that require the microbes to consume strange foods
(mothballs, for instance), harness energy from light, or
survive boiling temperatures around deep-sea thermal
vents. In the process, single-celled organisms developed ways to chemically “talk” to each other and form
intricate multicellular communities called biofilms. The
one process that links all of these activities is growth.

4.2 Nutrient Uptake
4.3 Culturing and Counting Bacteria
4.4 The Growth Cycle
4.5 Biofilms
4.6 Cell Differentiation

C U R R E N T R E S E A RC H

highlight

Evolution in aging colonies. Bacteria in old colonies struggle
to survive because nutrients dwindle and toxic products rise.
Ivan Matic and Claude Saint-Ruf found aging colonies to be
breeding grounds for diversity. This 10-day-old E. coli colony
has numerous mutant islands expressing different patterns
of two fluorescent proteins (green and red). Inset: An island
with dead cells (blue) in the center surrounded by growing
cells (green) and dormant cells (red). The patterns suggest
that each island evolves independently and that death of the
first mutant cells provides nutrients for their descendants.
Source: Saint-Ruf et al. 2014. J. Bacteriol. 196:3059–3073.

Growing
cells
Dormant
cells
Dead cells

A N I N T E RV I E W W I T H
IVAN MATIC, MICROBIOLOGIST, UNIVERSITÉ PARIS
DESCARTES

How have studies on aging colonies
altered our view of bacterial diversity?
The capacity of microbes to colonize
practically all environmental niches on
Earth fascinates us. Our work demonstrates that microhabitats within structured environments are important for
shaping this diversity. For instance,
environmental parameters of microhabitats in a bacterial colony continuously change as a
consequence of bacterial activity. The disparate selective
pressures that result favor the emergence and coexistence
of diverse variants that could evolve to inhabit new environmental niches. In a homogeneous environment, by contrast,
natural selection reduces diversity by eliminating all but the
fittest variants.
© SEBASTIEN FLEURIER

4.1 Microbial Nutrition

What application(s) might stem from your work?

500 μm

Our study illustrates how novel metabolic capabilities can
emerge in bacteria, transforming them, for example, into
more successful host invaders. Our work may also explain
how heritable antibiotic tolerance develops even in the
absence of antimicrobial agents. Learning how drug tolerance evolves in structured environments may influence how
we use antibiotics to treat bacterial infections.
117

118



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

Like all living things, microorganisms need sources of carcommunities that bacterial cells form while they grow and
bon and energy to grow. As those resources are depleted,
how some species differentiate into unique forms able to surorganisms can do one of the following: they can die (most
vive starvation or explore for new sources of food—all so they
do), evolve to better use what little resource remains, or cancan grow again.
nibalize other, less fortunate members of the community. All
three of these possible outcomes were observed within the
single colony described in the Current Research Highlight.
What is the evidence that cells taken from the growth
islands in aging colonies have actually evolved? Claude
Bacterial cells look simple but are remarkably complex and
Saint-Ruf (Fig 4.1A), working with Ivan Matic, isolated
efficient replication machines. One cell of Escherichia coli,
numerous variants from islands in aging colonies. She then
for example, can divide to form two cells every 20–30 mintested how well these variant cells competed with their
utes. At a rate of 30 minutes per division, one cell could
parental strains for growth in reconstructed aging colonies.
potentially multiply to over 1 × 1014 cells in 24 hours—that
Equal numbers of parental and variant cells were mixed,
is, 100 trillion organisms! Although these 100 trillion cells
spotted onto solid growth media (agar), and incubated for
would weigh only about 1 gram altogether, the mass of cells
7 days. In Figure 4.1B, you can see in the control (top
would explode to 1014 grams (that is, 107 tons) after another
panel) that two parents labeled with different fluorescent
24 hours (two days total) of replicating every 30 minutes.
proteins grew equally well on agar when mixed. However,
Why, then, are we not buried under mountains of E. coli?
the lower panel clearly shows that a variant strain (green)
has outcompeted its parent (red) in the reconstructed aging
colony. The results show that evolution in aging colonies
Nutrient Supplies Limit Microbial Growth
will generate mutants that better utilize dwindling nutriOne factor limiting growth is the finite supply of nutrients or the end products of metabolism.
ents. Microbes, in fact, often live where nutrients are scarce.
Understanding how bacteria
B.
use food to increase cell mass and, A.
Parental (red)/Parental (green) mixed colony
ultimately, cell number enables us
to control their growth and even
manipulate them to make useful
products. Yeast, for example, consume glucose and break it down
to ethanol and carbon dioxide gas.
These end products are mere waste
to the yeast, but extremely important to humans who enjoy beer.
Chapter 4 provides a broad perspective of microbial growth, intro1 mm
ducing topics that will be expanded
Parental (red)/variant (green) mixed colony
on in later chapters. We start by discussing the nutrients bacteria need
to grow and the ways nutrients are
used. For example, how do different bacteria obtain carbon and nitrogen, where do they get their energy,
and what mechanisms do they use
to gather the nutrients they need?
(The details of metabolism emerge
in Chapters 13, 14, and 15.) Next we
explain how scientists use our knowledge of microbial nutrition to cul1 mm
ture bacteria in the laboratory and
FIGURE 4.1 Survival of the fittest in aging colonies. A. Claude Saint-Ruf examined growth
measure their growth. And we poncompetition between parental E. coli and evolved variants found within an aging colony (Current
der, why do most bacterial species Research Highlight). B. 100 cells of a variant and 100 cells of its parent were mixed and spotted
growing in the world fail to grow onto growth agar. Two parental strains labeled with different fluorescent proteins can be seen in
in the lab? We end by describing the the top panel; the bottom panel shows a parental strain (red) mixed with a variant strain (green).

CLAUDE SAINT-RUF, ET AL. 2014. JOURNAL OF BACTERIOLOGY 196: 3059-3073

Microbial Nutrition

© SEBASTIEN FLEURIER

4.1

CHAPTER 4



BACTERIAL CULTURE, GROWTH, AND DEVELOPMENT



119

A. Heterotrophy
B. Autotrophy

Polysaccharides

Light absorption

ATP

or

Glucose (6C)
Lipids
Peptides
Lignin

Glycolysis
Pyruvate (3C)

Mineral oxidation

NADPH

Lithotrophy

Glucose
Carbon
fixation
CO2 + H2O

C.
Acetate (2C)

TCA
Cycle

Citrate
CO2 + H2O

Oxidative respiration
25 µm

FIGURE 4.2  The carbon cycle. The carbon cycle requires both autotrophs and heterotrophs. A. Heterotrophs gain energy from degrading complex organic compounds (such as polysaccharides) to smaller compounds (such as glucose and pyruvate). The carbon from pyruvate
moves through the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle and is released as CO2. In the absence of a TCA cycle, the carbon can end up as fermentation
products, such as ethanol or acetic acid. B. Autotrophs use light energy or energy derived from the oxidation of minerals to capture CO2 and
convert it to complex organic molecules. C. Chloroflexus aggregans, originally isolated from hot springs in Japan, possesses extraordinary
metabolic versatility. It grows anaerobically (without oxygen) as a photoheterotroph and aerobically (with oxygen) as a chemoheterotroph.

Essential nutrients are those compounds that a microbe
must have but cannot make. The organism needs to find and
import these nutrients from the immediate environment.
When an essential nutrient becomes depleted, microbes
cannot grow. How organisms cope with these periods of
starvation until nutrients are restored will be discussed later.
All microorganisms require a minimum set of macronutrients, nutrients needed in large quantities (as discussed in Chapter 3). Six macronutrients—carbon, nitrogen,
phosphorus, hydrogen, oxygen, and sulfur—make up
the carbohydrates, lipids, nucleic acids, and proteins of
the cell. Four other macronutrients are cations that serve
as cofactors for specific enzymes (Mg2+, Fe2+, and K+)
or act as regulatory signaling molecules (Ca2+). All cells also
require very small amounts of certain trace elements, called
micronutrients. These include cobalt, copper, manganese,
molybdenum, nickel, and zinc, which are ubiquitous trace
contaminants on glassware and in water. As a result, these
elements are not added to laboratory media unless heroic
measures have been taken to first remove the elements from
the medium. Micronutrients are required by cells as essential
components of enzymes or cofactors. Cobalt, for example, is
part of the cofactor vitamin B12.
Some organisms, such as the common laboratory bacterium E. coli, make all their proteins, nucleic acids, and cell wall
and membrane components from this very simple blend of
chemical elements and compounds. For many other microbes,
this basic set of nutrients is insufficient. Borrelia burgdorferi,

for example, the cause of Lyme disease, requires an extensive
mixture of complex organic supplements to grow.

Microbes Build Biomass through
Autotrophy or Heterotrophy

Maintaining life on this planet is an amazing process. All of
Earth’s life-forms are based on carbon, which they acquire
through delicately choreographed processes that recycle
key nutrients. The carbon cycle, a critical part of this process, involves two counterbalancing kinds of metabolism:
heterotrophy and autotrophy. The metabolic details of
these pathways are discussed later, in Chapters 13 and 14.
Heterotrophs (such as E. coli) rely on other organisms
to form the organic compounds (such as glucose) that
they use as carbon sources. Most heterotrophs are organotrophs. Organotrophy is a form of metabolism in which
organic carbon sources are disassembled in ways that generate energy and then reassembled to make cell constituents
such as proteins and carbohydrates (Fig. 4.2A). This process converts a large amount of the organic carbon source
to CO2, which is then released to the atmosphere. Thus,
left on their own, heterotrophs would deplete the world of
organic carbon sources (converting them to unusable CO2)
and then starve to death. For life to continue, CO2 must be
recycled.
Autotrophs (such as cyanobacteria) assimilate CO2
as a carbon source, reducing it (adding hydrogen atoms)

COURTESY OF SATOSHI HANADA, NATIONAL
INSTITUTE OF ADVANCED INDUSTRIAL SCIENCE
AND TECHNOLOGY

Acetyl-CoA

Acetyl-CoA
Fermentation
products

Phototrophy

120



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

to generate complex cell constituents made up of C, H,
and O (for example, carbohydrates, which have the general formula CH 2O) (Fig. 4.2B). When autotrophs later
die or are eaten, these organic compounds can be used
as carbon sources by heterotrophs. Autotrophs are classified as photoautotrophs or chemolithoautotrophs by how
they obtain energy. Photoautotrophs use light energy to
fix CO2 into biomass, whereas chemolithoautotrophs fix
CO2 using chemical reactions without light. Most chemolithoautotrophs gain energy by oxidizing inorganic substances such as iron or ammonia (described next). Both
photoautotrophs and chemolithoautotrophs carry out the
autotrophic process of CO2 fixation, which forms part of
the carbon cycle between autotrophs and heterotrophs
(Fig. 4.2). In addition, many microorganisms (for example, phototrophic soil bacteria) can use both heterotrophy
and autotrophy to gain carbon.
Thought Question

4.1 In a mixed ecosystem of autotrophs and heterotrophs,
what happens if the autotroph begins to outgrow the
heterotroph and makes excess organic carbon?

Microbes Obtain Energy through
Phototrophy or Chemotrophy

Although the macronutrients mentioned earlier (C, N, P,
H, O, and S) provide the essential building blocks to make
proteins and other cell structures, all synthetic processes
require an energy source. Depending on the organism,
energy can be obtained from chemical reactions triggered
by the absorption of light (phototrophy, or photosynthesis) or from oxidation-reduction reactions that transfer
electrons from high-energy compounds to make products
of lower energy (chemotrophy), capturing the energy difference to do work. Chemotrophic organisms fall into two
classes that use different sources of electron donors: lithotrophs (also called chemolithotrophs) and organotrophs
(chemoorganotrophs). Lithotrophs remove electrons (oxidize) inorganic chemicals (for example, H 2, H 2S, NH4+,
NO2 –, and Fe2+) for energy, whereas organotrophs oxidize
organic compounds (for example, sugars). Oxidation and
reduction is reviewed in eAppendix 1.
What if a microbe conducts more than one type of
metabolism? Many free-living soil and aquatic bacteria
can obtain energy from heterotrophy, lithotrophy, and
phototrophy, all in one cell. Such microbes are called
mixotrophs or photoheterotrophs. A photoheterotroph
has multiple gene systems that are expressed under different conditions and yield products that carry out different
functions. For example, Rhodospirillum rubrum grows by
photoheterotrophy when light is available and oxygen is

absent, but by respiration, without absorbing light, when
O2 is available.

Note:

The following prefixes for “-trophy” terms help distinguish
different forms of biomass-building and energy-yielding metabolism.
Carbon source for biomass:
Auto-: CO2 is fixed and assembled into organic molecules.
Hetero-: Preformed organic molecules are acquired from outside, broken down for carbon, and the carbon reassembled to
make biomass.

Energy source:
Photo-: Light absorption captures energy.
Chemo-: Chemical electron donors are oxidized.
Electron source:
Litho-: Inorganic molecules donate electrons.
Organo-: Organic molecules donate electrons.

In chemotrophy, the amount of energy harvested from
oxidizing a compound depends on the compound’s reduction state. The more reduced the compound is, the more
electrons it has to give up and the higher is the potential
energy yield. A reduced compound, such as glucose, can
donate electrons to a less reduced (more oxidized) compound, such as nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD),
releasing energy (in the form of donated electrons) and
becoming oxidized in the process. NAD is a cell molecule
critical to energy metabolism and is discussed, along with
oxidation-reduction reactions, in Chapter 13.
In short, microbes are classified on the basis of their carbon and energy acquisition as follows:


Autotroph (autotrophy). Autotrophs build biomass by
fi xing CO2 into complex organic molecules. Autotrophs
gain energy through one of two general metabolic routes
that either use or ignore light.
Photoautotroph
(photoautotrophy).
Photoautotrophs generate energy through light absorption by the
photolysis (light-activated breakdown) of H 2O or H 2S.
The energy is used to fix CO2 into biomass.
Chemolithoautotroph
(chemolithoautotrophy).
Chemolithoautotrophs produce energy from oxidizing
inorganic molecules such as iron, sulfur, or nitrogen.
This energy is used to fix CO2 into biomass.



Heterotroph (heterotrophy). Heterotrophs break
down organic compounds from other organisms to gain
energy and to harvest carbon for building their own
biomass. Heterotrophic metabolism can be divided into
two classes, also based on whether light is involved.
Photoheterotroph (photoheterotrophy). Photoheterotrophs obtain energy from the catabolism of organic
compounds and through light absorption. Organic
compounds are broken down and used to build biomass.



BACTERIAL CULTURE, GROWTH, AND DEVELOPMENT

FIGURE 4.3  Bacterial metabolism in an Antarctic
desert. Mars Oasis, Alexander Island (average winter temperature:

Paenibacillus
wynnii

–40°C; average summer temperature: 3°C), where scientists warm
the soil to test the ecological effects of global climate change.
Inset: Endolithic cyanobacteria, and the endospore-forming
heterotroph Paenibacillus wynnii.
Cyanobacteria
grow within rock.

Endospore

-15˚C



121

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF SYSTEMATIC AND
EVOLUTIONARY MICROBIOLOGY SEPT. 2005 55: 2093-2099,
DOI: 10.1099/IJS.0.63395-0, FIG 1.

CHAPTER 4

MARS OASIS, ANTARCTICA. UNIVERSITY OF BRADFORD.

2 µm

NIALL A. LOGAN, 2005. INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF SYSTEMATIC AND EVOLUTIONARY
MICROBIOLOGY 55: 2093.

Chemoheterotroph (chemoheterotrophy or organotrophy). Chemoheterotrophs obtain energy and carbon
for biomass solely from organic compounds. Chemoheterotrophy is also called chemoorganotrophy or, commonly, just heterotrophy.
The survival and metabolism of any one group of organisms depend on the survival and metabolism of other groups
of organisms. For example, the cyanobacteria, a type of
photosynthetic microorganism that originated 2.5–3.5 billion years ago, produce most of the oxygen that we breathe.
Cyanobacteria also depend on heterotrophic bacteria to
consume the molecular oxygen that the cyanobacteria produce, since molecular oxygen is toxic to cyanobacteria.
A present-day cyanobacteria-containing ecosystem that
may resemble that of ancient Earth is the polar desert Mars
Oasis, on Alexander Island, Antarctica (Fig. 4.3). In this
harsh habitat, cyanobacteria grow in soil and even as “endoliths” within rock. In the soil we find heterotrophs such as
Paenibacillus wynnii. P. wynnii consumes oxygen to catabolize many carbohydrates to CO2, and also fixes its own
nitrogen from the atmosphere. The bacteria can make endospores (see Section 4.6), which survive during long periods
of dormancy, such as the Antarctic winter. Researchers set
up experiments to test the effect of heating the soil, as a
simulation of climate change, on the ecosystem.
Today, cyanobacteria form the base of Earth’s marine
food chain. The autotrophic cyanobacteria fix carbon in
the ocean and are eaten by heterotrophic protists. The
protists are then devoured by fish, and the fish produce
the CO2 fixed by the cyanobacteria. And eventually, we
eat the fish.

Energy Is Stored for Later Use

Whatever the source, energy, once obtained, must be
converted to a form useful to the cell. This form can be
chemical energy, such as that contained in the high-energy
phosphate bonds in adenosine triphosphate (ATP), or it can
be electrochemical energy, which is stored in the form of
an electrical potential generated between compartments
separated by a membrane (see Chapter 14). Energy stored
by an electrical potential across the membrane is known as
the membrane potential. A membrane potential is generated when chemical (or light) energy is used to pump protons outside of the cell, making the proton concentration
greater outside the cell than inside. For example, membrane
proteins such as cytochrome oxidases use energy from respiration to pump hydrogen ions across the cell membrane,
generating a hydrogen ion gradient. This movement of positively charged ions produces an electrical gradient across
the cell membrane, making the inside of the cell more negatively charged than the outside. The hydrogen ion gradient plus the charge difference (voltage potential) across the
membrane form an electrochemical potential. Because
this electrochemical potential includes the hydrogen ion
gradient, it is called the proton potential, or proton
motive force. The energy stored in the proton motive force
can be used by specific transport proteins to move nutrients
into the cell (see Section 3.3), to directly drive motors that
rotate flagella, and to drive the synthesis of ATP by a membrane-embedded ATP synthase (Fig. 4.4A).
The membrane-embedded F-ATP synthase, also called
F1Fo ATP synthase, provides most of the ATP for aerobic
respiring cells such as E. coli. Essentially the same complex

122



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

A.

a

Cell membrane Fo

Nickel post

"!

%
Cytoplasm F1

Nanopropeller

c

b

2. Proton flow
causes F1 to
rotate.

B.

1. Proton flow through
Fo rotor is driven by
proton motive force.

H+

#

$

ADP + Pi
F1

#

#

$

3. F1 rotation
ATP

FIGURE 4.4  Bacterial membrane ATP synthase. A. The Fo portion of the F1Fo complex of ATP synthase is embedded in the cell
membrane. B. An artificial “biomolecular motor” was built from an ATP synthase F1 unit attached to a nickel post and a nanopropeller.

A.

Rhizobia

FRANK DAZZO, MICHIGAN STATE UNIVERSITY

mediates ATP generation in our own mitochondria. ATP
synthase is a complex of many different proteins. The
enzyme includes a channel (Fo) that allows H+ to move
across the membrane and drive rotation of the ATP synthase complex (F1). Rotation of F1 mediates the formation
of ATP. The role of the proton potential in metabolism is
discussed in detail in Chapters 13 and 14.
The idea that a living organism could contain rotating
parts was controversial when such parts were first discovered in bacterial flagella (discussed in Section 3.6). The
discovery of rotary biomolecules has inspired advances in
nanotechnology, the engineering of microscopic devices.
For example, a “biomolecular motor” was devised using an
ATP synthase F1 complex to drive a metal submicroscopic
propeller (Fig. 4.4B). In the future, such biomolecular
design may be used to build microscopic robots that enter
the bloodstream to perform microsurgery.

Tip of clover
root hair
3 μm

B.

Root nodule

Nitrogen is an essential component of proteins, nucleic
acids, and other cellular constituents, and as such, is
required in large amounts by living organisms. So how
do bacteria get nitrogen? Nitrogen gas (N2) makes up
nearly 79% of Earth’s atmosphere, but most organisms
are unable to use nitrogen gas, because the triple bond
between the two nitrogen atoms is highly stable and
requires considerable energy to be broken. For nitrogen to be used for growth, it must first be “fixed,” or
converted to ammonium ions (NH4 +). Nitrogen gas is
converted to NH4 + by nitrogen-fixing bacteria. The
ammonium is then used by all microbes to make amino
acids and other nitrogenous compounds needed for
growth.

INGA SPENCE/SCIENCE SOURCE

The Nitrogen Cycle

FIGURE 4.5

Rhizobium and a legume. A. Symbiotic
Rhizobium cells clustered on a clover root tip (SEM). Although the
rhizobia (about 0.9 µm × 3 µm) are shown clustered on the surface
of the root, they will soon invade the root and begin a symbiotic
partnership that will benefit both organisms. B. Root nodules. After
the rhizobia invade the plant root, symbiosis between plant and
microbe produces nodules.


CHAPTER 4



BACTERIAL CULTURE, GROWTH, AND DEVELOPMENT

Nitrogen-fixing bacteria may be free-living in soil or
water, or they may form symbiotic associations with plants
or other organisms. A symbiont is an organism that lives in
intimate association with a second organism. For example,
Rhizobium, Sinorhizobium, and Bradyrhizobium species
are nitrogen-fixing symbionts of leguminous plants such as
soybeans, chickpeas, and clover (Fig. 4.5). Although symbionts are the most widely known nitrogen-fixing bacteria,
the majority of nitrogen in soil and marine environments is
fixed by free-living bacteria and archaea.
Once fixed, how does nitrogen get back into the atmosphere? As with the carbon cycle, various groups of organisms collaborate to recycle ammonium ions and nitrate
ions (NO3 –) into nitrogen gas in what is called the nitrogen cycle, and they collect energy in the process (Fig. 4.6).
One group of bacteria gains energy by converting, or oxidizing, ammonia to form nitrate in a process called nitrification (Nitrosomonas, Alcaligenes, and Nitrobacter).
Nitrification is a form of lithotrophy. Other heterotrophic
microbes (Paracoccus) can reduce nitrate to N2 via denitrification, a process that uses nitrate and related inorganic forms of nitrogen as terminal electron acceptors
for certain electron transport chains. Denitrifying bacteria send an amount of nitrogen into the atmosphere that
roughly balances the amount removed by nitrogen fixation. Like the carbon cycle, the nitrogen cycle illustrates
how nature manages to replenish planet Earth. For the
environmental significance of nitrogen metabolism, see
Chapter 22.

1. Nitrogenase
fixes atmospheric
N2 to ammonia.

N2

Paracoccus
3. Denitrifiers
use oxidized
forms (e.g.,
nitrate) as
alternative e–
acceptors.

Denitrifiers

Nitrogen fixers

NO3–

Rhizobium

NH4+
Nitrifiers

2. Nitrifiers oxidize
NH4+ to generate
energy.

Nitrosomonas,
Nitrobacter

FIGURE 4.6

 The nitrogen cycle. Different sets of bacteria fix
nitrogen from atmospheric nitrogen gas (N2) to form ammonia (NH4+),
convert NH4+ to nitrate (NO3+/), and return N2 to the atmosphere.



123

To Summarize














Microorganisms require certain essential macro- and
micronutrients to grow.
Autotrophs use CO2 as a carbon source, either through
photosynthesis or through lithotrophy, and make
organic compounds as biomass.
Heterotrophs consume the organic compounds made
by autotrophs to gain carbon.
Energy gained by autotrophy or chemotrophy is
stored either as proton motive force or chemical energy
(ATP).
Nitrogen fixers (only bacteria and archaea) incorporate
nitrogen into biomass and contribute organic nitrogen
to the rest of the ecosystem.
Chemotrophic nitrifying bacteria gain energy by
converting NH4+ (made by nitrogen-fixing bacteria)
into nitrate and nitrite.
Heterotrophic denitrifying organisms use nitrate and
nitrite as electron acceptors to make nitrogen gas.

4.2

Nutrient Uptake

How do bacteria gather nutrients? Whether a microbe
swims by f lagella toward a favorable habitat or, lacking
motility, drifts through its environment, the organism
must be able to find nutrients and move them across the
membrane into the cytoplasm. The membrane, however,
presents a daunting obstacle. Membranes are designed to
separate what is outside the cell from what is inside. So,
for a cell to gain sustenance from the environment, the
membrane must be selectively permeable to nutrients the
cell can use. A few compounds, such as oxygen and carbon dioxide, can passively diffuse across the membrane,
but most cannot. Selective permeability is achieved in
three ways:


Substrate-specific carrier proteins (permeases) in the
membrane



Nutrient-binding proteins that patrol the periplasmic
space



Membrane-spanning protein channels, or pores, that
discriminate between substrates

Microbes must also overcome the problem of low
nutrient concentrations in the natural environment (for
example, lakes or streams). If the intracellular concentration of nutrients were no greater than the extracellular

124



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

A.

B.
Glycerol
channel

Glycerol

Glycerol
Extracellular
fluid

GlpF
1. Glycerol enters
the GlpF channel.

Cell
membrane

Cytoplasm

2. A conformational
change in GlpF opens
the channel to the
cytoplasm, and glycerol
enters the cell.

FIGURE 4.7

In passive transport,
transport solutes move
down the concentration gradient.

 Facilitated diffusion. A. The glycerol transporter of E. coli,
viewed from the external side of the membrane, consists of four channels that
span the cell membrane. Each channel (blue and yellow) can transport two glycerol
molecules (magenta) at a time. (PDB code: 1FX8) B. Facilitated diffusion of glycerol
through GlpF. The protein facilitates the movement of the compound from outside
the cell (where the concentration of glycerol is high) to inside the cell (where the
concentration of glycerol is low).

concentration, the cell would remain starved of most
nutrients. To solve this dilemma, most organisms have
evolved efficient transport systems that concentrate
nutrients inside the cell relative to outside. However,
moving molecules against a concentration gradient
requires some form of energy.
In contrast to environments where nutrients are available but exist at low concentrations (for example, aqueous
environments), certain habitats have plenty of nutrients
but those nutrients are locked in a form that cannot be
transported into the cell. Starch, a large, complex carbohydrate, is but one example. Many microbes unlock
these nutrient “vaults” by secreting digestive enzymes
that break down complex carbohydrates or other molecules into smaller compounds that are easier to transport. The amazing mechanisms that cells use to extrude
these large digestive proteins through the membrane
and into their surrounding environment are discussed in
Chapter 8.

Facilitated Diffusion

Although most transport systems use cellular energy to
bring compounds into the cell, a few do not. Facilitated
diffusion uses the concentration gradient of a compound
to move that compound across the membrane from a compartment of higher concentration to a compartment of
lower concentration. The best these passive systems can do
is to equalize the internal and external concentrations of a
solute; facilitated transport cannot move a molecule against
its gradient. Facilitated diffusion systems are used for compounds that are either too large or too polar to diffuse on
their own.

The most important facilitated diffusion transporters
are those of the aquaporin family that transport water and
small polar molecules such as glycerol (which is used for
energy and for building phospholipids). Glycerol transport
is performed by an integral membrane protein in E. coli
called GlpF. The structure of a glycerol channel is shown in
Figure 4.7A, where the complex is viewed from the outer
face of the membrane. The complex is a tetramer of four
channels, each of which transports a glycerol.
In the membrane, GlpF reversibly (and randomly)
assumes two conformations. One form exposes the
glycerol-binding site to the external environment, whereas
the second form exposes this site to the cytoplasm. When the
concentration of glycerol is greater outside than inside the
cell, the form with the binding site exposed to the exterior
is more likely to find and bind glycerol. After binding glycerol, GlpF changes shape, closing itself to the exterior and
opening to the interior (Fig. 4.7B). Bound glycerol is then
released (diffuses) into the cytoplasm (influx). Of course,
this form of GlpF could also bind a glycerol molecule in
the cytoplasm and release it outside the cell. Thus, once
the cytoplasmic concentration of glycerol equals the concentration outside the cell, bound glycerol can be released
to either compartment. However, facilitated diffusion normally promotes glycerol influx, because the cell consumes
the compound as it enters the cytoplasm, keeping cytoplasmic concentrations of glycerol low.

Active Transport Requires Energy

Most forms of transport expend energy to take up molecules from outside the cell and concentrate them inside.
The ability to import nutrients against their natural

CHAPTER 4



BACTERIAL CULTURE, GROWTH, AND DEVELOPMENT



125

B. Antiport

A. Symport
1. Energy is released as one substrate (red)
moves down its concentration gradient.
2. This energy moves a second
substrate (blue) against its
gradient and into the cell.

1. Antiporter binds
substrate A (red) on
the cytoplasmic side
of the membrane.

2. Antiporter opens to the outside,
where the concentration of A is less.

3. Substrate A leaves its binding site, and
substrate B (blue) then binds to its site.

Outside

Outside

Cell
membrane
Inside

Inside

4. Antiporter opens to the
inside of the cell. Substrate B
is released in exchange for
substrate A.

COURTESY OF RONALD KABACK

C.

concentration gradients is critical in aquatic habitats, where
nutrient concentrations are low, and in soil habitats, where
competition for nutrients is high.
The simplest way to use energy to move molecules across
a membrane is to exchange the energy of one chemical
gradient for that of another. The most common chemical
gradients used are those of ions, particularly the positively
charged ions Na+ and K+. These ions are kept at different
concentrations on either side of the cell membrane. When
an ion moves down its concentration gradient (from high
to low), energy is released. Some transport proteins harness
that free energy and use it to drive transport of a second
molecule up, or against, its concentration gradient in the
process called coupled transport.
The two types of coupled transport systems are symport, in which the two molecules travel in the same direction (Fig. 4.8A), and antiport, in which the actively
transported molecule moves in the direction opposite
that of the driving ion (Fig. 4.8B). An example of a symporter is the lactose permease LacY of E. coli, one of the
first transport proteins to have its function elucidated.
This work was carried out by the pioneering membrane
biochemist H. Ronald Kaback (Fig. 4.8C). LacY moves
lactose inward, powered by a proton that is also moving
inward (symport). LacY proton-driven transport is said to

FIGURE 4.8  Coupled transport. In both symport (A) and antiport (B), substrate B (blue) is taken up against its gradient because
of the energy released by substrate A (red) traveling down its gradient. C. Ronald Kaback (left) of UCLA elucidated the mechanism of
transport by the proton-driven lactose symporter LacY.

be electrogenic because an unequal distribution of charge
results (for example, symport of a neutral lactose molecule
with H+ results in net movement of positive charge).
An example of electroneutral coupled transport, in
which there is no net transfer of charge, is that of the Na+/
H+ antiporter. The Na+/H+ antiporter couples the export
of Na+ with the import of a proton (antiport). Because molecules of like charges are merely exchanged, there is no net
movement of charge. Sodium exchange is important for all
organisms and is particularly critical for organisms living in
high-salt habitats (see Section 5.4).
Thought Questions

4.2 In what situation would antiport and symport be passive
rather than active transport?
4.3 What kind of transporter, other than an antiporter, could
produce electroneutral coupled transport?

Symport and antiport transporter proteins function by
alternately opening one end or the other of a channel that
spans the cell membrane. The channel contains solute-binding sites (Fig. 4.8A and B). When the channel is open to the
high-concentration side of the membrane, the driving ion

126



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

(solute) attaches to the binding sites. The transport protein
then changes shape to open that site to the low-concentration
side of the membrane, and the ion leaves. When and where
the second (cotransported) solute binds depends on whether
the transport protein is an antiporter or a symporter.
With all this ion traffic across the membrane going on, a
careful accounting must be kept of how many ions are inside
the cell relative to outside. The cell must recirculate ions
back and forth across the membrane to maintain certain
gradients if the organism is to survive. Because key ATPproducing systems require an electrochemical gradient
across the membrane, it is especially important to keep the
interior of the cell negatively charged relative to the exterior. However, because the movement of many compounds
is coupled to the import of positive ions, the electrochemical gradient will eventually dissipate, or depolarize, unless
positive ions are also exported. Depolarization must be
avoided, because a depolarized cell loses membrane integrity and cannot carry out the transport functions needed
to sustain growth. A healthy cell maintains a proper charge
balance by using the electron transport chain to move protons out of the cell and by using antiporters to exchange
negatively and positively charged ions as needed.
While symport and antiport systems directly link the
transport of different ions, the movement of one ion can
also be linked indirectly to movement of another molecule.
For example, proton concentrations are typically greater
outside the cell than inside. The inwardly directed proton
gradient is called proton motive force. Proton motive force
can impel the exit of Na+ through the Na+/H+ antiporter.
The resulting Na+ gradient can then drive the symport of
amino acids into the cell. In this case, Na+ moves back into
the cell down its gradient, and the energy released is tied to
the import of an amino acid against its gradient.

ABC Transporters Are Powered by ATP

As we pointed out in Section 3.2, a major function of
proton transport is to form the proton motive force that

Periplasm

Solutebinding
protein

powers ATP synthesis (for details on the proton motive
force, see Chapter 14). The energy stored in ATP can then
drive membrane transport of nutrients.
The largest family of energy-driven transport systems is the
ATP-binding cassette superfamily, also known as ABC transporters. These transporters are found in bacteria, archaea,
and eukaryotes. All of them appear to have arisen from a common ancestral porter, so they share a considerable amount of
amino acid sequence homology. Many different ABC transporters mediate the transport of a wide variety of substrates.
It is impressive that nearly 5% of the E. coli genome
is dedicated to producing the components of 70 different varieties of uptake and efflux ABC transporters. The
uptake ABC transporters are critical for transporting nutrients such as maltose, histidine, arabinose, and galactose.
The efflux ABC transporters are generally used as multidrug efflux pumps that allow microbes to survive exposures to hazardous chemicals. Lactococcus, for example, can
use a pump called LmrP to export a broad range of antibiotics, including tetracyclines, streptogramins, quinolones,
macrolides, and aminoglycosides, thus conferring resistance to those drugs (see Section 27.3).
An ABC transporter typically consists of two hydrophobic proteins that form a membrane channel and two cytoplasmic proteins that contain a highly conserved amino acid
motif, called the ATP-binding cassette, that binds ATP.
The ABC transporter superfamily contains both uptake and
efflux transport systems. The uptake systems (but not the
efflux systems) possess an additional, extracytoplasmic protein, called a substrate-binding protein, that initially binds
the substrate (also called solute). In Gram-negative bacteria, these substrate-binding proteins float in the periplasmic
space between the inner and outer membranes. In Grampositive bacteria, which lack an outer membrane, the proteins
must be tethered to the cell surface.
ABC transport (Fig. 4.9) starts with the substratebinding protein snagging the appropriate solute, either as it
floats by a Gram-positive microbe or as the molecule enters
the periplasm of a Gram-negative cell. Most substrates

Solute
1. Solute binds to its cognate
periplasmic binding protein,
and the complex then binds
to the membrane transporter
(green).

Cell membrane

Cytoplasm

2. The ATPase activity of one
component (yellow) powers
the opening of the channel
(green) and movement of the
solute into the cell.

ATP
ADP + P

FIGURE 4.9



ABC (ATP-binding cassette) transporter in a Gram-negative organism.

ATP
ADP + P

CHAPTER 4



BACTERIAL CULTURE, GROWTH, AND DEVELOPMENT

FIGURE 4.10  Siderophores and iron
transport. A. This model shows the E. coli

A.
1. The siderophore called enterochelin is
secreted and binds Fe3+.

siderophore called enterochelin. B. Susan
Buchanan examines the molecular structure
and assembly of various transport proteins in
Gram-negative bacteria.

Fe3+
Fe3+

2. The complex is transported to the periplasm
through an outer membrane protein (FepA).

Enterocheliniron complex

Outer
membrane
FepB

FepA

4. The enterocherlin-Fe3+
complex enters the cell.

FepG

FepC

3. A periplasmic binding
protein escorts the complex
to an ABC transporter.

FepD

FepC

ATP

Fe3+

127

to move the substrate into the periplasm. Because substrate-binding
proteins have a high affinity for their
cognate (matched) solutes, their use
increases the efficiency of transport
when concentrations of solute are low.
Once united with its solute, the
binding protein binds to the periplasmic
face of the channel protein and releases
the solute, which now moves to a site
on the channel protein. This interaction triggers a structural (or conformational) change in the channel protein
(the green “membrane transporter”
in Fig. 4.9) that is telegraphed to the
nucleotide-binding proteins on the
cytoplasmic side (yellow). On receiving
this signal, the nucleotide-binding proteins start hydrolyzing ATP and send a
return conformational change through
the channel, signaling the channel to
open its cytoplasmic side and allow the
solute to enter the cell.

Cell
membrane

Siderophores Are
Secreted to Scavenge Iron

ATPase
ATP

ADP + P

ADP + P



Iron, an essential nutrient of most cells, is
mostly locked up in nature as Fe(OH)3,
which is insoluble and unavailable for
transport. Many bacteria and fungi have
solved this transport dilemma by synthesizing and secreting specialized molecules called siderophores (Greek for
“iron bearer”), which have a very high affinity for the small
“ir
amounts of soluble ferric iron available in the environment.
These iron scavenger molecules are produced and secreted
by cells when the intracellular iron concentration is low
(Fig. 4.10). In most Gram-negative organisms, the siderophore (for example, enterochelin in E. coli) binds iron in the
environment, and the siderophore-iron complex then attaches
to specific receptors in the outer membrane. At this point,
either the iron is released directly and is passed to other transport proteins or the complex is transported across the cytoplasmic membrane by a dedicated ABC transporter. The iron
is released intracellularly and reduced from Fe3+ to Fe2+ for
biosynthetic use. Other Gram-negative microorganisms, such
as Neisseria gonorrhoeae (the causative agent of gonorrhea), do
not use siderophores at all but employ receptors on their surface that bind human iron complexes (for example, transferrin
or lactoferrin) and wrest the iron from them.
Because microbial iron-transporting proteins are critical
to the pathogenesis of many microbes, solving the molecular

5. Inside the cell, the iron is
released and reduced to Fe2+.
+ Fe2+

PHOTOGRAPH BY RHODA BAER

B.

nonspecifically enter the periplasm of Gram-negative
organisms through the outer membrane pores, although
some high-molecular-weight substrates, like vitamin B12,
require the assistance of a specific outer membrane protein

128



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

an intermediate in glycolysis, to
attach a phosphate to specific
sugars during their transport into
the cell (Fig. 4.11 ). Glucose,
O
Glucose
IIB
CH2
for
example, is converted durP
IIC
HO P O
ing transport to glucose 6-phosCOOH
OH
phate. The system has a modular
PEP
design that accommodates differGlucose 6- PO4
ent substrates. Protein elements
that initiate phosphotransfer
from PEP are used for all sugars
P IIB
IIC
Mannitol
transported by the PTS (step 1).
Later PTS proteins, however, are
Mannitol 6- PO4
unique to a given carbohydrate
(step 2). For example, different enzyme IIB and membraneCytoplasm
Membrane
Extracellular fluid
embedded IIC proteins transfer
phosphate to glucose and manFIGURE 4.11  Group translocation: the phosphotransferase system (PTS) of E. coli. The
nitol during transport. Because
phosphate group from phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) is ultimately passed along proteins common to all PTS
sugar transport systems and to Enzyme II components of the PTS that are specific to individual substrates the sugar (glucose, for instance) is
phosphorylated during transport,
(such as glucose or mannitol). The substrate is then phosphorylated during transport, making it different
from the external sugar. As a result, the sugar is always traveling down its concentration gradient into the
glucose itself never accumulates
cell. A more detailed look at the cellular location of different PTS proteins is found in eTopic 4.1.
in the cytoplasm. As a result, the
sugar transported via PTS always
structures of these proteins is of great interest. Learning
travels down its concentration gradient into the cell. More
their structural and functional vulnerabilities could lead to
details about the PTS are given in eTopic 4.1. In Chapter 9
the development of new antibiotics that stop iron transport.
we will see how this physiological system impacts the genetic
Susan Buchanan from the National Institutes of Health is
control of many other systems.
working to solve the structures of several iron and heme
Like prokaryotic cells, eukaryotic cells possess antiportransport systems in pathogenic microbes (Fig. 4.10B).
ters and symporters and use ABC transport systems as multidrug efflux pumps, but they also employ another process,
called endocytosis, which often precedes nutrient transport
Group Translocation Avoids
across membranes. Endocytosis is discussed in eTopic 4.2
“Uphill” Battles
and eAppendix 2.
The uptake transporters that we have just considered
increase concentrations of solute inside the cell relative to
To Summarize
the outside. They move nutrients “uphill” against a concentration gradient. An entirely different system, known as
 Transport systems move nutrients across phospholipid
group translocation, cleverly accomplishes the same result
bilayer membranes.
but without really moving a substance uphill. Group trans Facilitated diffusion helps solutes move across a memlocation alters the substrate during transport by attachbrane from a region of high concentration to one of
ing a new group (for example, phosphate) to it. Because
lower concentration.
the modified nutrient inside the cell is chemically different from the related compound outside, the parent solute
 Antiport and symport are coupled transport systems in
entering the cell is always moving down its concentration
which energy released by moving a driving ion (H+ or
gradient, regardless of how much solute has already been
Na+) from a region of high concentration to one of low
transported. Note that this process uses energy to chemiconcentration is harnessed and used to move a solute
cally alter the solute. ABC transporters and group transagainst its concentration gradient.
location systems both involve active transport, but group
 ABC transporters use the energy from ATP hydrolysis to
translocation systems are not ABC transporters.
move solutes “uphill,” against their concentration gradients.
The phosphotransferase system (PTS) is a well3+
 Siderophores are secreted to bind ferric iron (Fe ) and
characterized group translocation system present in many
bacteria. It uses energy from phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP),
transport it into the cell, where it is reduced to the more
1. Phosphate from PEP is passed
along common elements of the
PTS to the Enzyme II proteins.

2. Substrates are transformed by
phosphorylation during transport.

CHAPTER 4



BACTERIAL CULTURE, GROWTH, AND DEVELOPMENT

useful ferrous form (Fe2+). Siderophore-iron complexes
enter cells with the help of ABC transporters.

Culturing and
Counting Bacteria

How do we capture bacteria and study them? Microbes
in nature usually exist in complex, intertwined multispecies communities. For detailed studies of a single species,
however, cells of the species are usually grown in pure culture. This section will describe how that is done. But after
120 years of trying to grow microbes in the laboratory,
we have succeeded in culturing less than 1% of the microorganisms around us. The vast majority of the microbial
world has yet to be tamed. At the end of this section we
will discuss some new, innovative methods that enable us
to culture at least some of these “unculturable” microbes.

Bacteria Are Grown in Culture Media

For those organisms that can be cultured, we have access to
a variety of culturing techniques that can be used for different purposes. Bacterial culture media may be either liquid or
solid. A liquid, or broth, medium, in which organisms can
move about freely, is useful for studying the growth characteristics of a single strain of a single species (that is, a pure culture). Liquid media are also convenient for examining growth
kinetics and microbial biochemistry at different phases of
growth. Solid media, usually gelled with agar, are useful for
trying to separate mixtures of different organisms as they are
found in the natural environment or in clinical specimens.

B.

Yellow-pigmented
bacterial colonies

20 mm

Wrinkled
bacterial
colonies
Fungus

FIGURE 4.12  Separation and growth of microbes on an
agar surface. A. Colonies (diameter 1–5 mm) of Acidovorax citrulli
separated on an agar plate. A. citrulli is a plant pathogen that causes
watermelon fruit blotch. B. A mixture of yellow-pigmented bacterial
colonies, wrinkled bacterial colonies, and fungus separated by dilution on an agar plate. As time passed, the fungal colony overgrew
adjacent bacterial colonies.

A.

B.
Holding
loop

Hold the loop
flat against the
agar and streak
across surface.

Dilution Streaking and Spread Plates

Solid media are basically liquid media to which a solidifying agent has been added. The most versatile and widely
used solidifying agent is agar (for the development of agar
medium, see Section 1.3). Derived from seaweed, agar
forms an unusual gel that liquefies at 100°C but does not
solidify again until cooled to about 40°C. Liquefied agar
medium poured into shallow, covered petri dishes cools
and hardens to provide a large, flat surface on which a mixture of microorganisms can be streaked to separate individual cells. Each cell will divide and grow to form a distinct,
visible colony of cells (Fig. 4.12).
As shown in Figure 4.13 , a drop of liquid culture is
collected with an inoculating loop and streaked across the
agar plate surface in a pattern called dilution streaking.
Organisms fall off the loop as it moves along the agar surface.

PARM RANDHAWA, CALIFORNIA SEED
& PLANT LAB, INC.

Group translocation systems use energy to chemically
modify the solute during transport.

4.3

129

A.

UNIVERSITY OF MANITOBA





Start

FIGURE 4.13

Reflame loop before
changing direction
of streaking.

Colony

JOHN FOSTER, UNIVERSITY OF SOUTH ALABAMA

Dilution streaking technique. A. A liquid culture is sampled with a sterile inoculating loop and streaked across
the plate in three or four areas, with the loop flamed between areas
to kill bacteria still clinging to it. Dragging the loop across the agar
diminishes the number of organisms clinging to the loop until only
single cells are deposited at a given location. B. Salmonella enterica
culture obtained by dilution streaking.




PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

A.

1.0 ml

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

Microcolony

9.0 ml
5 μm

FIGURE 4.14  Bacterial colonies. A 3-day-old microcolony
(biofilm) on the surface of a membrane used to treat municipal
wastewater in Fountain Valley, California (SEM).

Toward the end of the streak, few bacteria remain on the
loop, so individual cells will land and stick to different places
on the agar surface. If the medium, whether artificial (for
example, laboratory medium) or natural (for example, crab
carapace) contains the proper nutrients and growth factors,
a single cell will multiply into many millions of offspring,
forming a microcolony. At first visible only under a microscope, the microcolony (Fig. 4.14) grows into a visible droplet called a colony (Fig. 4.13B). A pure culture of the species
or one strain of a species can be obtained by touching a single
colony with a sterile inoculating loop and inserting that loop
into fresh liquid medium.
It is important to note that the “one cell equals one colony” paradigm does not hold for all bacteria. Organisms such
as Streptococcus and Staphylococcus usually do not exist as single cells, but grow as chains or clusters of several cells. Thus, a
cluster of ten Staphylococcus cells will form only one colony on
an agar medium and so is called a colony-forming unit (CFU).
Another way to isolate pure colonies is the spread plate
technique. Starting from a liquid culture of bacteria, a
series of tenfold dilutions is made, and a small amount of
each dilution is placed directly on the surface of separate
agar plates (Fig. 4.15). The sample is spread over the surface of the plate with an alcohol-sterilized, bent glass rod.
The early dilutions, those containing the most bacteria,
will produce confluent growth that covers the entire agar
surface. Later dilutions, containing fewer and fewer organisms, yield individual colonies. As we will see later, spread
plates not only enable us to isolate pure cultures but also
can be used to enumerate the number of viable bacteria in
the original growth tube. A viable organism is one that successfully replicates to form a colony. Thus, each colony on
an agar plate represents one viable organism (or CFU)
present in the original liquid culture.

Complex versus Synthetic Media

We often culture bacteria in a type of medium, called complex medium (or “rich medium”) that is nutrient-rich but
has poorly defined components. Alternatively, we can select

Unknown concentration
of colony-forming units

Too many
to count

0.1 ml

311 colonies

27 colonies

3 colonies

B.
10–1

10–2

TNTC

TNTC
–4

TNTC
–5

10

10–6

10

TNTC

FIGURE 4.15

10–3

107


11

Tenfold dilutions, plating, and viable counts.

A. A culture containing an unknown concentration of cells is serially
diluted. One milliliter (ml) of culture is added to 9.0 ml of diluent
broth and mixed, and then 1 ml of this 1/10 dilution is added to another 9.0 ml of diluent (10–2 dilution). These steps are repeated for
further dilution, each of which lowers the cell number tenfold. After
dilution, 0.1 ml of each dilution is spread onto an agar plate.
B. Plates prepared as in (A) are incubated at 37°C to yield colonies.
By multiplying the number of countable colonies (107 colonies on
the 10–5 plate) by 10, you get the number of cells in 1.0 ml of the
10–5 dilution. Multiplying that number by the reciprocal of the dilution factor, you can calculate the number of cells (colony-forming
units, or CFUs) per milliliter in the original broth tube (107 × 101 ×
105 = 1.1 × 108 CFUs/ml). TNTC = too numerous to count.

a defined or synthetic medium in which all chemical components are known. Bacteria grow more slowly on defined
media because the organisms must synthesize more of
their own components. A minimal defined medium contains only those nutrients that are essential for growth of
a given microbe (Table 4.1). However, not every microbe
that can be cultured on a complex medium can be grown
on a defined medium. Recipes for complex media usually
contain several ingredients, such as yeast extract or beef
extract, whose exact composition is unknown. These additives include a rich variety of amino acids, peptides, nucleosides, vitamins, and some sugars. Some organisms are
particularly fastidious, requiring that components of blood

JOHN FOSTER, U. OF SOUTH ALABAMA

HARRY F. RIDGWAY, ORANGE COUNTY WATER DISTRICT

130

CHAPTER 4



BACTERIAL CULTURE, GROWTH, AND DEVELOPMENT



131

TABLE 4.1-Composition of Commonly Used Media
Medium

Ingredients per liter

Organisms cultured

Luria Bertani (complex)

Bacto tryptonea

10 g

Bacto yeast extract
NaCl
Adjust to pH 7

5g
10 g

M9 medium (defined)

Glucose
Na2HPO4
KH2PO4
NH4Cl
NaCl
MgSO4
CaCl2
Adjust to pH 7

2.0 g
6.0 g (42 mM)
3.0 g (22 mM)
1.0 g (19 mM)
0.5 g (9 mM)
2.0 mM
0.1 mM

Gram-negative organisms such as E. coli

Sulfur oxidizers (defined)

NH4Cl
KH2PO4
MgSO4 • 7H2O
CaCl2
Elemental sulfur
CO2
Adjust to pH 3

0.52 g
0.28 g
0.25 g
0.07 g
1.56 g
5%

Acidithiobacillus thiooxidans

Many Gram-negative and Gram-positive organisms
(such as Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus aureus,
respectively)

a

Bacto tryptone is a pancreatic digest of casein (bovine milk protein).

be added to a basic complex medium. With these additions,
the complex medium is called an enriched medium.
Complex media provide many of the chemical building
blocks that a cell would otherwise have to synthesize on
its own. For example, instead of making proteins that synthesize tryptophan, all the cell needs is a membrane transport system to harvest prefabricated tryptophan from the
medium. Likewise, fastidious organisms that require blood
in their media may reclaim the heme released from red
blood cells as their own, using it as an “enzyme prosthetic
group,” a group critical to enzyme function (for example,
the heme group in cytochromes). All of this saves the scavenging cell a tremendous amount of energy, and as a result,
bacteria tend to grow fastest in complex media.
The metabolism of a microbe growing in a complex
medium is hard to characterize. How would you know
whether E. coli possesses the ability to make tryptophan
if the bacterium grew only in complex media? Questions
like this can be asked of organisms able to grow in fully
defined synthetic media. In preparing a synthetic medium,
we start with water and then add various salts, carbon,
nitrogen, and energy sources in precise amounts. For selfreliant organisms like E. coli or Bacillus subtilis, that is all
that’s needed. Other organisms, such as Shigella species or
mutant strains of E. coli or B. subtilis, require additional
ingredients to satisfy requirements imposed by the absence
of specific metabolic pathways (growth factors are discussed shortly). However, newer molecular tools, such as
whole-genome sequencing, can reveal missing biosynthetic

pathways and help predict which nutrients are needed to
grow a particular species in a synthetic medium.
Thought Question

4.4 What would be the phenotype (growth characteristic) of
a cell that lacks the trp genes (genes required for the synthesis of tryptophan)? What would be the phenotype of a cell
missing the lac genes (genes whose products catabolize the
carbohydrate lactose)?

Selective and Differential Media

Microorganisms are remarkably diverse with respect to
their metabolic capabilities and resistance to certain toxic
agents. These differences are exploited in selective media,
which favor the growth of one organism over another,
and in differential media, which expose biochemical differences between two species that grow equally well. For
example, Gram-negative bacteria, with their outer membrane, are much more resistant than Gram-positive bacteria to detergents like bile salts and certain dyes, such as
crystal violet. A solid medium containing bile salts and
crystal violet is considered selective because it favors the
growth of Gram-negative over Gram-positive bacteria.
On the other hand, a differential medium is needed to distinguish between organisms that differ not in their ability to
grow, but in a particular biochemical function they possess.
For example, E. coli and Salmonella enterica, a major cause



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

JOHN FOSTER, U. OF SOUTH ALABAMA

Nonfermenting
Lactoseof diarrhea, are both Gram-negafermenting (Lac– )
tive, but only E. coli can ferment lac(Lac+)
tose. Both organisms will grow on
solid media containing a nonfermentable carbon source like peptone, a
dye called “neutral red,” and lactose.
Unlike S. enterica, E. coli ferments the
lactose and produces acidic end products. These products lower the pH surrounding the colony, the neutral-red
dye enters the cells, and the colony of
E. coli turns red. S. enterica grows well
on the nonfermentable peptides but
cannot ferment lactose. Consequently,
acidic end products are not produced,
and the colonies of S. enterica remain FIGURE 4.16  MacConkey medium, a
white, their natural color. In this culture medium both selective and differexample, growth in differential media ential. Only Gram-negative bacteria grow on
easily distinguishes colonies of lactose lactose MacConkey (selective). Only a species
capable of fermenting lactose produces pink
fermenters from nonfermenters.
colonies (differential), because only fermenters
Several media used in clinical micro- can take up the neutral red and peptones that
biology are both selective and differen- are also in the medium. Gram-negative nonfertial. MacConkey medium, for example, menters appear as uncolored colonies.
contains bile salts and crystal violet to
prevent the growth of Gram-positive bacteria and allow the
growth of Gram-negative bacteria (Fig. 4.16). The medium
also includes lactose, neutral red, and peptones to differentiate lactose fermenters (Lac+, red colonies) from nonfermenters
(Lac–, uncolored colonies). This medium is often used to identify bacteria that cause diarrheal disease because most normal
microbiota that grow on this medium are lactose fermenters,
whereas two important pathogens, Salmonella and Shigella,
are lactose nonfermenters.

of the relevant metabolic pathway
through random mutations. Once that
happens, a species will require growth
factors (Table 4.2) to grow in laboratory media. Growth factors are specific
nutrients not required by other species. Why, for example, should Streptococcus pyogenes make glutamic acid
or alanine if both are readily available
in its normal environment, the human
oral cavity? Because it never needs to
make glutamic acid or alanine in its
natural habitat, S. pyogenes has lost
the genes needed to synthesize these
amino acids. For S. pyogenes to grow
in the laboratory, the culture medium
must contain alanine and glutamic acid
along with the macro- and micronutrients mentioned previously.
Some species have adapted so well
to their natural habitats that we still
do not know how to grow them in the

Thought Questions

4.5 If lactose was left out of MacConkey medium (Fig. 4.16),

would lactose-fermenting E. coli bacteria grow, and if so, what
color would their colonies be?

4.6 The addition of sheep’s blood to agar produces a very
rich medium called blood agar. Do you think blood agar is a
selective medium? A differential medium? Hint: Some bacteria
can lyse red blood cells.

Growth Factors, Unculturable Microbes,
and Obligate Intracellular Bacteria

Why do some bacterial species fail to grow in minimal
medium, or fail to grow at all in the laboratory? Such failures are a consequence of evolution and the organism’s
natural growth environment. Long-term growth in an
ecological niche that continually provides a compound an
organism would otherwise have to make can lead to loss

0.5 μm

FIGURE 4.17

 “Unculturable” marine organism MSC33. To
grow in natural environments, many bacterial species rely on factors
produced by other species within their niche. The microbe shown,
MSC33, will not grow in laboratory media unless a peptide growth
factor from another species is included.

D. NICHOLS, ET AL. 2008. APPL. ENVIRON, MICROBIOL. 74:4889-4897. 2008, AMERICAN SCOIETY FOR MICROBIOLOGY.

132

CHAPTER 4



BACTERIAL CULTURE, GROWTH, AND DEVELOPMENT



133

TABLE 4.2-Growth Factors and Natural Habitats of Organisms Associated with Disease
Organism

Diseases

Natural habitats

Growth factors

Shigella

Bloody diarrhea

Humans

Nicotinamide (NAD)a

Haemophilus

Meningitis, chancroid

Humans and other animal species,
upper respiratory tract

Hemin, NAD

Staphylococcus

Boils, osteomyelitis

Widespread

Complex requirement

Abiotrophia

Osteomyelitis

Humans and other animal species

Vitamin K, cysteine

Legionella

Legionnaires’ disease

Soil, refrigeration cooling towers

Cysteine

Bordetella

Whooping cough

Humans and other animal species

Glutamate, proline, cysteine

Francisella

Tularemia

Wild deer, rabbits

Complex, cysteine

Mycobacterium

Tuberculosis, leprosy

Humans

Nicotinic acid (NAD),a alanine
(M. leprae is unculturable)

Streptococcus pyogenes

Pharyngitis, rheumatic fever

Humans

Glutamate, alanine

a

D. J. SILVERMAN, C. L. WISSEMAN, JR., AND A. WADELL

laboratory. As mentioned earlier, over 99% of bacterial species
that nature harbors many undiscovered microbes. Even
that are present in water or soil, or that grow in or on anithough we don’t know the growth and nutritional requiremals, will not form colonies on an agar plate. Some of these
ments of these phantom microbes, modern genomic tech“unculturable” organisms depend on growth factors, such
niques can expose their existence and can even provide
as siderophores, provided by other species that cohabit their
remarkable insight into their physiologies (see Section 8.6).
natural environment. Some of these factors even appear to act
Another class of bacteria, known as obligate intracellular
like hormones, somehow stimulating replication of the unculbacteria, could also be called unculturable because they, too,
turable organism. For example, Figure 4.17 shows a marine
will not grow on laboratory media. These species first evolved
organism (MSC33) that will not grow in the laboratory unless
to penetrate and then grow only within a eukaryotic cell. For
you include a peptide made by a companion microbe from
example, Rickettsia prowazekii, the cause of epidemic typhus
the same natural environment. The peptide is not a nutrient,
fever, has adapted to grow within the cytoplasm of eukarybut instead has a signaling function that induces cell diviotic cells and nowhere else (Fig. 4.18). As it evolved, this
sion. Today, new methods of culturing these “unculturable”
obligate intracellular bacterium lost key pathways needed for
species are being used to discover new antibiotic-producing
independent growth because the host cell supplied them.
microbes (Special Topic 4.1).
A.
B.
How do we know that
unculturable microbes exist
if we cannot grow them? All
Rickettsia
known microorganisms have
a set of genes encoding RNA
molecules present in ribosomes. The ribosomal RNA
Nucleus
molecules are highly conRickettsia
served across the phylogenetic tree. A DNA-amplifying
procedure called the poly6 μm
merase chain reaction (PCR,

Host cell
described in Section 7.6) can FIGURE 4.18 Rickettsia prowazekii
growing within eukaryotic cells. A. R. prowaoutline
screen for the presence of zekii growing within the cytoplasm of a chicken
these genes in soil and water embryo fibroblast (SEM). B. Fluorescent stain
samples. Comparing the DNA of R. prowazekii (approx. 0.5 µm long), growing
sequences of the PCR prod- within a cultured human cell (outline marked by
ucts from environmental sam- dotted line). The rickettsias are green (FITClabeled antibody, arrow), the host cell nucleus is
ples with the DNA sequences
blue (Hoechst stain), and the mitochondria are red
of similar genes from known, (Texas Red MitoTracker). The bacterium grows
culturable organisms reveals only in the cytoplasm, not in the nucleus.

JON AUDIA, U. OF SOUTH ALABAMA COLLEGE OF MEDICINE

Both nicotinamide and nicotinic acid are derived from NAD, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide.

134



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

SPECIAL TOPIC 4.1- - Antibiotic Hunters Culture the “Unculturable”
There is a quiet panic among infectious disease doctors,
who worry that we will soon run out of effective antibiotics
to treat deadly infections. Since antibiotics were introduced
over 70 years ago, bacterial pathogens have continually
evolved to resist their effects. Scientists, for their part, have
struggled to find new antibiotics to replace the old, ineffective ones. Chapter 27 will discuss this “arms race” in more
detail. The classic approach for finding new antibiotics is to
screen bacteria and fungi snatched from exotic environments
such as the Amazon for secreted antimicrobial compounds.
This method worked for decades, but over the past 20 years
it has yielded very few new antibiotics. A new way of thinking
was needed if we humans are to maintain dominance over
microbes.
Fewer than 1% of the microbes in the world whose DNA
we can detect can be cultured in the laboratory. This means
we have missed capturing the antibiotic potential of over
99% of living microbes. These “unculturable” organisms are
present in soil, water, and even the human body. Why do the
microbes grow there but not in the lab? They grow in their
natural environments because of interspecies cooperation.
In this environmental “buddy system,” one species provides a
growth factor to another species that cannot make its own.
Can we find a way to tame such uncooperative organisms and
screen them for new antibiotics?
Kim Lewis (Northeastern University, Boston) and colleagues have devised an elegant method to do just that.
To harvest previously unculturable soil microbes, samples
prepared from soil were diluted such that one bacterial cell
was delivered into each channel of a multichannel iChip
A.

(Fig. 1A). The channels contained agar plugs in which a
microbe could grow. Both sides of the device were covered
with semipermeable membranes and placed back into the
soil (Fig. 1B). Nutrients and growth factors made by organisms in the soil diffused into the chamber and allowed many
of the unculturable microbes to form colonies. Once a colony formed, the previously uncultured organism became
“domesticated,” able to grow on agar medium without further assistance. The mechanism of domestication is not yet
known.
The scientists made extracts from 10,000 iChip isolates
and tested each one for antibiotic activity against Staphylococcus aureus, an important pathogen that can cause infections ranging from boils to sepsis. One extract was highly
effective. The Gram-negative organism that produced this
antibiotic was sequenced and named Eleftheria terrae
(Fig. 2). The structure of the antibiotic, teixobactin, is shown
in Figure 2B. It is a nonribosomal peptide synthesized by
enzymes instead of a ribosome (nonribosomal peptide synthesis is described in Special Topic 15.1).
The cellular target of teixobactin is peptidoglycan synthesis in Gram-positive bacteria (the peptide cannot penetrate
the Gram-negative outer membrane). The new antibiotic kills
bacteria by binding to the lipid carrier molecule, bactoprenol,
that ferries the peptidoglycan subunits N-acetylglucosamine
and N-acetylmuramic acid across the bacterial membrane
(described in Chapter 3). As a result, growing cells lyse
because they cannot make new cell wall. Chapter 27 describes
the details of peptidoglycan synthesis and the antibiotics that
target steps in this process.
B.

Membrane

FIGURE 1



The multichannel iChip. The iChip was used to find the antibiotic teixobactin.

SLAVA EPSTEIN/NORTHEASTERN UNIVERSITY.

Channels

CHAPTER 4



BACTERIAL CULTURE, GROWTH, AND DEVELOPMENT

Teixobactin is unusual among antibiotics because
attempts to generate antibiotic resistance to it have failed.
Most antibiotics bind to bacterial proteins whose sequence
can easily change by mutation to become antibiotic resistant.
Teixobactin, however, binds to a highly conserved, nonprotein
component of the bacterial cell (bactoprenol). Altering bactoprenol to become teixobactin resistant would require the
bacterium to make new kinds of enzymes. Thus, the likelihood
that pathogens can develop resistance is low. This feature
makes this drug highly attractive as a potential therapeutic
agent. Whether or not teixobactin proves useful in treating
human infections, the new in situ culturing strategies used to
discover this new drug have reenergized the field of antibiotic
A.

135

discovery and should help scientists solve the mysteries of
the “unculturable.”

RESEARCH QUESTION
Propose a mechanism for the domestication of unculturable
microbes. Why would “domestication” not happen in the natural environment?
Ling, Losee L., Tanja Schneider, Aaron J. Peoples, Amy
L. Spoering, Ina Engels, et al. 2015. A new antibiotic
kills pathogens without detectable resistance. Nature
517:455–459.
B.
NmPhe

Ile

Ser

Gln

Ile

Ile

Ser
NH2

O
H
N

HN
O

O

O
N
H
OH

H
N
O

Thr

Ala

O

End

Ile

OH

H
N

N
H

HN

WILLIAM FOWLE/NORTHEASTERN UNIVERSITY



O
HN

O

O
NH O
O

O

NH HN
O
HN

NH

HN

C.

© BROOKS CANADAY

FIGURE 2  Eleftheria terrae and teixobactin. A previously
uncultured Gram-negative bacterium, Eleftheria terrae (A), makes
teixobactin (B), a new antibiotic. Color highlights mark each
residue. End = enduracididine, a nonprotein amino acid; modified
from alanine. C. Kim Lewis (right), with post-doctoral researcher
Brian Conlon.

136



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

1. Slide with shallow wells
and inscribed grid (~400
squares, 0.0025 mm2 each).

2. Coverslip is
placed over slide.

3. Bacterial suspension added to
wells seeps under the coverslip
to fill the shallow space of known
volume over the grid.

4. Bacterial cells in each
square are counted
under a microscope.

0.2 mm apart

FIGURE 4.19

 The Petroff-Hausser chamber for direct microscopic counts. A precision grid is
etched on the surface of the slide. The organisms in several squares are counted, and their numbers are
averaged. Knowing the dimensions of the grid and the height of the coverslip over the slide makes it possible to calculate the number of organisms in a milliliter.

However, we still do not know what those factors are. We
can grow Rickettsia using animal cell tissue culture or in
chicken eggs (the bacteria grow inside the endothelial cells
of blood vessels formed in fertilized eggs). But despite extensive efforts to grow them outside of a host cell (called axenic
growth), R. prowazekii has proved uncooperative.

Techniques for Counting Bacteria

Growing culturable bacteria in laboratory media is important
for studying their physiology and genetics, but knowing how
many bacteria are present in the medium is critical for interpreting results. You might also ask how we determine whether
a lake is contaminated with fecal bacteria or our peanut butter contains Salmonella. In addition to finding organisms in
these cases, we have to count how many there are to determine the extent of contamination. Counting or quantifying
microorganisms is surprisingly difficult because each of the
available techniques measures a different physical or biochemical aspect of growth. Thus, a cell density value (given as cells
per milliliter) derived from one technique will not necessarily
agree with the value obtained by a different method. Here are
some commonly used methods for counting microbes.

However, “seeing” an organism under the microscope
does not mean that the organism is alive, because living
and dead cells are indistinguishable by this basic approach.
Living cells may be distinguished from dead cells by fluorescence microscopy using fluorescent chemical dyes, as discussed in Chapter 2. For example, propidium iodide, a red
dye, intercalates between DNA bases but cannot freely penetrate the energized membranes of living cells. Thus, only
dead cells stain red under a fluorescence scope. Another
dye, Syto-9, enters both living and dead cells, staining them
both green. By combining Syto-9 with propidium iodide,
living and dead cells can be distinguished: Living cells stain
green, whereas dead cells appear orange or yellow because

Cheek cell
nuclei
Live

Direct counting of living and dead cells. Microorganisms

Thought Question

4.7 Use the information in Figure 4.19 to determine the concentration (in cells per milliliter) of bacteria shown.

MOLECULAR PROBES, INC.

can be counted directly using a microscope. A dilution of a
bacterial culture is placed on a special microscope slide called
a hemocytometer (or, more specifically for bacteria, a PetroffHausser counting chamber) (Fig. 4.19). Etched on the surface of the slide is a grid of precise dimensions, and placing a
coverslip over the grid forms a space of precise volume. The
number of organisms counted within that volume is used to
calculate the concentration of cells in the original culture.

Dead

FIGURE 4.20  Live/dead stain. Live and dead bacteria visualized
on freshly isolated human cheek epithelial cells using the LIVE/DEAD
BacLight Bacterial Viability Kit. Dead bacterial cells fluoresce orange or
yellow because propidium (red) can enter the cells and intercalate the
base pairs of DNA. Live cells fluoresce green because Syto-9 (green)
enters the cell. The faint green smears are the outlines of cheek cells.

CHAPTER 4



BACTERIAL CULTURE, GROWTH, AND DEVELOPMENT



137

B.

A.

Flow-cell body

Sample stream

Laser

FACS

3,000 volts (–)

3,000 volts (+)

Deflection plate

Tube of cells

Sorted cell

0 0
10

101
Low

Waste

A. Schematic of a FACS apparatus (bidirectional sorting). B. Separation of GFP-producing E. coli from non-GFP-producing E. coli. The
low-level fluorescence in the cells on the left is baseline fluorescence (autofluorescence). The scatterplot displays the same FACS
data, showing the size distribution of cells (x-axis) with respect to
the level of fluorescence (y-axis). The larger cells may be cells that
are about to divide.

both dyes enter and Syto-9 (green) plus propidium (red)
gives a yellow appearance (Fig. 4.20).
Direct counting without microscopy can be achieved
using an electronic technique that not only counts but
also separates populations of bacterial cells according to
their distinguishing properties. The instrument is called a
fluorescence-activated cell sorter (FACS) or flow cytometer. In the FACS technique, bacterial cells that synthesize
a fluorescent protein (such as cyan fluorescent protein; see
Section 2.4), or that have been labeled with a fluorescent
antibody or chemical, are passed single file through a small
orifice and then through a laser beam (Fig. 4.21A). Detectors measure light scatter in the forward direction (an indicator of particle size) and to the side (which indicates shape
or granularity). In addition, the laser activates the fluorophore in the fluorescent antibody, and a detector measures
fluorescence intensity.
Within a single culture, one subpopulation of cells may
fluoresce more than or less than another because of the
presence or absence of a targeted protein. Thus the FACS
technique enables us to use cell size and the level of fluorescence to identify and count different populations of cells.
For example, FACS analysis can determine the expression
of a gene in different subpopulations of cells in culture.
This can be done by placing the green fluorescent protein

102
103
104
FL1-GFP
High
Fluorescence level

Fluorescent cells of increasing size

Fluorescence-activated cell sorter (FACS).

Large fluorescent
cells
High 104

103
FL1-GFP



Cell collector

Fluorescence level

FIGURE 4.21

GFP-producing
(fluorescent) cells

Events

Charging collar

Numbers of organisms

64

Non-GFPproducing cells

102

101

Low 100

0

1,023

Small nonfluorescent cells
Increasing cell size

gene (gfp) under the control of a specific bacterial gene
(making a gene fusion). Researchers can then use the flow
cytometer to count cells expressing that gene, and even
sort high-expressing cells from low-expressing cells. FACS
analysis makes it possible to determine which conditions
allow expression of the gene and whether all cells in the
population express that gene at the same time and to the
same extent (Fig. 4.21B).
Viable counts. Viable cells, as noted previously, are those

that can replicate and form colonies on a plate. To obtain a
viable cell count, dilutions of a liquid culture can be plated

138



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

directly on an agar surface (as in Fig. 4.15) or added to
liquid agar cooled to about 42°C–45°C. The agar is subsequently poured into an empty petri plate (this is called the
pour plate technique), where the agar cools further and
solidifies. Because many bacteria resist short exposures to
that temperature, individual cells retain the ability to form
colonies on, and in, the pour plate. After colonies form,
they are counted, and the original cell number is calculated. For example, if 100 colonies are observed in a pour
plate made with 100 microliters (µl) of a 10 –3 dilution of
a culture, then there were 106 organisms per milliliter in
the original culture. Figure 4.15 illustrates these types of
calculations.
Although viable counts are widely used in research, this
method is problematic for measuring cell number. One
issue is that colony counting does not reflect cell size or
growth stage. Even more problematic, colony counts usually underestimate the number of living cells in a culture.
Cells damaged for one reason or another can remain metabolically active and alive but may be too compromised to
divide. Because these cells will not form colonies on an
agar plate, they will not be counted as living. Comparing a viable count with a direct count obtained from a
live/dead stain can expose the presence of these damaged cells. Another challenge is any organism that grows
in chains, such as Streptococcus, because each colony originates from a group of cells, not a single cell. Consequently,
counting colonies underestimates actual cell number. For
this reason, viable counts are reported as colony-forming
units (CFUs) rather than cells.
Biochemical assays. In contrast to methods that visualize individual cells, assays of cell biomass, protein
content, or metabolic rate measure the overall size of a
population of cells. The most straightforward but timeconsuming biochemical approach to monitoring population growth is to measure the dry weight of a culture.
Cells are collected by centrifugation, washed, dried in
an oven, and weighed. Because bacterial cells weigh
very little, a large volume of culture must be harvested
to obtain measurements, making this technique quite
insensitive. A more accurate alternative is to measure
increases in protein levels, which correlate with increases
in cell number. Protein levels are more easily measured
with relatively sensitive assays.
Optical density measures growth in real time. The phe-

nomenon of light scattering was introduced in Chapter 2.
Recall that the presence of bacteria in a tube of medium
can be detected by how cloudy the medium appears as the
cells scatter light. The decrease in intensity of a light beam
due to the scattering of light by a suspension of particles is
measured as optical density.

The optical density of light scattered by bacteria is a very
useful tool for estimating population size. The method is
quick and easy, but because light scattering is a complex
function of cell number and cell volume, optical density
provides only an approximate result that must be corrected using a standard curve. Typically, a standard curve is
obtained that plots viable counts for cultures versus optical
densities as measured by a spectrophotometer. Thereafter,
the optical density of a growing culture is measured, and
the standard curve is used to estimate cell number at any
given point during growth.
One problem with using optical density to estimate cell
numbers is that a cell’s volume can vary depending on its
growth stage, altering its light-scattering properties. Thus,
the cell number estimated by the standard curve may deviate from the true number. Another problem is that dead
cells also scatter light. Clearly, using optical density to estimate viable count can be misleading, especially when measuring populations in stationary phase.

To Summarize

















Microbes in nature usually exist in complex, multispecies communities, but for detailed studies they must be
grown separately in pure culture.
Bacteria can be cultured on solid or liquid media.
Defined or synthetic media contain only chemical
components that are known. Minimal defined media
contain only the defined nutrients essential for growth
of a given organism.
Complex, or rich, media contain many nutrients. Other
media exploit physiological differences between organisms and can be defined as selective, differential, or
both (for example, MacConkey medium).
Microbes can evolve to become unculturable or to
require specific growth factors depending on the
nutrient richness of their natural ecological niche.
Obligate intracellular bacteria lose metabolic pathways
provided by their hosts and develop requirements for
growth factors supplied by their hosts.
Microorganisms in culture may be counted directly
under a microscope, with or without staining, or by use
of a fluorescence-activated cell sorter (FACS).
Microorganisms can be counted indirectly by viable
counts, measurement of dry weight, protein levels, or
optical density.
A viable bacterial organism is defined as being capable
of replicating.

CHAPTER 4

BACTERIAL CULTURE, GROWTH, AND DEVELOPMENT



139

Exponential Growth

The Growth Cycle

Thought Question

4.8 A virus such as influenza virus might produce 800 proge-

ny virus particles from one host cell infected by one virus. How
would you mathematically represent the exponential growth
of the virus? What practical factors might limit such growth?
B.

Stalk

DENNIS KUNKEL MICROSCOPY, INC.

How do microbes grow? What determines their rate of
growth? And when does growth restart in a nongrowing
population? In nature, the answers to these questions are
difficult to determine because most microbes exist in complex, mixed communities fixed to solid surfaces. Yet these
same multicellular communities can also send off planktonic cells, free-living organisms that grow and multiply
on their own. Growth of these planktonic cells is easier to
measure.
All species at one time or another exhibit rapid growth,
nongrowth, and many phases in between. For clarity, we
present here the principles of rapid growth, while bearing in
mind the diversity of growth situations in nature. We care
about growth because how rapidly a microbe grows influences how fast a pathogen causes disease, or how quickly
contaminated food spoils. Similarly, a bacterial species that
consumes oil is useful for cleaning up oil spills only if the
organism can grow rapidly.
Survival of any species ultimately depends on its ability to make more of its own kind. A typical bacterium
that can be cultured in the laboratory grows by increasing in length and mass, which facilitates expansion of
its nucleoid as its DNA replicates (see Section 3.4). As
DNA replication nears completion, the cell, in response
to complex genetic signals, begins to synthesize an equatorial septum that ultimately separates the two daughter
cells. In this overall process, called binary fission, one
parental cell splits into two equal daughter cells (Fig. 4.22A).
Although a majority of culturable bacteria divide symmetrically in two equal
A.
halves, some species divide asymmetrically. For example, the bacterium Caulobacter forms a stalked cell that remains
fixed to a solid surface but reproduces by
budding from one end to produce small,
unstalked motile cells. The marine
organism Hyphomicrobium also replicates asymmetrically by budding, releasing a smaller cell from a stalked parent
(Fig. 4.22B).
Eukaryotic microbes divide by a special form of cell fission involving mitosis,
the segregation of pairs of chromosomes
within the nucleus (see Section 20.2 and
eAppendix 2). Some eukaryotes also
undergo more complex life cycles involving budding and diverse morphological
FIGURE 4.22
forms.

The process of reproduction has implications for growth
not only of the individual, but also of populations. If we
assume that growth is unbounded, what happens to the
population? The unlimited growth of any population obeys
a simple law: The growth rate, or rate of increase in cell
numbers or biomass, is proportional to the population size
at a given time. Such a growth rate is called “exponential”
because it generates an exponential curve, a curve whose
slope increases continually.
How does binary fission of cells generate an exponential
curve? If each cell produces two cells per generation, then
the population size at any given time is proportional to 2n,
where the exponent n represents the number of generations (that is, cell divisions in which offspring replace parents) that have taken place between two time points. Thus,
cell number rises exponentially. Many microbes, however,
have replication cycles based on numbers other than 2.
For example, some cyanobacteria form cell aggregates that
divide by multiple fissions, releasing dozens of daughter
cells. The cyanobacterium enlarges without dividing, and
then suddenly divides many times without separating. The
cell mass breaks open to release hundreds of progeny cells.

Budding
cell
1 μm

Symmetrical and asymmetrical cell division. A. Symmetrical
cell division, or binary fission, in Lactobacillus sp. (SEM). B. Asymmetrical cell division
via budding in the marine bacterium Hyphomicrobium (approx. 4 µm long).


ELLEN QUARDOKUS

4.4



140



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

Generation Time

A variable not accounted for in bacterial growth curves is
the length of time from one generation to the next. In an
environment with unlimited resources, bacteria divide at a
constant interval called the generation time. The length of
that interval varies with respect to many parameters, including the bacterial species, type of medium, temperature, and
pH. The generation time for cells in culture is also known as
the doubling time, because the population of cells doubles
over one generation. For example, one cell of E. coli placed
into a complex medium will divide every 20 minutes. After
1 hour of growth (three generations), that one cell will have
become eight (1 to 2, 2 to 4, 4 to 8). Because cell number
(N) doubles with each division, the increase in cell number
over time is exponential, not linear. A linear increase would
occur if cell number rose by a fixed amount after every generation (for example, 1 to 2, 2 to 3, 3 to 4).
Why do we care about generation time? As noted already,
generation time is important when we’re trying to understand how rapidly a pathogen can cause disease symptoms.
In biotechnology, how fast a producing organism grows will
affect how quickly a commercially useful by-product can be
made. Let’s review how we calculate generation time.
Starting with any number of organisms (N0), the number
of organisms after n generations will be N0 × 2n. For example,
a single cell after three generations (n = 3) will produce
1 cell × 23 = 8 cells
The number of generations that an exponential culture undergoes in a given time period can be calculated if
the number of cells at the start of the period (N0) and the
number of cells at the end of the period (Nt) are known.

A.

Methods such as viable counts are used to make those
determinations. Thus,
Nt = N0 × 2n
can be expressed as
log 2 Nt = log 2 N0 + n log 2 2
= n + log 2 N0
Solving for n:
n = log2 Nt – log2 N0
= log2 (Nt /N0)
Once the number of generations (n) over a given time is
known, generation time (g) is calculated as
g = t/n [if 2 hours (120 min) yielded
6 generations, then g = 20 min]
The rate of exponential growth is expressed as the mean
growth rate constant (k), which is the number of generations (n) per unit time (usually generations per hour). This
is written as
k = n/t, where t is 1 hour; or k = 1/g
Thus, if the generation time is 20 minutes (0.33 hour) for
a given bacterial species in a given medium, the growth
rate constant k = 1/0.33 hour = 3 generations per hour. If
the generation time is 2 hours, the growth rate constant is
0.5 generation per hour.
In practice, exponential growth lasts for only a short
period when all nutrients are in full supply and the concentration of waste products has not become a limiting factor.
The growth rate constant can also be calculated from
the slope of log2 N over time, where N is a relative measure
of culture density, such as the optical density measured in
a spectrophotometer (Fig. 4.23A). The units of N do not

B. Bacterial growth curve
1.0

0.1
0.05
Exponential growth
converted to log scale

Number of microbes (log scale)

Optical density (OD600)

0.50
109

0

20 40 60 80
Growth time (min)

FIGURE 4.23

3
Stationary
nary phase

4
Death
ath
h ph
phase

1. Bacteria are preparing their
cell machinery for growth.
2. Growth approximates an
exponential curve (straight line,
on a logarithmic scale).

108

3. Cells stop growing and shut
down their growth machinery
while turning on stress
responses to help retain viability.

107
106
10

0.01

1
2
Lag
Lag
L
Log
phase phase

4. Cells die with a “half-life”
similar to that of radioactive
decay, a negative exponential
curve.

5

Time (arbitrary)

 Bacterial growth curves. A. Theoretical growth curve of a bacterial suspension measured by optical density (OD) at a
wavelength of 600 nm. B. Phases of bacterial growth in a typical batch culture.

CHAPTER 4



BACTERIAL CULTURE, GROWTH, AND DEVELOPMENT

matter, because we are always looking at ratios of cell numbers relative to an earlier level (N1/N0). For example, we
can use the following series of optical density (OD) measurements to determine N:
Time (min)



141

ocean. In each instance, the mathematics of exponential
growth applies, at least until the community reaches a
density at which different species begin to compete or
nutrients become scarce.

OD600

log2 OD600

0

0.05

–4.32

Thought Question

15

0.08

–3.65

30

0.13

–2.94

4.11 It takes 40 minutes for a typical E. coli cell to completely

45

0.20

–2.32

60

0.33

–1.59

If we plot log2 OD600 versus time, we obtain a line with a
slope of 0.0452 per minute. The growth rate constant, in
doublings per hour, becomes
k = (0.0452/min)(60 min/h)
= 2.7 generations per hour
The steeper the slope, the faster the organisms are
dividing.

Note:

An alternative formula uses logarithms to base 10,
requiring conversion to base 2:
log10 Nt = log10 N0 + n log102
= log10 N0 + n0.301
n = 3.3 log10 (Nt/N0)

Thought Questions

4.9 Suppose you ingest 20 cells of Salmonella enterica in a
peanut butter cookie. They all survive the stomach and enter
the intestine. Suppose further that the sum total of subsequent bacterial replication and death (caused by the host)
produces an average generation time of 2 hours and you will
feel sick when there are 1,000,000 bacteria. How much time
will elapse before you feel sick?
4.10 Suppose one cell of the nitrogen fixer Sinorhizobium
meliloti colonizes a plant root. After 5 days (120 hours), there
are 10,000 bacteria fixing N2 within the plant cells. What is
the bacterial doubling time?

The mathematics of exponential growth is relatively
straightforward, but remember that microbes grow differently in pure culture (very rare in nature) than they do
in mixed communities, where neighboring cells produce
all kinds of substances that may feed or poison other
microbes. In mixed communities, the microbes may
grow planktonically (f loating in liquid), as in the open
ocean, or as a biofilm on solid matter suspended in that

replicate its chromosome and about 20 minutes to prepare
for another round of replication. Yet the organism enjoys
a 20-minute generation time growing at 37°C in complex
medium. How is this possible? Hint: How might the cell overlap
the two processes?

Stages of Growth in Batch Culture
Exponential growth never lasts indefinitely, because nutrient consumption and toxic by-products eventually slow the
growth rate until it halts altogether. The simplest way to
model the effects of changing conditions is to culture bacteria in liquid medium within a closed system, such as a
flask or test tube. This is called batch culture. In batch
culture, no fresh medium is added during incubation; thus,
nutrient concentrations decline and waste products accumulate during growth.
The changing conditions of a batch culture profoundly
affect bacterial physiology and growth, and they illustrate
the remarkable ability of bacteria to adapt to their environment. As medium conditions deteriorate, alterations
occur in membrane composition, cell size, and metabolic
pathways, all of which impact generation time. Microbes
possess intricate, self-preserving genetic and metabolic
mechanisms that slow growth before their cells lose viability. Because many bacteria replicate by binary fission,
plotting culture growth (as represented by the logarithm
of the cell number) versus incubation time makes it possible to see the effect of changing conditions on generation time and reveals the stages of growth shown in
Figure 4.23B—namely, lag phase, log phase, stationary
phase, and death phase.
Lag phase. Cells transferred from an old culture to
fresh growth media need time to detect their environment, express specific genes, and synthesize components
needed to grow rapidly. As a result, bacteria inoculated into fresh media typically experience a lag period,
or lag phase, during which cells do not divide. Several
factors influence lag phases. Cells taken from an aged
culture may be damaged and require time for repair.
Carbon, nitrogen, or energy sources different from those
originally used by the seed culture must be sensed, and

142



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

the appropriate enzyme systems must be synthesized.
The length of the lag phase also varies with changes in
temperature, pH, and salt concentration, as well as nutrient richness. For example, transferring cells from one
complex medium to a fresh complex medium results in
a very short lag phase, whereas cells grown in a complex medium and then plunged into a minimal defi ned
medium experience a protracted lag phase. During lag
phase in the latter case, cells must synthesize all the
amino acids, nucleotides, and other metabolites previously supplied by the complex medium.

macromolecular synthesis until DNA, R NA, ribosome,
and cell wall synthesis come into balance with the rest of
metabolism. In contrast, nutritional upshift means that
the cell will start making more energy than it needs at
its current growth rate, in which case cell metabolism
will again be out of balance with cell division. The same
fail-safe mechanisms used during downshift will, during upshift, kick macromolecular synthesis into a higher
gear, once again establishing balanced growth. Nutritional upshift causes cells to reenter log phase, but with a
shorter generation time.

Early log, or exponential, phase. Once cells have retooled

Late log phase. As cell density (number of cells per mil-

their physiology to accommodate the new environment,
they begin to grow exponentially and enter what is called
exponential, or logarithmic (log), phase. Exponential
growth is balanced growth, in which all cell components
are synthesized at constant rates relative to each other—
the assumption behind the generation time calculation
given in the previous section. At this stage, represented
by the linear part of the growth curve, cells are growing and dividing at the maximum rate possible in the
medium and growth conditions provided (such as temperature, pH, and osmolarity). Cells are largest at this
stage of growth. If cell division were synchronized and
all cells divided at the same time, the growth curve during this period would appear as a series of steps with
cell numbers doubling instantly after every generation
time. But batch cultures are not synchronous. Every cell
has an equal generation time, but each cell divides at a
slightly different moment, making the cell number rise
smoothly.
Cells enjoying balanced, exponential growth
are temporarily thrown into metabolic chaos
(unbalanced growth) when their medium is abruptly
changed. Nutritional downshift (moving cells from a
good carbon source such as glucose to a poorer carbon
source such as succinate) or nutritional upshift (moving
cells to a better carbon source) casts cells into unbalanced growth. Downshifting to a carbon source with
a lower energy yield means not only that a different
set of enzymes must be made and employed to use the
carbon source, but also that the previous high rate of
macromolecular synthesis (such as ribosome synthesis)
used to support a fast generation time is now too rapid
relative to the lower energy yield. Failure to adjust will
lead to increased mistakes in RNA, protein, and DNA
synthesis, depletion of key energy stores, and ultimately
death.
How do microbes adjust to nutrient shifts? During
downshifts, energy levels (ATP) drop faster than macromolecular synthesis systems can stop making macromolecules. Molecular fail-safe systems quickly slow rates of

liliter) rises during log phase, the rate of doubling eventually slows, and a new set of growth phase–dependent genes
is expressed. At this point, some species can also begin
to detect the presence of others by sending and receiving
chemical signals in a process known as quorum sensing
(discussed in Chapter 10).
Stationary phase. Eventually, cell numbers stop rising,

owing to the lack of a key nutrient or the buildup of waste
products. At this point the growth curve levels off and the
culture is said to be in stationary phase (Fig. 4.23B). It
was thought that in stationary phase, the rate of cell division equaled the rate of cell death. That is, cells were either
dead or they were alive. That model has recently been
challenged by Nathalie Balaban and colleagues from the
Hebrew University of Jerusalem. They elegantly show that
the vast majority of cells thought to have died in stationary
phase are actually alive but growth-arrested—and can still
make protein (Fig. 4.24). The nature of growth arrest is
unclear but may involve the molecule guanosine tetraphosphate, which is associated with the stringent response (discussed in Chapter 10).
If they did not change their physiology, microbes
would be very vulnerable upon entering stationary
phase. Cells in stationary phase are not as metabolically
nimble as cells in exponential phase, so damage from
oxygen radicals and the toxic by-products of metabolism
readily kill them. As an avoidance strategy, some bacteria
differentiate into very resistant spores in response to
nutrient depletion (see Section 4.6), while other bacteria
undergo less dramatic but very effective molecular reprogramming. The microbial model organism E. coli, for
example, adjusts to stationary phase by decreasing its
size, thus minimizing the volume of its cytoplasm compared to the volume of its nucleoid. Fewer nutrients are
then required to sustain the smaller cell. New stress
resistance enzymes are also synthesized to handle oxygen radicals, protect DNA and proteins, and increase cell
wall strength through increased peptidoglycan crosslinking. As a result, E. coli cells in stationary phase

CHAPTER 4



BACTERIAL CULTURE, GROWTH, AND DEVELOPMENT

A.

O. GEFEN, ET AL., 2014. PROC. NATL. ACAD. SCI 111:556-561.

COURTESY OF HEBREW UNIVERSITY

B.

FIGURE 4.24  Observing dormant E. coli making protein
in stationary phase. A. E. coli cells trapped in a microfluidic

channel express a red fluorescent protein in exponential phase.
After 15 hours in stationary phase, a chemical inducer molecule
was added to observe what percentage of cells could still synthesize a new, green fluorescent protein (time 0). At least 90%
of cells produced the new protein, meaning these cells are alive
and dormant, not dead. B. Nathalie Balaban (center) with student
Eitam Rotem and lab manager Irene Ronin, viewing fluorescent
bacteria growing and dying.



143

toxic chemicals present in the environment. Cells begin
to die, and the culture enters the death phase. Like the
growth rate, the death rate—the rate at which cells die—
is logarithmic. In death phase, the number of cells that
die in a given time period is proportional to the number
that existed at the beginning of the time period. Thus, the
death rate is a negative exponential function. The death
rate can be expressed as a half-life, the time over which a
population declines by half.
Determining microbial death rates is critical to the study
of food preservation and to the development of antibiotics
(further discussed in Chapters 5, 16, and 27). Although
death curves are basically logarithmic, exact death rates are
difficult to define because mutations arise that promote
survival, and some cells grow by cannibalizing others.
Consequently, the death phase is extremely prolonged. In
fact, a portion of the cells will often survive for months,
years, or even decades.
Note that the nice, smooth exponential growth
phase shown in Figure 4.23B does not always hold for
microbes growing in natural environments or in complex laboratory media containing multiple carbon and
energy sources. Some bacterial species produce odd-looking growth curves in complex media as the population
depletes one carbon source and must switch physiology to
use another. Even E. coli doesn’t really experience a uniform log-phase metabolism growing in complex medium;
instead, it smoothly transitions through a series of metabolic states.

Thought Questions

become more resistant to heat, osmotic pressure, pH
changes, and other stresses that they might encounter
while waiting for a new supply of nutrients.

4.13 What can happen to the growth curve when a culture
medium contains two carbon sources, if one is a preferred
carbon source of growth-limiting concentration and the
second is a nonpreferred source?

4.14 How would you modify the equations describing microThought Question

4.12 The bacterium Acidithiobacillus thiooxidans is an

extremophile that grows using sulfur as an energy source.
(a) Draw the approximate growth curves that you would
expect to see, extending from log phase to stationary phase, if
four cultures with different starting numbers of bacteria were
grown in the same concentration of sulfur. Use
Figure 4.23B as the model, and 4 × 105, 4 × 106, 4 × 107, and
4 × 108 as the starting cell densities. Maximum growth yield is
109 cells per milliliter. (b) Draw a second graph showing how
the curves would change if the initial population density was
constant but the concentration of sulfur varied.

Death phase. Without reprieve in the form of new nutri-

ents, cells in stationary phase will eventually succumb to

bial growth rate to describe the rate of death?

4.15 Why are cells in log phase larger than cells in stationary
phase?

Continuous Culture

In the classic growth curve that develops in closed systems,
the exponential phase spans only a few generations. In
open systems, however, where fresh medium is continuously added to a culture and an equal amount of culture
is constantly siphoned off, bacterial populations can be
maintained in exponential phase at a constant cell mass for
extended periods of time. In this type of growth pattern,
known as continuous culture, all cells in a population
achieve a steady state, which permits a detailed analysis of

144



PART 1



A.

THE MICROBIAL CELL

Sterile
air inlet

B.

C.

Fresh media
(ingested food)

Fresh
medium

Culture
flask

Spent medium,
wastes, and
excess microbes

EPPENDORF NORTH AMERICA

Culture “flask”
(intestines)

Wastes and
excess microbes

FIGURE 4.25

 Chemostats and continuous culture. A. The basic chemostat ensures logarithmic growth by constantly adding and
removing equal amounts of culture media. B. The human gastrointestinal tract is engineered much like a chemostat, in that new nutrients are
always arriving from the throat while equal amounts of bacterial culture exit in fecal waste. C. A modern chemostat.

Continuous cultures are used to study large numbers
of cells at a constant growth rate and cell mass for both
research and industrial applications. Its advantage over
batch culture is that the physiology of cells in continuous culture is homogeneous. Consequently, continuous

Steady state

Greater

Longer

Bacterial mass

Generation time (min)

Generation time
Nutrient
Bacterial mass

microbial physiology at different growth rates. The chemostat is a continuous culture system in which the diluting medium contains a limiting amount of one essential
nutrient (Fig. 4.25). You could think of your gastrointestinal tract as a kind of crude chemostat. Nutrient enters
through your mouth and passes through your intestine,
where it feeds your microbiome, and your microbiome
exits in fecal waste. In both cases the numbers of microbes
in the chamber (or gut) remain relatively constant. The GI
tract is different from a chemostat, of course, in that nutrient intake and fecal exit are not continuous and water is
absorbed.
The complex relationships among dilution rate, cell
mass, and generation time in a chemostat are illustrated in
Figure 4.26. The curves in this figure represent a typical
experimental result. At very low dilution (flow) rates, the
nutrient is so limiting that cells will divide very slowly and
cell mass will remain low. Any increase in flow rate, however, will increase the availability of the limiting nutrient
such that cells grow faster and cell mass increases. The rate
of cell division and the cell mass are kept constant when the
flow rate is kept constant, because the amount of culture
(and cells) removed from the vessel exactly compensates
for the increased rate of cell division. Constant cell mass,
or density, can be maintained only over a certain range of
flow rates. At faster and faster flow rates, cells are eventually removed more quickly than they can be replenished by
division, so cell density (cell mass) decreases in the vessel—
a phenomenon called “washout.”

Nutrient concentration
in vessel
Washout
Dilution rate
(flow rate)

Faster

FIGURE 4.26  Relationships among chemostat dilution
rate, cell mass, and generation time. As the dilution rate

(x-axis) increases, the generation time decreases and the mass of
the culture increases. When the rate of dilution exceeds the division rate, cells are washed from the vessel faster than they can be
replaced by division, and the cell mass decreases. The y-axis varies
depending on the curve, as labeled.

CHAPTER 4



BACTERIAL CULTURE, GROWTH, AND DEVELOPMENT

cultures are used in industry to optimize the production of antibiotics, beer, and other microbial products. In
research, continuous culture is used to examine what happens to metabolic flux (essentially the rate at which molecules move through metabolic pathways) before and after a
biochemical step is altered, and to conduct long-term studies of bacterial evolution.
One disadvantage of the continuous culture apparatus shown in Figure 4.25C is the large volume of
media required to maintain a 500-ml culture chamber
over a period of days or months. To solve this problem,
microfluidic principles have been used to miniaturize
the process onto a 5-cm computer-controlled lab chip.
One milliliter of culture moves along three chambers
that monitor oxygen, optical density, and pH. Culture
conditions are maintained or changed by a computer
that controls delivery of media and chemicals from onchip reservoirs. The heightened ability to control culture
parameters in small volumes can be used to characterize genetic switches, environmental shock responses,
directed evolution, co-metabolism, and the dynamics of
mixed-species cultures.



145

Continuous culture can be used to sustain a population
of bacteria at a specified growth rate and cell density.

4.5

Biofilms

Can bacteria collaborate? Bacteria are typically thought
of as unicellular, but many, if not most, bacteria in nature
form specialized, surface-attached, collaborative communities called biofilms. Indeed, within aquatic environments
bacteria are found mainly associated with surfaces—a fact
that underscores the importance of biofilms in nature. Soil
biofilms help filter groundwater through the soil, where
the bacteria break down organic waste. This process is especially important in wetlands, which provide an important
“ecosystem service” for human communities (discussed in
Chapter 22). Other biofilms play critical roles in microbial
pathogenesis and environmental degradation, which costs
billions of dollars each year in equipment damage, product
contamination, and medical infections. For example, pseudomonad or staphylococcal biofilms can damage ventilators used to assist respiration. Biofilms can also form inside
indwelling catheter tubes that deliver fluids and medicaTo Summarize
tions to patients. In both of these examples, the biofilms
serve as direct sources of infection, so developing ingenious
 The growth cycle of organisms grown in liquid batch
ways to prevent biofilm formation on medical instrumentaculture consists of lag phase, log (exponential) phase,
tion is a major goal of biomedical research. Making cathstationary phase, and death phase.
eter surfaces mimic the architecture of sharkskin is one
intriguing approach (eTopic 4.3).
 The physiology of a bacterial population changes
Biofilms can be constructed by a single species or by
with growth phase.
multiple, collaborating species, as in the mixture of fac Generation time is the length of time it takes for a popultative and anaerobic bacteria that form dental plaque.
ulation of cells to double in number.
Biofilms can form on a range of organic and inorganic surfaces (Fig. 4.27 ). The Gram-negative bacterium Pseu The generation time for a single species will vary
domonas aeruginosa, for example, can form a single-species
as culture conditions change. During exponential
biofilm on the lungs of cystic fibrosis patients or on medigrowth, generation time remains constant.
cal implants. Distinct stages in biofilm development (the
biofilm “life cycle”) include initiaA.
B.
tion, maturation, maintenance, and
dissolution (or dispersal). Bacterial
biofilms form when nutrients are
plentiful. The goal of biofilms in
nature is to stay where food is abundant. Why should a microbe travel
off to hunt for food when it is already
available? Once nutrients become
scarce, however, individuals detach
from the community to forage for
Biofilm
new sources of nutrients.
Biofilms in nature can take many
FIGURE 4.27  Biofilms. A. A greenish-brown slime biofilm found on cobbles of the
different forms and serve different
streambed in High Ore Creek, Montana. B. The biofilm that forms on teeth is called plaque.
J. D. RUBY, K. F. GERENCSER

USGS





PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

functions for different species. Confocal images of biofilms
are shown in Figure 4.28 (inset) and Figure 2.30. The formation of biofilms can be cued by different environmental
signals in different species. These signals include pH, iron
concentration, temperature, oxygen availability, and the
presence of certain amino acids. Nevertheless, a common
pattern emerges in the formation of many kinds of biofilms
(Fig. 4.28 ).
First, the specific environmental signal induces a genetic
program in planktonic cells. The planktonic cells then start
to attach to nearby inanimate surfaces by means of flagella,
pili, lipopolysaccharides, or other cell-surface appendages,
and they begin to coat that surface with an organic monolayer of polysaccharides or glycoproteins to which more
planktonic cells can attach. At this point, cells may move
along surfaces using a twitching motility that involves the
extension and retraction of a specific type of pilus. Ultimately, they stop moving and firmly attach to the surface.
As more and more cells bind to the surface, they can begin
to communicate with each other by sending and receiving
chemical signals in a process called quorum sensing. These
chemical signaling molecules are continually made and
secreted by individual cells. Once the population reaches
a certain number (analogous to an organizational “quorum”), the chemical signal achieves a specific concentration
that the cells can sense. This concentration triggers genetically regulated changes that cause cells to bind tenaciously
to the substrate and to each other. Quorum sensing serves

FIGURE 4.28



Biofilm development. The stages of biofilm

development in Pseudomonas, which generally apply to the formation of many kinds of biofilms. Inset: A mucoid environmental strain
of P. aeruginosa produces uneven, lumpy biofilms in an experimental
flow cell. Cells in the biofilm were stained green with the fluorescent
DNA-binding dye Syto-9 (3D confocal laser scanning microscopy).
Source: H. C. Flemming and J. Wingender. 2010. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 8:623–633.

the biofilm in many ways. Among other functions, quorum
sensing triggers the increased resistance of biofilms to antibiotics and to phagocytosis by white blood cells—subjects
we explore in eTopic 4.4 and Special Topic 27.1.
Once established, the cells in a microcolony form a
thick extracellular matrix of polysaccharide polymers and
entrapped organic (DNA and proteins) and inorganic
materials (Fig. 4.28). These exopolysaccharides (EPSs),
such as alginate produced by P. aeruginosa and colanic acid
produced by E. coli, increase the antibiotic resistance of
residents within the biofilm. As the biofilm matures, the
amalgam of adherent bacteria and matrix takes on complex
3D shapes such as columns and streamers, forming channels through which nutrients flow. For many bacteria, sessile (nonmoving) cells in a biofilm chemically “talk” to each
other in order to build microcolonies and keep water channels open. Bacillus subtilis also spins out a fibril-like amyloid
protein called TasA, which tethers cells and strengthens the
biofilm. The effect of TasA on a floating biofilm formed on
liquid medium is evident in Figure 4.29.
Bacteria growing in biofilms also exhibit a type of cell
differentiation brought about by different physiological

0

μm

146

100

200
200

100
μm

0
μm
0 120

Biofilm towers
Planktonic
cells

1. Attachment to
monolayer by flagella

2. Microcolonies

3. Exopolysaccharide
(EPS) production

4. Mature biofilm

5. Dissolution
and dispersal

DIEGO ROMERO, ET AL. 2010. PNAS 107:2230–2234

500 nm



147

DIEGO ROMERO,
ET AL. 2010. PNAS
107:2230–2234

BACTERIAL CULTURE, GROWTH, AND DEVELOPMENT

B.

DIEGO ROMERO, ET AL. 2010. PNAS 107:2230–2234

A.



DIEGO ROMERO,
ET AL. 2010. PNAS
107:2230–2234

CHAPTER 4

500 nm

FIGURE 4.29

Surface and upper zone
Middle zone
Bottom and lower zone

DIEGO O. SERRA AND REGINE HENGGE. 2014. ENVIRON. MICROBIOL. 16:1455

conditions in different layers of the biofilm. For examthe matrix. P. aeruginosa, for instance, produces an alginate
ple, oxygen does not penetrate deep into biofilms. So in
lyase that can strip away the EPS. Cells of B. subtilis sever
a colony growing on agar, cells at the colony surface will
their links to TasA fibers in some as yet unknown way. The
be exposed to oxygen, whereas
A.
B.
cells near the agar will not. Colonies of microbes like E. coli that do
not need oxygen to grow will have
an actively growing zone at the
agar-colony interface because cells
Stationarythere can ferment nutrients diffusphase zone
ing up from the agar. Cells at the
Transition
zone
colony-air interface will be in stationary phase because the nutrients are consumed before reaching
Post-exponential
phase zone
them (Fig. 4.30). The reverse pattern happens for oxygen-requiring
bacteria such as Pseudomonas. Cells
deep in the colony at the agar surface are in stationary phase because
they can’t get oxygen. Nutrients
from the agar are not consumed
100 μm
and diffuse toward the oxygen-rich

FIGURE 4.30 Two-layer differentiation in Escherichia coli biofilms. A. Side view
colony surface, where they feed a
of a cross section through a ridge of a macrocolony (see inset) grown on salt-free LB agar
growth zone.
plates for 5 days (SEM). Areas false-colored in red and blue represent zones of cells exhibitHow do cells escape from a bioing stationary-phase and post-exponential-phase physiologies, respectively. The narrow
film? When a sessile biofilm (or a
purple area represents the physiological transition zone between the lower and upper layers.
part of it) begins to starve or experiB. SEM images showing (top) stationary phase cells on the macrocolony surface covered with
ences oxygen depletion, some cells
secreted cellulose, (middle) transition zone cells covered with pili and cellulose next to “naked”
cells, and (bottom) mesh-entangled flagella of post-exponential-growth cells.
start making enzymes that dissolve

DIEGO O. SERRA AND REGINE HENGGE. 2014. ENVIRONMENTAL MICROBIOLOGY 16:1455.

 Floating biofilm (pellicle) formation of Bacillus subtilis. Cells were grown in a broth for 48 hours without agitation
at 30°C. The pellicles formed by wild-type and tasA mutant B. subtilis are strikingly different. Wild-type pellicles are extremely wrinkly (A),
whereas tasA mutant pellicles are flat and fragile (B). Insets: Electron micrographs of wild-type (A) and tasA mutant (B) cells.



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL
B. + 1018 peptide (0.8 μg/ml)

A. No peptide

CESAR DE LA FUENTE-NUNEZ, ET AL. 2014. PLOS PATHOG. 10(5):E1004152.

Top view

Top view

Right
side view
Bottom side view
C.

COURTESY OF THE UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH COLUMBIA

Right side view

20 μm

Bottom side view

FIGURE 4.31

Effect of an antibiofilm
peptide on a Pseudomonas biofilm. Confo

cal images of 2-day-old Pseudomonas biofilms
(top and two side views) after 23 hours of no
peptide (A) or with antibiofilm peptide treatment
(B). The peptide promotes degradation of the
intracellular signaling molecule (p)ppGpp. Cells
were stained with live/dead stain in which live
cells fluoresce green and dead cells stain red.
Most cells from the treated biofilm were dead
or had dispersed. C. Robert Hancock (right) and
master’s student Pat Taylor.

sessile biofilm then sends out “scouts” called dispersal cells
to initiate new biofilms. For scouts to form, genes whose
products produce EPSs must be turned off, and for bacteria capable of motility, genes needed for flagella must be
activated.
Recall that biofilms are important for chronic infections,
so preventing or reversing their formation could prove therapeutic. Two intracellular signaling molecules critical to biofilm development and dispersal in many bacteria are the
unusual nucleotides cyclic dimeric guanosine monophosphate (cdiGMP) and guanosine tetra- and pentaphosphate
[(p)ppGpp]. High concentrations of either molecule promote biofilm formation, whereas low levels promote dispersal. Robert Hancock and colleagues from the University
of British Columbia may have found a way to undo a biofilm’s architecture by targeting one of these signal nucleotides. They recently discovered a synthetic peptide that binds
the signaling molecule (p)ppGpp and promotes its degradation in various pathogens. When used in vitro, this peptide
caused the death and dispersal of biofilm cells and may do
the same in an infection (Fig. 4.31).
Organisms adapted to life in extreme environments also
form biofilms. Archaea form biofilms in acid mine drainage
(pH 0), where they contribute to the recycling of sulfur, and



CESAR DE LA FUENTE-NUNEZ, ET AL. 2014. PLOS PATHOG. 10(5):E1004152.

148

cyanobacterial biofilms are
common in thermal springs.
Suspended particles called
“marine snow” are found
in oceans and appear to be
floating biofilms comprising
many unidentified organisms
(discussed in Chapter 21).
The particles seem to be
capable of methanogenesis,
nitrogen fixation, and sulfide
production, indicating that
the architecture of biofilms
enables anaerobic metabolism to occur in an otherwise
aerobic environment.

To Summarize




Biofilms are complex,
multicellular,
surfaceattached
microbial
communities.
Chemical signals enable
bacteria to communicate
(quorum sensing) and
in some cases to form
biofilms.

Biofilm development involves the adherence of cells to
a substrate, the formation of microcolonies, and, ultimately, the formation of complex channeled communities that generate new planktonic cells.

4.6

Cell Differentiation

Can bacteria change shape? Many bacteria faced with environmental stress undergo complex molecular reprogramming that includes changes in cell structure. Some species,
like E. coli, experience relatively simple changes in cell
structure, such as the formation of smaller cells or thicker
cell surfaces. However, select species, such as Caulobacter
crescentus, undergo elaborate cell differentiation processes.
Caulobacter cells convert from the swimming form to the
holdfast form before cell division (see Section 3.5). Each
cell cycle then produces one sessile cell attached to its substrate by a holdfast, while its sister cell swims off in search
of another habitat.
Eukaryotic microbes also have highly complex life cycles.
For example, Dictyostelium discoideum is a seemingly unremarkable ameba that grows as separate, independent cells.

CHAPTER 4

A.



BACTERIAL CULTURE, GROWTH, AND DEVELOPMENT

149

FIGURE 4.32  Endospore formation. A. Photomicrograph of Clostridium difficile endospores.
The cells (approx. 3 µm long) are stained with crystal
violet. The cells are blue, whereas the spores are
colorless and located inside the cells (arrow). A spore
stain in which spores appear blue-green is shown in
Figure 2.22B. B. Peter Setlow (right) of the University
of Connecticut figured out how proteins regulate the
process of endospore differentiation. C. The seven
stages of endospore formation.

B.

COURTESY OF PETER SETLOW

CDC HTTP://PHIL.CDC.GOV/PHIL/HOME.ASP



C.

Origin
Sporulation

Vegetative growth

Axial filament DNA

Mother cell

Germination
Spore

Stage I. Septum forms near
one pole. DNA replicates and
extends into an axial filament.
Stage VII. Mother
cell releases spore.

Stage II. Septum
separates forespore
from mother cell. DNA
pumped through septum
until each compartment
gets a chromosome.

Forespore

Spore coat
Stage VI. Dipicolinic acid
is synthesized, and calcium
is incorporated into the
spore coat.

Stage III. Mother cell
engulfs forespore,
surrounding it with a
second membrane.

Engulfment

Cortex
Stage V. Forespore develops
a cortex layer of peptidoglycan
between original forespore
membrane and the membrane
from the mother cell. Coat
proteins deposited on outer
membrane.

Exosporangium

When challenged by adverse conditions such as starvation,
however, D. discoideum secretes chemical signaling molecules that choreograph a massive interaction of individuals
to form elaborate multicellular structures. The developmental cycle of this organism may be compared to that of
other eukaryotic microbes that are human parasites (discussed in Chapter 20).

Endospores Are Bacteria in
Suspended Animation

Certain Gram-positive genera, including important pathogens such as Clostridium tetani (tetanus), Clostridium botulinum (botulism), and Bacillus anthracis (anthrax), have
the remarkable ability to develop dormant spores that
are heat and desiccation resistant. Spores are particularly
hearty because they do not grow and do not need nutrients

Stage IV. Chromosomes
of mother cell disintegrate.

until they germinate. Resistance to heat and desiccation
(and its lethal toxin) makes B. anthracis spores a potential
bioweapon.
Most of what we know about bacterial sporulation
comes from the Gram-positive soil bacterium Bacillus subtilis. When growing in rich media, this microbe undergoes
normal vegetative growth and can replicate every 30–60
minutes. However, starvation initiates an elaborate 8-hour
genetic program that directs an asymmetrical cell division
process and ultimately yields a spore (see Section 10.3).
As shown in Figure 4.32 , sporulation can be divided
into seven discrete stages based primarily on cell morphology.
Stage 0 (not shown) represents the point at which the vegetative cell “decides” to use one of two potential polar division
sites to begin septum formation instead of the central division site used for vegetative growth. In stage I, the DNA is
replicated and stretched into a long axial filament that spans
the length of the cell. There are two chromosome copies at

150



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

this point. Ultimately, one of the polar division sites wins
out and forms a septum. In stage II, the septum divides
the cell into two unequal compartments: the smaller forespore, which will ultimately become the spore, and the larger
mother cell, from which the forespore is derived. Each compartment eventually contains one of the replicated chromosomes. (Most of the chromosome in the forespore has to be
pumped in after septum formation.)
In stage III of sporulation, the mother cell membrane
engulfs the forespore. Next, the mother cell chromosome is
destroyed (stage IV) and a thick peptidoglycan layer (cortex) is placed between the two membranes surrounding
the forespore protoplast (stage V). Layers of coat proteins
are then deposited on the outer membrane, also in stage
V. Stage VI completes the development of spore resistance
to heat and chemical insults. This last process includes the
synthesis of dipicolinic acid (which stabilizes and protects
spore DNA) and the uptake of calcium into the coat of the
spore. Finally, the mother cell, now called a sporangium,
releases the mature spore (stage VII).
Spores resist many environmental stresses that would
kill vegetative cells. Spores owe this resistance, in part, to
their desiccation (they have only 10%–30% of a vegetative

A.

Heterocyst

Cyanobacteria Differentiate into
Nitrogen-Fixing Heterocysts

Some autotrophic cyanobacteria, such as Anabaena, not only
carry out photosynthesis but also “fix” atmospheric nitrogen
to make ammonia. This is surprising because nitrogenase,
the enzyme required to fix nitrogen, is very sensitive
to oxygen present in air and produced as a by-product of photosynthesis. So one might expect that photosynthesis and nitrogen fixation would be two mutually
exclusive physiological activities. Anabaena solved this
dilemma by developing specialized cells, called heterocysts, that can fix nitrogen (Fig. 4.33). A tightly
regulated genetic program converts every tenth photosynthetic, vegetative cell to a heterocyst. As part of the
differentiation process, heterocysts make nitrogenase,
produce three additional cell walls, and form a specialized envelope that provides a barrier to atmospheric
20 µm
O2 and degrades the photosynthesis machinery that
produces O2. The heterocyst then supplies nitrogen
compounds to the adjacent vegetative cells, which, in
return, send carbon sugars to the heterocyst (see eTopic 2.1).
The precise spacing of heterocysts relies on the ratio of inhibitors relative to activators in different cells in the chain. Inhibitors predominate in vegetative cells, whereas cells fated to
become heterocysts contain higher levels of an activator.

20 µm

FIGURE 4.33



WILLIAM BUIKEMA, U. OF CHICAGO

BIODIDAC

B.

cell’s water content). But, as discovered by Peter Setlow and
colleagues, spores are also packed with small acid-soluble
proteins (SASPs) that bind to and protect DNA. The SASP
coat protects the spore’s DNA from damage by ultraviolet
light and various toxic chemicals.
A fully mature spore can exist in soil for at least 50–100
years, and spores have been known to last thousands of years.
Once proper nutrient conditions arise, another genetic program, called germination, is triggered to wake the dormant
cell, dissolve the spore coat, and release a viable vegetative cell.
While sporulation is an effective survival strategy, bacteria that sporulate actually go out of their way not to sporulate—even to the point of cannibalism. During nutrient
limitation, these bacteria will secrete proteins that can kill
their siblings and then use the released nutrients to prevent
starvation and, thus, sporulation. When (and only when)
that strategy fails, they sporulate.

Cyanobacteria and heterocyst formation.

A. Light-microscope image of the cyanobacterium Phanizomenon.
B. The cyanobacterium Anabaena. The expression of genes in heterocysts is different from their expression in other cells. All cells in
the figure contain a cyanobacterial gene to which the gene for green
fluorescent protein (GFP) has been spliced. Only cells that have
formed heterocysts are expressing the fused gene, which makes the
cell fluoresce bright green.

Starvation Induces Differentiation
into Fruiting Bodies

Certain species of bacteria, in the microbial equivalent of
a barn raising, produce architectural marvels called fruiting bodies. The Gram-negative species Myxococcus xanthus uses a gliding motility (involving a type of pilus,

0 hours



BACTERIAL CULTURE, GROWTH, AND DEVELOPMENT

7 hours

20 µm

31 hours



151

72 hours

20 µm

20 µm

20 µm

FIGURE 4.34



J. M. KUNER AND D. KAISER

CHAPTER 4

Myxococcus swarm, erecting a fruiting body. Approximately 100,000 cells begin to aggregate, and over the course

of 72 hours they erect a fruiting body.

not a flagellum) to travel on surfaces as individuals or to
move together as a mob (Fig. 4.34). Starvation triggers a
developmental cycle in which 100,000 or more individuals aggregate, rising into a mound called a fruiting body.
Myxococci within the interior of the fruiting body differentiate into thick-walled, spherical spores that are released
into the surroundings. The random dispersal of spores
is an attempt to find new sources of nutrients. This differentiation process requires many cell-cell interactions
and a complex genetic program that we still do not fully
understand.

Some Bacteria Differentiate to
Form Filamentous Structures

The actinomycetes (see Chapter 18), such as Streptomyces,
are bacteria that form mycelia and sporangia analogous to
the filamentous structures of eukaryotic fungi (Fig. 4.35).
Several developmental programs tied to nutrient availability are at work in this process (Fig. 4.36). Under favorable
nutrient conditions, a germ tube emerges from a germinating spore, grows from its tip (tip extension), and forms

A.

branches that grow along, and within, the surface of its food
source (Fig. 4.36, step 1). This type of growth produces
an intertwined network of long multinucleate filaments
(hyphae; singular, hypha) collectively called substrate
mycelia (singular, mycelium). After a few days, a signaling molecule made by the organisms accumulates to a level
that activates a new set of genes, including one encoding a
surfactant, that allow hyphae to grow into the atmosphere,
rising above the surface to form aerial mycelia (Fig. 4.36,
steps 2a and 2b). Compartments at the tips of these aerial
hyphae contain 20–30 copies of the genome. Aerial hyphae
stop growing as nutrients decline, triggering a developmental program that synthesizes antibiotics. Meanwhile, the
older ends of the filaments senesce, and their decomposing
cytoplasm attracts scavenger microbes—which are killed by
the antibiotics. The younger streptomycete cells then feast
on the dead scavengers.
The aerial hyphae ultimately produce spores (arthrospores) that are fundamentally different from bacterial endospores. This program lays down multiple septa
that subdivide the compartment into single-genome prespores (Fig. 4.36, step 3). The shape of the prespore then

B.

Aerial hypha
Droplet of antibiotic actinorhodin

KIM FINDLAY AND MARK BUTTNER, JOHN INNES
CENTRE, NORWICH, UK

1 µm

FIGURE 4.35

SOCIETY FOR GENERAL
MICROBIOLOGY, READING, UK

DAVID SCHARF/SCIENCE SOURCE

C.

 Mycelia. A. Streptomyces substrate mycelia. B. Filamentous colonies of Streptomyces coelicolor, an actinomycete known for
producing antibiotics (blue pigment in water droplets). C. Streptomyces aerial hyphae. The arrow points to a hyphal spore (approx. 1 µm each).

152



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

1. Under favorable conditions,
one or two germ tubes emerge
from a spore and produce a
substrate mycelium.

Substrate mycelium

bld genes
expressed

Germ tubes
18 hours

10 hours

Nutrient depletion

30 hours
2a. After 48–72 hours, bld genes
cause production of aerial hyphae
(i.e., aerial mycelia).

Free spore

Dispersal

whi genes
expressed

Surfactant
protein made

2b. The tips of the hyphae
form a spiral compartment
containing multiple copies
of the genome.
Aerial mycelia

3. When growth stops, the
compartment segments (which
requires the whi genes). Each
segment changes shape and its
wall thickens to become a
desiccation-resistant spore.

3 days

Mycelia

Antibiotics
synthesized

4–10 days

FIGURE 4.36



Developmental cycle of Streptomyces coelicolor.

changes, its cell wall thickens, and deposits are made in
the spore that increase resistance to desiccation. These
organisms are of tremendous interest, both for their ability to make antibiotics and for their fascinating developmental programs.

To Summarize








Microbial development involves complex changes in
cell forms.
Endospore development by Bacillus and Clostridium
species is a multistage process that includes asymmetrical
cell division to make a forespore and a mother cell, forespore engulfment by the mother cell, deposition of coat
proteins around the forespore, and steps that increase
chemical and heat resistance of the endospore.
Heterocyst development enables cyanobacteria to
fix nitrogen anaerobically while maintaining oxygenic
photosynthesis.
Multicellular fruiting bodies in Myxococcus and mycelia in actinomycetes develop in response to starvation,
dispersing dormant cells to new environments.

Thought Question

4.16 How might Streptomyces and Actinomyces species avoid
“committing suicide” when they make their antibiotics?

Concluding Thoughts
Bacteria, as simple as they seem, perform incredibly complex
and highly orchestrated processes to achieve growth. They
coordinate the gathering of food with the synthesis of biomass and then adjust those processes as nutrients change in
the local environment, or when they are challenged by stress.
Most, if not all, bacteria also undergo elegant developmental
processes ranging from biofilms and swarming, to sporulation or heterocyst formation. As with metabolic adaptations,
developmental programs are launched in response to environmental pressures such as starvation, desiccation, changes
in temperature, and even crowding. The environmental
influence over these microbial processes impacts the composition and interspecies collaboration among water and soil
ecosystems, as well as within the microbial communities that
inhabit the human body. In Chapter 5 we build on these
concepts and explore the remarkable ways that microbes
respond to environmental stress and change.

CHAPTER 5



ENVIRONMENTAL INFLUENCES AND CONTROL OF MICROBIAL GROWTH



157

CHAPTER 5

Environmental Influences and
Control of Microbial Growth
5.2 Temperature and Pressure
5.3 Osmolarity
5.4 Hydronium (pH) and Hydroxide Ion

Concentrations
5.5 Oxygen
5.6 Nutrient Deprivation and Starvation
5.7 Physical, Chemical, and Biological Control

of Microbes

C U R R E N T R E S E A RC H

highlight

Manipulating your neighbor. Can one bacterial species manipulate differentiation of another? Elizabeth Shank and student Matthew Powers explored this question by searching for
soil bacteria that could inhibit biofilm gene expression in Bacillus subtilis. One species, Pseudomonas protegens, uses 2,4-diacetylphloroglucinol (DAPG) for that purpose. A DAPG-secreting
P. protegens colony (arrow) alters the wrinkle morphology of a
nearby B. subtilis colony (below). Subinhibitory concentrations
of DAPG also decreased Bacillus spore formation tenfold, proving that some microbiome species secrete signaling molecules
that manipulate the development of “niche-mates.” Microbiome
composition could be radically changed by such interactions.
Source: Matthew J. Powers et al. 2015. J. Bacteriol. 197:2129–2138.

M

icrobes have both the fastest and the slowest growth rates of any known organisms.
Some hot-springs bacteria can double in
as little as 10 minutes, whereas deep-sea-sediment
microbes may take as long as 100 years. What determines these differences in growth rate? Nutrition
is one factor, but niche-specific physical parameters such as temperature, pH, and osmolarity are
equally important. In Chapter 5 we explore the limits
of microbial growth and show how this knowledge
helps us control the microbial world.

A N I N T E RV I E W W I T H
ELIZABETH SHANK, MICROBIOLOGIST, UNIVERSITY OF
NORTH CAROLINA

How might tinkering with sporulation
affect a microbial ecosystem?
Cross-species interactions between
Bacillus subtilis and Pseudomonas
protegens could allow them to cocolonize plant roots by partitioning
growing cells of each species in different regions of the root. Alternatively,
P. protegens might have a competitive
growth advantage if B. subtilis cannot sporulate to survive
harsh conditions. Altering growth or survival of one member of a microbial community can also have ripple effects on
other members of the ecosystem.
COURTESY OF UNIVERSITY OF
NORTH CAROLINA

5.1 Environmental Limits on Growth

Will the signal molecule DAPG affect sporulation of other
bacteria, and if so, are there potential applications?

5 mm

Whether DAPG affects other species depends on how it
impacts sporulation. DAPG probably acts early in the Spo0A
signaling pathway, increasing the chances that DAPG will
affect other bacteria with conserved Spo0A pathways. If
DAPG does affect other bacteria, it might be used to help
plants resist particular pathogens or, if DAPG prevents sporulation of the biopesticide Bacillus thuringiensis, it could
extend the efficacy of this biopesticide. Regardless, DAPG is
a useful chemical tool to probe how P. protegens and B. subtilis may chemically manipulate each other in nature.
157

158



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

Microbes encounter numerous environmental stresses during their existence. Some are physical, some are chemical,
and some are imposed by their competitors, as illustrated
in the Current Research Highlight. Although a species’
physiology is geared to work within only a narrow range
of physical parameters, in nature the environment can
change quickly and dramatically. Many marine microbes,
for instance, move within seconds from deep-sea cold to
the searing heat of a thermal vent. How do these organisms
survive? Most species have stopgap measures called stress
responses that temporarily protect the organism from brief
forays into potentially lethal environments. But some organisms evolve to thrive, not just survive, in extreme environments. How do these so-called extremophiles grow under
conditions that would kill most living things? In addition
to environmental threats, microbes in nature wage wars
among themselves by secreting antimicrobial compounds.
Why doesn’t the toxin-producing microbe kill itself? Is it
somehow immune to its own toxin? Knowledge about how
microbes cope with their environments, and each other, is
exploited by humans to prevent the growth of bacteria in
foods, destroy disease-causing microbes, and develop new
microbe-based industries.
We begin this chapter by describing how physical and
chemical changes in the environment impact the growth of
different groups of microbes. We also explore how microorganisms adapt to different environments in ways both
transient (involving temporary expression of genes) and permanent (modifications of the gene pool). The permanent
genetic changes have led to biological diversity. Finally, we
examine the different ways humans try to limit the growth
of microorganisms to protect plants, animals, and ourselves.
As you proceed through this chapter, you will encounter two recurring themes: that different groups of microbes
live in vastly different environments, and that microbes can
respond in diverse ways when confronted by conditions
outside their niche, or comfort zone. Chapter 21 builds on
this information to discuss how communities of microbes
interact with their environment, and presents current
research methods that are used to study microbial ecology.

5.1

Environmental Limits
on Growth

What is normal? With our human frame of reference, we
tend to think that “normal” growth conditions are those
found at sea level with a temperature between 20°C and
40°C, a near-neutral pH, a salt concentration of 0.9%, and
ample nutrients. Any ecological niches outside this window
are labeled “extreme,” and the organisms inhabiting them
are called extremophiles. The term “extremophile” was first

used by NASA biochemist Robert MacElroy, who sought
evidence for kinds of life that might inhabit other planets.
Extremophiles are microbes (bacteria, archaea, and some
eukaryotes) that are able to grow in conditions extremely
different from those optimal for humans. For example,
one group of organisms can grow at temperatures above
the boiling point of water (100°C), while another group
requires a strongly acidic (pH 2) environment to grow.
According to our definition of what is “normal,” conditions
on Earth when life began were certainly extreme. The earliest microbes, then, likely grew in these extreme environments. Organisms that grow under conditions that seem
normal to humans likely evolved from an ancient extremophile that gradually adapted as the environment changed to
that of our present-day Earth.
A single environment can simultaneously encompass multiple extremes. In Yellowstone National Park, for
instance, an acid pool can be found next to an alkali pool,
both at extremely high temperatures. Thus, extremophiles
typically evolve to survive multiple extreme environments.
Extremophiles may provide insight into the workings of
extraterrestrial microbes we may one day encounter, since
outer space certainly qualifies as an extreme environment.
Our experiences with extremophiles should alert us to the
dangers of underestimating the precautions necessary in handling extraterrestrial samples. For example, we should not
assume that irradiation will sterilize samples from future planetary or interstellar missions. Such treatments do not even kill
Deinococcus radiodurans, an extremophile found on Earth.
How do we even begin to study organisms that grow in
boiling water or sulfuric acid solutions or organisms that
we cannot culture in the laboratory? Genome sequences
present new opportunities for investigating these questions.
Bioinformatic analysis, which uses the DNA sequence of a
gene to predict the function of its protein product, allows
us to study the biology of organisms that we cannot culture. Transcriptomic and proteomic techniques can examine all the gene and protein expression, respectively, that
take place in bacteria as they adjust to changing environments such as temperature or pH. These techniques are
discussed further in Chapters 7, 8, and 12.
We have already mentioned the fundamental physical conditions (temperature, pH, osmolarity) that define an environment and favor (select for) the growth of specific groups of
organisms. Within a given microbial community, each species
is further localized to a specific niche defined by a narrower
range of environmental factors (see the Current Research
Highlight). Species find their niche, in part, because every
protein and macromolecular structure within a cell is affected
by changes in environmental conditions. For example, a single enzyme works best under a unique set of temperature,
pH, and salt conditions because those conditions allow it to
fold into its optimum shape, or conformation. Deviations

CHAPTER 5



ENVIRONMENTAL INFLUENCES AND CONTROL OF MICROBIAL GROWTH



159

TABLE 5.1+Basic Environmental Classification of Microorganisms
Environmental
parameter

Classification

Temperature

Hyperthermophile*
(growth above 80°C)

Thermophile*
(growth between 50°C
and 80°C)

Mesophile
(growth between 15°C
and 45°C)

pH

Alkaliphile*
(growth above pH 9)

Neutralophile
(growth between pH 5 and pH 8)

Acidophile*
(growth below pH 3)

Osmolarity

Halophile*
(growth in high salt,
>2 M NaCl)

Oxygen

Strict aerobe
(growth only in O2)

Facultative microbe
(growth with or without O2)

Microaerophile
(growth only in small
amounts of O2)

Pressure

Barophile*
(growth at high pressure,
greater than 380 atm)

Psychrophile*
(growth
below 15°C)

Strict anaerobe
(growth only
without O2)

Barotolerant
(growth between 10
and 500 atm)

*Considered extremophiles.

from these optimal conditions cause the protein to fold a little differently and become less active. While not all enzymes
within a cell boast the same physical optima, these optima
must at least be similar and matched to the organism’s environment for the organism to function effectively.
As you might guess from the preceding discussion,
microbes are commonly classified by their environmental
niche. Table 5.1 summarizes these environmental classes.

To Summarize








Different species exhibit different optimal growth values of temperature, pH, and osmolarity.
Extremophiles inhabit fringe environments with conditions that do not support human life.
The environmental habitat (such as high salt or acidic
pH) inhabited by a particular species is defined by the tolerance of that organism’s proteins and other macromolecular structures to the physical conditions within that niche.
Global approaches used to study gene expression allow
us to view how organisms respond to changes in their
environment.

5.2

Temperature and Pressure

How do microbes react to hot and cold, or to high pressure? Let’s start with temperature. Unlike humans (and
mammals in general), microbes cannot control their

temperature; thus, bacterial cell temperature matches
that of the immediate environment. Because temperature affects the average rate of molecular motion,
changes in temperature impact every aspect of microbial
physiology, including membrane f luidity, nutrient transport, DNA stability, R NA stability, and enzyme structure and function. Every organism has an “optimum”
temperature at which it grows most quickly, as well as
minimum and maximum temperatures that define the
limits of growth.
Growth temperature limits are imposed, in part, by the
thousands of proteins in a cell, all of which must function
within the same temperature range. A species grows most
quickly at temperatures where all of the cell’s proteins work
most efficiently as a group to produce energy and synthesize cell components. Growth stops when rising temperatures cause critical enzymes or cell structures (such as the
cell membrane) to fail. At cold temperatures, growth ceases
because enzymatic processes become too sluggish and the
cell membrane becomes too rigid. The membrane needs to
remain fluid so that it can expand as cells grow larger and
so that proteins needed for solute transport can be inserted
into the membrane.
The different branches of life reflect narrowing tolerance to heat. Different archaeal species, for example, can
grow in extremely hot or extremely cold temperatures, and
some can grow in the middle range. Bacteria, for the most
part, tolerate temperatures between the archaeal extremes.
Eukaryotes are even less temperature tolerant than bacteria, with individual species capable of growth between
10°C and 65°C.

160

PART 1





THE MICROBIAL CELL

Growth Rate and Temperature

In general, microbes that grow at higher temperatures can
achieve higher rates of growth (Fig. 5.1A). Remarkably,
for any one species the relationship between growth temperature and the growth rate constant k (the number of
generations per hour; see Section 4.4) obeys the Arrhenius equation for simple chemical reactions (eTopic 5.1).
At higher temperatures,
growth rates fall because
enzymes denature.

A.
4.0
3.0

Growth rate constant, k (per hour)

2.0

37°
36°
33°

42° 39°
45°
46°

1.0

At lower temperatures,
growth rates fall because of
decreases in membrane
fluidity and enzymatic activity.
30°

37°

28°

47°

30°

23°
21°

0.5
0.4

23° 19°

0.3

17°
48°

0.2

Growth in rich media
Growth in minimal media
Extrapolated Arrhenius plot

0.1
3.1

3.2

3.3
1,000/T (K)

15°
13.5°
3.4

3.5

B.

Extreme thermophile
Generations per hour

Thermophile
Mesophile
Psychrophile

The general result of the Arrhenius equation is that growth
rate roughly doubles for every 10°C rise in temperature
(Fig. 5.1A). This same relationship is observed for most
chemical reactions.
At the upper and lower limits of the growth range, however, the Arrhenius effect breaks down. Critical proteins
denature at high temperatures, whereas lower temperatures
decrease membrane fluidity and limit the conformational
mobility of enzymes, thereby lowering their activity. As a
result, growth stops at temperature extremes. The typical temperature growth range for most bacteria spans the
organism’s optimal growth temperature by 30°C–40°C,
but some organisms have a much narrower tolerance. Even
within a species, we can find mutants that are more sensitive to one extreme or the other (heat sensitive or cold
sensitive). These mutations often define key molecular
components of stress responses, such as the heat-shock proteins (discussed in Chapter 10).
Thermodynamic principles limit a cell’s growth to a narrow temperature range. For example, heat increases molecular movement within proteins. Too much or too little
movement will interfere with enzymatic reactions. A great
diversity exists among microbes because different groups
have evolved to grow within very different thermal ranges.
A species grows within a specific thermal range because
its proteins have evolved to tolerate that range. Outside
that range, proteins will denature or function too slowly
for growth. The upper limit for protists is about 50°C,
while some fungi can grow at temperatures as high as
60°C. Prokaryotes, however, have been found to grow at
temperatures ranging from below 0°C to above 100°C.
Temperatures over 100°C are usually found near thermal
vents deep in the ocean. Vent water temperature can rise
to 350°C, but the pressure is sufficiently high to keep the
water in a liquid state.

Thought Question

5.1 Why haven’t cells evolved so that all their enzymes have
0

10

20

30

40 50 60 70
Temperature (°C)

80

90

100

FIGURE 5.1  Relationship between temperature and
growth rate. A. The growth rate constant (k) of the enteric

organism Escherichia coli is plotted against the inverse of the
growth temperature on the Kelvin scale (1,000/T is used to give
a convenient scale on the x-axis). This is a more detailed view of a
mesophilic growth temperature curve. As temperature rises above
or falls below the optimum range, growth rate decreases faster than
is predicted by the Arrhenius equation. B. The relationship between
temperature and growth rates of different groups of microbes. Note
that the peak growth rate increases linearly with temperature and
obeys the Arrhenius equation. Source: Part A from Sherrie L. Herendeen

et al. 1979. J. Bacteriol. 139:185.

the same temperature optimum? If they did, wouldn’t they
grow even more rapidly?

Microorganisms Are Classified
by Growth Temperature

Using range of growth temperature, microorganisms can
be classified as mesophiles, psychrophiles, or thermophiles
(Fig. 5.1B).
Mesophiles include the typical “lab rat” microbes,
such as Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis. Their growth
optima range between 20°C and 40°C, with a minimum
of 15°C and a maximum of 45°C. Because they are easy to

CHAPTER 5



ENVIRONMENTAL INFLUENCES AND CONTROL OF MICROBIAL GROWTH

ASIM BEJ, UNIVERSITY OF ALABAMA AT BIRMINGHAM

1˚C

5 µm

FIGURE 5.2



Psychrophilic environments and microbes.

A. The continent of Antarctica is an extreme environment populated
by many species of psychrophilic microorganisms, most of them
unknown. In addition to being brutally cold, this extreme environment is nutrient-poor and subject to high levels of solar UV irradiation. Inset: Asim Bej, University of Alabama at Birmingham, collects
samples from the ecosystem at Schirmacher Oasis (location as
marked). Genome sequences from the captured microbes, like those
shown in (B), reveal the composition and metabolic capabilities of
the South Pole microbiome. B. Psychrotolerant Flavobacterium
(grows between 0°C and 22°C) from a South Pole lake made from
glacial meltwater in summer (high temperature = 0.9°C) (SEM).
Novel compounds made by members of the polar microbiome are
screened for anticancer and antimicrobial potential.

grow and because most human pathogens are mesophiles,
much of what we know about protein, membrane, and
DNA structure came from studying this group of organisms. However, detailed 3D views of protein structures are
frequently based on studies of two other classes of organisms whose optimum growth temperature ranges flank that

ASIM BEJ, UNIVERSITY OF ALABAMA AT BIRMINGHAM

B.

161

of the mesophiles—namely, psychrophiles (on the low-temperature side)
and thermophiles (on the high-temperature side). Because proteins from
thermophiles are more stable structures than proteins from mesophiles,
it’s easier to crystallize proteins from
extremophiles and determine their
structure by X-ray crystallography
(see Section 2.6).
Psychrophiles are microbes that grow at temperatures
as low as –10°C, but their optimum growth temperature is usually around 15°C. Psychrophiles are prominent
members of microbial communities beneath icebergs
in the Arctic and Antarctic (Fig. 5.2). In addition to
true psychrophiles, there are cold-resistant mesophiles
(psychrotolerant bacteria or psychrotrophs) that grow
between 0°C and 35°C. Both psychrophiles and psychrotrophs can be isolated from Antarctic lakes, beneath
several meters of ice (Fig. 5.2B). Entire microscopic ecosystems flourish there, capable of surviving –40°C all
winter, and then growing at near zero during the sunlit
summer. Polar microorganisms may be screened for novel
compounds with anticancer and antimicrobial potential.
Closer to home, in human environments, psychrotolerant
bacteria cause milk to spoil in the refrigerator. Even some
pathogens, such as Listeria monocytogenes (one cause of
food poisoning and septic abortions), can grow at refrigeration temperatures.
Why do these organisms grow so well in the cold?
One reason is that the proteins of psychrophiles are
more flexible than those of mesophiles and require less
energy (heat) to function. Of course, the downside to the
increased flexibility of psychrophilic proteins is that they
denature at lower temperatures than their mesophilic
counterparts. As a result, psychrophiles grow poorly, if
at all, when temperatures rise above 20°C. Another reason psychrophiles favor cold is that their membranes are
more fluid at low temperatures (because they contain
a high proportion of unsaturated fatty acids); at higher
temperatures their membranes are too flexible and fail
to maintain cell integrity. Finally, bacteria and archaea
that grow at 0°C in glaciers also contain antifreeze proteins and other cryoprotectants (such as trehalose) that
can depress the freezing point by 2°C. So, although these
organisms can grow in ice, they will not freeze. Interestingly, some psychrophilic and psychrotolerant bacteria actually stimulate ice formation in their surrounding
environment (eTopic 5.2).
Psychrophilic enzymes are of commercial interest
because their ability to carry out reactions at low temperature is useful in food processing and bioremediation.
Enzymes help brew beer more quickly, break down lactose
DR. ALFONSO DAVILA/SETI INSTITUTE

A.



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL
B.

ROBERTHARDING/ALAMY STOCK PHOTO

A.

C.

3 µm

2 µm

FIGURE 5.3  Thermophilic environments and thermophiles. A. Yellowstone
National Park hot spring. B. Thermus aquaticus, a hyperthermophile first isolated at
Yellowstone by Thomas Brock. Cell length varies from 3 to 10 μm. C. Thermophile
Methanocaldococcus jannaschii, grown at 78°C and 30 psi.

in milk, and can remove cholesterol from various foods.
The production of foods at lower temperatures is beneficial too, because the lower processing temperatures minimize the growth of typical mesophiles that degrade and
spoil food. Genetically engineered psychrophilic organisms
can safely degrade toxic organic contaminants (for example,
petroleum) in the cold. Arctic environments are particularly sensitive to pollution because contaminants are slow
to degrade in the freezing temperatures. Consequently, the
ability to seed Arctic oil spills with psychrophilic organisms
armed with petroleum-degrading enzymes could more
rapidly restore contaminated environments.
Thermophiles (Fig. 5.3) are species adapted to
growth at high temperatures (typically 55°C and higher).
Hyperthermophiles, which grow at temperatures as high
as 121°C, are found near thermal vents that penetrate
Earth’s crust on the ocean floor and on land (for example, hot springs). The thermophile Thermus aquaticus was
the first source of a high-temperature DNA polymerase
used for PCR amplification of DNA. T. aquaticus was
discovered in a hot spring at Yellowstone National Park
by microbiologist Thomas Brock, a pioneer in the study
of thermophilic organisms. Its application to the polymerase chain reaction revolutionized molecular biology
(discussed in Chapter 7).
Extreme thermophiles often have specially adapted
membranes and protein sequences. The thermal limits
of these structures determine the specific high-temperature ranges in which various species can grow. Because
enzymes in thermophiles (thermozymes) do not unfold as
easily as mesophilic enzymes, they more easily hold their
shape at higher temperatures. Thermophilic enzymes
are stable, in part, because they contain relatively low
amounts of glycine, a small amino acid that contributes to an enzyme’s flexibility (glycines do not contain

side chains, so they cannot form stabilizing intramolecular bonds). In addition, the amino termini of proteins
in these organisms often are “tied down” by hydrogen
bonding to other parts of the protein, making them
harder to denature.
Like all microbes, thermophiles have chaperone proteins that help refold other proteins as they undergo thermal denaturation. Thermophile genomes are packed with
numerous DNA-binding proteins that stabilize DNA. In
addition, these organisms possess special enzymes that
tightly coil DNA in a way that makes it more thermostable
and less likely to denature (think of a coiled phone cord
that has twisted and bunched up on itself).
Special membranes also help give cells additional stability at high temperatures. Unlike the typical lipid bilayers
of mesophiles, the membranes of thermophiles manage to
“glue” together parts of the two hydrocarbon layers that
point toward each other, making them more stable. They
do this by incorporating more saturated linear lipids into
their membranes. Saturated lipids form straight hydrocarbon tails that align well with neighboring lipids and form
a highly organized structure that is stable to heat. The
membranes of mesophiles are composed mostly of unsaturated lipids that bend against each other and align poorly.
Consequently, the membranes of mesophiles are more fluid
at lower temperatures.
The membranes of hyperthermophilic archaea impart
an amazing level of heat resilience by being lipid monolayers, not bilayers (see Fig. 3.12 and eAppendix Fig. A2.3B).
Lipid bilayers peel apart under withering heat. Monolayers, built for extremophile living, do not. Monolayer membranes are heat stable because long hydrocarbon chains
directly tether glycerophosphates on opposite sides of the
membrane. The chains (40 carbons long) do not contain
fatty acids, but are made of isoprene units bonded by ether

B. BOONYARATANAKORNKIT ET AL., UC BERKELEY



THOMAS D. BROCK, U. OF WISCONSIN, MADISON

162

CHAPTER 5



ENVIRONMENTAL INFLUENCES AND CONTROL OF MICROBIAL GROWTH



163

shape and enzymes that change membrane lipid composition. The heat-shock response, first identified in E. coli
by Tetsuo Yamamori and Takashi Yura in 1982, has
since been documented in all living organisms examined
thus far.

FIGURE 5.4

 Bioreactor used to grow thermophilic
microorganisms. Dr. Robert Kelly and students stand next to a

20-liter bioreactor that they use for the engineering analysis of
biofuel-producing microbes. Left to right: Aaron Hawkins, Andrew
Loder, Hong Lian, Kelly, and Yejun Han.

linkages to glycerol phosphate. More on thermophiles can
be found in Chapter 19.
How can we “see” the genome sequences of organisms
that will not grow at usual laboratory temperatures? And
could we use those sequences to invent biofuels? The DNA
of uncultured hyperthermophiles can be amplified by the
polymerase chain reaction (PCR), a technique that multiplies a small sample of DNA (see Section 7.6). PCR can
amplify DNA directly from the natural environment in
which the organisms are found. Genomic comparison with
known models such as E. coli quickly reveals whether an
organism under study may possess specific metabolic pathways and regulatory responses. The ability to peek at the
genome of hyperthermophiles led Robert Kelly and colleagues at North Carolina State University to mix genes
and enzymes from different species (Fig. 5.4). Their lab
attempts to engineer a new organism able to convert abundantly available CO2 and H 2 directly into high-energy
liquid fuels.

The Heat-Shock Response

As insurance against extinction, most microorganisms
possess elegant genetic programs that remodel their
physiology into one that can temporarily survive inhospitable conditions. Rapid temperature changes experienced during growth activate batches of stress response
genes, resulting in the heat-shock response (discussed
in Chapter 10). The protein products of these heatactivated genes include chaperones that maintain protein

5.2 If microbes lack a nervous system, how can they sense a
temperature change?

Adaptation to Pressure

Living creatures at Earth’s surface (sea level) are subjected to a pressure of 1 atmosphere (atm), which is equal
to 0.101 megapascal (MPa) or 14 pounds per square inch
(psi). At the bottom of the ocean, however—thousands
of meters deep—hydrostatic pressure averages a crushing
400 atm and can reach as high as 1,000 atm (101 MPa,
or 14,600 psi) in ocean trenches (Fig. 5.5). Organisms

A. Ocean depths.

0.296 atm

0.98 atm
Average height
of the land,
870 m

365 atm
Average depth
of the ocean,
3,730 m

B. The barophile
Shewanella violacea.

1,085 atm
Mariana Trench,
11,035 m

FIGURE 5.5



Mount
Everest,
8,848 m

TEM

1 µm

J. W. DEMING & R. COLWELL, APPL.
ENVIRON. MICROBIOL.44:1222–1230

PHOTO PROVIDED BY ROBERT KELLY

Thought Question

Barophilic environments and piezophiles.

A. Ocean depths. The deepest part of the ocean is at the bottom
of the Mariana Trench, a depression in the floor of the western
Pacific Ocean, just east of the Mariana Islands. The Mariana Trench
is 2,500 km (1,554 miles) long and 70 km (44 miles) wide. Near
its southwestern extremity, about 340 km (210 miles) southwest
of Guam, lies the deepest point on Earth. This point, referred to as
the Challenger Deep, plunges to a depth of 11,035 meters (nearly
7 miles). The pressure there (110 MPa) is over 1,000 times higher
than what we experience on land (0.1 MPa). B. The barophile
Shewanella violacea.

164



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

Barophiles require
high pressure to
grow, though they
die at still higher
pressures.

Growth rate

Barotolerant
organisms grow up
to a certain
pressure, but die at
higher pressures.

Douglass Bartlett and colleagues at the Scripps Institution
of Oceanography gradually increased the pressure under
which E. coli was grown to 62 MPa. One E. coli mutant
evolved to successfully grow at this pressure. The evolved
strain developed a mutation in a key fatty acid synthesis
protein, which changed the ratio of its membrane fatty
acids. Further studies could uncover mutations in additional genes and improve our understanding of the evolutionary steps necessary for microbial growth under extreme
pressure.

To Summarize


0

20

40

60

80

100

Pressure (MPa)

Barosensitive
organisms die as
pressure increases.

FIGURE 5.6
pressure.





Relationship between growth rate and

adapted to grow at these overwhelmingly high pressures
are called barophiles or piezophiles. From the curves in
Figure 5.6, notice that barophiles actually require elevated pressure to grow, while barotolerant organisms grow
well in the range of 1–50 MPa, but their growth falls off
thereafter.
Many barophiles are also psychrophilic, because the
average temperature at the ocean’s floor is 2°C. However,
barophilic hyperthermophiles form the basis of thermal
vent communities that support symbiotic worms and giant
clams (see Chapter 21).
How bacteria survive pressures of 80–100 MPa
(11,600–14,500 psi) is still a mystery. It is known,
though, that increased hydrostatic pressure and cold temperatures reduce membrane fluidity. Because fluidity of
the cell membrane is critical to survival, the phospholipids of deep-sea bacteria commonly have high levels of
polyunsaturated fatty acids to increase membrane fluidity. It is thought that in addition to these membrane
changes, internal structures must be pressure adapted.
For example, ribosomes in the barosensitive organism
E. coli (maximum growth pressure 50 MPa) dissociate
at pressures above 60 MPa, so barophiles must contain
uniquely designed ribosome structures that can withstand even higher pressures.
Clues to the physiological changes needed for growth
at high pressure may come from E. coli adaptive-evolution studies. Over a period of 500 generations (126 days),







The Arrhenius equation applies to the growth of
microorganisms: within a specific growth temperature
range, the growth rate doubles for every 10°C rise in
temperature.
Membrane fluidity varies with the composition of
lipids in a membrane, which in turn dictates the temperature and pressure at which an organism can grow.
Mesophiles, psychrophiles, and thermophiles are
groups of organisms that grow at moderate, low, and
high temperatures, respectively.
The heat-shock response produces a series of protective
proteins in organisms exposed to temperatures near the
upper edge of their growth range.
Barophiles (piezophiles) can grow at pressures up to
1,000 atm but fail to grow at low pressures. Growth at
high pressure requires specially designed membranes and
protein structures.

Thought Question

5.3 What could be a relatively simple way to grow barophiles
in the laboratory?

5.3

Osmolarity

Water is critical to life, but environments differ in the
amount of water actually available to growing organisms. Microbes, for instance, can use only water that
is not bound at any given instant to ions or other solutes in solution. Water availability is measured as water
activity (a w), a quantity approximated by concentration.
Because interactions with solutes lower water activity, the
more solutes there are in a solution, the less water there
is available for microbes to use for growth. Water activity

CHAPTER 5



ENVIRONMENTAL INFLUENCES AND CONTROL OF MICROBIAL GROWTH

is typically measured as the ratio of the
solution’s vapor pressure relative to that
of pure water. A solution is placed in a
sealed chamber, and the amount of water
vapor is determined at equilibrium. If
the air above the sample is 97% saturated
relative to the moisture present over pure
water, the relative humidity is 97% and
the water activity is 0.97. Most bacteria
growing on land or in freshwater habitats require water activity to be greater
than 0.91 (the water activity of seawater).
Fungi can tolerate water activity levels as
low as 0.86.



165

Pore size: 4 nm
Hydrophobic amino acid
residues speed water
through pore.
H 2O

Membrane

Channel

FIGURE 5.7 Aquaporin. Transverse view of the channel
through which water molecules move. Complementary halves
of the channel are formed by adjacent protein monomers.
(PDB code: 1J4N)


Osmotic Stress

Osmolarity is a measure of the number of solute molecules in a solution and is inversely related to aw. The more
particles there are in a solution, the greater the osmolarity
and the lower the water activity. Osmolarity is also important for a cell because of the cell’s semipermeable plasma
membrane. This membrane allows the osmolarity inside
the cell to be different from the osmolarity outside. The
principles of physical chemistry dictate that a solute present at different concentrations in two chambers separated
by a semipermeable membrane will tend to equilibrate. But
if the semipermeable membrane does not allow solutes to
move through the membrane, then osmolarity will equilibrate by water moving between the chambers. For a cell
in a hypertonic medium, where the external osmolarity
is higher than the internal, water will leave the cell in an
attempt to equalize osmolarity across the membrane. In
contrast, suspending a cell in a hypotonic medium (one of
lower osmolarity than the cell) will cause an influx of water
(see eAppendix 2).
Water does not move across cell membranes primarily by
simple diffusion. Instead, special membrane water channels formed by proteins called aquaporins enable water to
traverse the membrane much faster than by unmediated
diffusion. Rapid movement of water helps protect cells
against osmotic stress (Fig. 5.7). However, too much
water moving in or out of a cell is detrimental. Cells may
ultimately explode or implode, depending on the direction
the water moves. Even bacteria with a rigid cell wall suffer. They may not explode like a human cell, but the forces
placed on the cell wall are great.

Protection against Osmotic Stress

In addition to moving water, microbes have at least two
other mechanisms to minimize osmotic stress across

membranes. When stranded in a hypertonic medium
(higher osmolarity than the cell), bacteria try to protect
their internal water from leaving the cell by synthesizing
or importing compatible solutes that increase intracellular
osmolarity. Compatible solutes are small molecules that do
not disrupt normal cell metabolism even at high intracellular concentrations. Increasing intracellular levels of these
compounds (such as proline, glutamic acid, potassium, or
betaine) elevates cytoplasmic osmolarity without any detrimental effects, making it unnecessary for water to leave
the cell. In contrast, ions such as Na+ are not compatible
solutes and will disturb metabolism at high intracellular
concentrations.
Cells also contain pressure-sensitive (mechanosensitive)
channels that can be used to leak solutes out of the cell. It is
believed that these channels are activated by rising internal
pressures in cells immersed in a hypotonic medium (lower
osmolarity than the cell). When activated, the channels
allow solutes to escape, thereby lowering internal osmolarity and preventing too much water from entering the cell.
Outside a certain range of external osmolarity, these
housekeeping strategies become ineffective at controlling
internal osmolarity. To adapt, microbes launch a global
response in which cellular physiology is transformed to
tolerate brief encounters with potentially lethal salt (or
other solute) concentrations. Some changes are similar
to those provoked by heat shock, such as the increased
synthesis of chaperones that protect critical cell proteins
from denaturation. Other changes include alterations in
outer membrane pore composition (for Gram-negative
organisms).

166



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

WAYNE P. ARMSTRONG

Gas vesicles

0.5 µm

C.

FIGURE 5.8  Halophilic salt flats and halophilic bacteria. A. The halophilic salt flats along Highway 50 east of Fallon, Nevada, are
colored pinkish red by astronomical numbers of halophilic bacteria. B. Cross section of the archaeon Halobacterium sp. (TEM). Gas vesicles
allow the organism to float in liquid and acquire more oxygen. C. Shiladitya DasSarma and colleagues at the University of Maryland completed
the genome sequence of Halobacterium species NRC-1.

Thought Question



5.4 How might the concept of water availability be used by
the food industry to control spoilage?


Halophiles Require High Salt

Some species of archaea and bacteria have evolved to
require high salt (NaCl) concentration in order to grow.
These microbes are called halophiles (Fig. 5.8). In striking contrast to most bacteria, which require salt concentrations from 0.05 to 1 M (0.2%–5% NaCl), the extremely
halophilic archaea can grow at an aw of 0.75 and actually
require NaCl at concentrations of 2–4 M (10%–20%) to
grow. For comparison, seawater is about 3.5% NaCl. All
cells, even halophiles, prefer to keep a relatively low intracellular Na+ concentration, because some solutes are moved
into the cell by symport with Na+. To achieve a low internal Na+ concentration, halophilic microbes use special ion
pumps to excrete sodium and replace it with other cations,
such as potassium, which is a compatible solute. In fact, the
proteins and cell components (for example, ribosomes) of
halophiles require remarkably high intracellular potassium
levels to maintain their structure. Halophilic archaea are
presented in Chapter 19.

To Summarize




Water activity (aw) is a measure of how much water in a
solution is available for a microbe to use.
Osmolarity is a measure of the number of solute molecules in a solution and is inversely related to aw.





Aquaporins are membrane channel proteins that allow
water to move quickly across membranes to equalize
internal and external pressures.
Compatible solutes are used to minimize pressure differences across the cell membrane.
Mechanosensitive channels can leak solutes out of the
cell when internal pressure rises.
Halophilic organisms require high salt concentrations
to grow.

5.4

Hydronium (pH) and
Hydroxide Ion Concentrations

As with salt and temperature, the concentration of hydrogen ions (H+)—actually, hydronium ions (H3O+)—also
has a direct effect on the cell’s macromolecular structures.
Extreme concentrations of either hydronium or hydroxide
ions (OH–) in a solution will limit growth. In other words,
too much acid or base is harmful to cells. Despite this sensitivity to pH extremes, living cells tolerate a greater range
in environmental concentration of H+ than of virtually any
other chemical substance. E. coli, for example, tolerates a
pH range from 2 to 10, a 10-million-fold difference (but
grows only between pH 4.5 and 9). For a brief review of
pH, refer to eAppendix 1.

pH Optima, Minima, and Maxima

The charges on various amino or carboxyl groups within
a protein help forge the intramolecular bonds that dictate

COURTESY OF S. DASSARMA, U. OF MARYLAND BIOTECHNOLOGY INSTITUTE

B.
COURTESY OF S. DASSARMA, U. OF MARYLAND BIOTECHNOLOGY INSTITUTE

A.

CHAPTER 5
Growth pH

0

10–1

1

10–2

2

12

–3

3

11

10–4

4

10

10–5

5

9

10–6

6

–7

7

10–8

14
13

8

10–9

9

5

10–10

10

4

–11

11

3

10–12

12

2

10–13

13

10–14

14

10

FIGURE 5.9

H3O+

8 Intracellular
levels
7
compatible
6 with life

10

Alkaliphiles

pOH

10

10

Neutralophiles

ENVIRONMENTAL INFLUENCES AND CONTROL OF MICROBIAL GROWTH

[H+] (molarity) pH
0

Acidophiles



OH–



167

of an organic acid (HA) can freely permeate cell membranes and dissociate intracellularly, releasing a proton
that then acidifies the internal pH (eTopic 5.3 describes
how). An example of organic acid stress involves the
lactic acid produced and secreted by lactobacilli during
the formation of yogurt. The buildup of lactic acid limits bacterial growth, leaving yogurt with plenty of food
value. The food industry has taken advantage of this
phenomenon by preemptively adding citric acid or sorbic acid to certain foods. This practice controls microbial
growth under pH conditions that do not destroy the f lavor or quality of the food. Figure 5.10 provides the pH
values of various everyday items. Food microbiology is
discussed further in Chapter 16.

1
0

Classification of organisms according to their
optimum growth pH. pOH is the log10 of the reciprocal of the


hydroxide ion (OH–) concentration; that is, pOH = –log[OH–].

protein shape and thus protein activity. Because H+ concentration, [H+], affects the protonation of these ionizable groups, changing the pH can alter the charges on
these groups, as well as protein structure and activity.
The result is that all enzyme activities exhibit optima,
minima, and maxima with regard to pH, much as they
do for temperature. As we saw with temperature, groups
of microbes have evolved to inhabit diverse niches, for
which pH values can range from 0 to 11.5 (Fig. 5.9).
However, species differences in optimum growth pH
are not dictated by the pH limits at which critical cell
proteins function.
Generally speaking, the majority of enzymes, regardless
of the pH at which their source organism thrives, tend to
operate best between pH 5 and 8.5 (which, if you think
about it, is still a 3,000-fold range in hydrogen ion concentration). Yet many microbes grow in even more acidic or
alkaline environments.
Unlike its temperature, the intracellular pH of a
microbe, as well as its osmolarity, is not necessarily the
same as that of its environment. Biological membranes
are relatively impermeable to protons—a fact that allows
the cell to maintain an internal pH compatible with protein function when growing in extremely acidic or alkaline
environments. When the difference between the intracellular and extracellular pH (ΔpH) is very high, protons can
leak through either directly or via proteins that thread the
membrane. Excessive influx or efflux of protons can cause
problems by altering internal pH.
Membrane-permeant organic acids, also called weak
acids (discussed in Chapter 3), can accelerate the leakage
of protons into a cell. Unlike H+, the uncharged form

Neutralophiles, Acidophiles, and
Alkaliphiles Grow in Different pH Ranges

Cells have evolved to live under different pH conditions not
by drastically changing the pH optima of their enzymes,
but by using novel pH homeostasis strategies that maintain
intracellular pH between pH 5 and pH 8, even when the
cell is immersed in pH environments well above or below
that range.

Hydrogen ion
molarity

Example of solutions at this pH
pH = 0

Battery acid (strong), hydrofluoric acid

1 x 10–1

pH = 1

Hydrochloric acid secreted by
stomach lining

1 x 10–2

pH = 2

Lemon juice, gastric acid, vinegar

1 x 10–3

pH = 3

Grapefruit, orange juice, soda

1 x 10–4

pH = 4

Acid rain, tomato juice

1 x 10–5

pH = 5

Soft drinking water, black coffee

1 x 10–6

pH = 6

Urine, saliva

1 x 10–7

pH = 7

“Pure” water

1 x 10–8

pH = 8

Seawater

1 x 10–9

pH = 9

Baking soda solution

1 x 10–10

pH = 10

Great Salt Lake, milk of magnesia

1 x 10–11

pH = 11

Ammonia solution

1 x 10–12

pH = 12

Soapy water

1 x 10–13

pH = 13

Bleaches, oven cleaner

1 x 10–14

pH = 14

Liquid drain cleaner

1 x 100

FIGURE 5.10



pH values of common substances.

168



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

10
8.5

Bacillus
pseudofirmus OF4

9

Bacillus
pseudofirmus RAB

Cytoplasmic pH

Acid added at
a constant rate
pHint

pH

7.5

Bacillus cohnii

8

Escherichia coli
Bacillus subtilis

7

Acidithiobacillus
ferrooxidans

6

Bacillus acidocaldarius
6.5

Base added at
a constant rate

pHext

5
4

5.5

0

40

80

120

Time (min)

FIGURE 5.11

Maintaining internal pH (pH homeostasis)
over a wide range of external pH. Internal pH (pHint) of the neu

tralophile Escherichia coli measured following the addition of acid
to change external pH (pHext) and the subsequent addition of base.
Internal pH was determined using nuclear magnetic resonance to
measure changes in methyl phosphate. The two phosphate species
titrate over different pH ranges. Source: Joan L. Slonczewski et al. 1981.
PNAS 78:6271.

Three classes of organisms are differentiated by the pH
of their growth range: neutralophiles, acidophiles, and
alkaliphiles (see Fig. 5.9).
Neutralophiles, which generally grow between pH 5
and pH 8, include most human pathogens. Many neutralophiles, including E. coli and Salmonella enterica,
adjust their metabolism to maintain an internal pH
slightly above neutrality, which is where their enzymes
work best. They maintain this pH even in the presence
of moderately acidic or basic external environments
(Fig. 5.11). Other neutralophiles allow their internal
pH to f luctuate with external pH but usually maintain
a pH difference (ΔpH) of about 0.5 pH unit across the
membrane at the upper and lower limits of growth pH.
The ΔpH value is an important component of the transmembrane proton potential, a source of energy for the
cell (see Chapter 14).

Note:

The older term “neutrophile” used for this group of
organisms is similar to the descriptor for a specific type of white
blood cell (“neutrophil,” discussed in Chapter 23). To avoid confusion, the term “neutrophil” should be reserved for the white blood
cell and the term “neutralophile” used to designate microbes with
growth optima near neutral pH (pH 7).

Acidiphilium acidophilum

0

2

4

6
External pH

8

10

12

FIGURE 5.12

 Cytoplasmic pH as a function of the external
pH among acidophiles, neutralophiles, and alkaliphiles.

Source: Joan L. Slonczewski et al. 2009. Adv. Microb. Physiol. 55:1–79.

Acidophiles are bacteria and archaea that live in acidic
environments. They are often lithotrophs (chemolithoautotrophs) that oxidize reduced metals and generate strong
acids, such as sulfuric acid. Consequently, they grow
between pH 0 and pH 5. Acidophiles generally maintain
an internal pH that is considerably more acidic than that of
neutralophiles but still less acidic than their growth environment (Fig. 5.12). The ability to grow at this pH is due
partly to altered membrane lipid profiles (high levels of tetraether lipids) that decrease proton permeability, as well as to
ill-defined proton extrusion mechanisms. Often, an organism that is an extremophile with respect to one environmental factor is an extremophile with respect to others as well.
Sulfolobus acidocaldarius, for example, is a thermophile and
an acidophile (Fig. 5.13). It uses sulfur as an energy source
and grows in acidic hot springs rich in sulfur.
Alkaliphiles occupy the opposite end of the pH spectrum, growing best at values ranging from pH 9 to pH 11.
They are commonly found in saline soda lakes, which have
high salt concentrations and pH values as high as pH 11.
Soda lakes, like Lake Magadi in Kenya’s Great Rift Valley
(Fig. 5.14A), are steeped in carbonates, which explains
their extraordinarily alkaline pH. An alkaliphilic organism
first identified in Lake Magadi is Halobacterium salinarum
(also known as Natronobacterium gregoryi), a halophilic
archaeon (Fig. 5.14B).
The cyanobacterium Spirulina is another alkaliphile
that grows in soda lakes. Its high concentration of carotene gives the organism a distinctive pink color (note the
color of the lake in Fig. 5.14A). Spirulina is also a major



ENVIRONMENTAL INFLUENCES AND CONTROL OF MICROBIAL GROWTH

B.

A.
95ºC
60ºC

Grows as irregular
spheres at pH 1–5
and temperature
60ºC–95ºC.

1 µm



169

THOMAS D. BROCK, UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN, MADISON

CHAPTER 5

FIGURE 5.13

food for the famous pink flamingos indigenous to these
African lakes and is, in fact, the reason pink flamingos
are pink. After the birds ingest these organisms, digestive
processes release the carotene pigment to the circulation,
which then deposits it in the birds’ feathers, turning them
pink (Fig. 5.14C). Humans also consume Spirulina, as
a health food supplement, but they do not turn pink,
because the cyanobacteria are only a small component of
their diet.
The internal enzymes of alkaliphiles, like those of acidophiles, exhibit rather ordinary pH optima (around pH 8).
The key to the survival of alkaliphiles is the cell-surface

A.

lowstone National Park, is one of the most acidic springs in the park.
It is rich in sulfur and in Sulfolobus, an archaeon that thrives in hot,
acidic waters with temperatures from 60°C to 95°C and a pH of 1–5.
B. Thin-section electron micrograph of S. acidocaldarius.

barrier that sequesters fragile cytoplasmic enzymes away
from harsh extracellular pH. Key structural features of the
cell wall, such as the presence of acidic polymers and an
excess of hexosamines in the peptidoglycan, appear to be
essential. The reason is unclear. At the membrane, some
alkaliphiles also possess a high level of diether lipids (more
stable than ester-linked phospholipids), which prevent protons from leaking out of the cell (see Section 3.2).
Because external protons are in such short supply at
alkaline pH, most alkaliphiles use a sodium motive force
in addition to a proton motive force to do much of the
work of the cell (see Section 14.2). They also rely heavily on

C.

DSMZ/GBF, ROHDE

BIRUTE VIJEIKIENE/DREAMSTIME.COM

B.

FIGURE 5.14

 A soda lake ecosystem. A. Lake Magadi in Kenya. Its pink color is due to
the cyanobacterium Spirulina. B. Alkaliphile Halobacterium salinarum (aka Natronobacterium
gregoryi). Cell size, approx. 1 μm × 3 μm. C. Pink flamingos turn pink because they ingest large
quantities of Spirulina.

WILD HORIZONS/UIG VIA GETTY IMAGES

SONNY X. LI

 Sulfur Caldron acid spring and Sulfolobus
acidocaldarius. A. Sulfur Caldron, in the Mud Volcano area of Yel-

170



PART 1

FIGURE 5.15





THE MICROBIAL CELL

Na+ circulation

1. Respiratory
chains pump H+.

in alkaliphiles. Cells of alkali-

philes use Na+ in place of H+ to
do some of the work of the cell.
They require an inwardly directed
sodium gradient to rotate flagella
and transport nutrient solutes.
The Na+/H+ antiporter is also
used to keep internal pH lower
than external pH.

+

+

2. H+ import through
F1Fo ATP synthase
drives ATP synthesis.

H+
Respiratory
chain

3. Na /H antiporters
help maintain internal
pH below external pH.

ATP
synthase

H+

Na+

4. Na+-driven
ATPases
export Na+.
ADP

7. Bacterial cytoplasm
is negatively charged
relative to the exterior.

+

6. Na motive forces
drive symport of
some substrates.

+

–

Na+

ATP

+

H

ADP

Na+

5. Na+ motive force
powers motility.

Symport
Solute
Na+

Cell membrane

Na

Flagellar
motor

+

Na+

8. A sodium channel activated by high pH
replenishes Na+ needed for pH homeostasis.

Na+/H+ antiporters (see Section 4.2) to bring protons into
Thought Question
the cell. This H+ influx keeps the internal pH well below
5.5 Recall from Section 4.2 that an antiporter couples
the extremely alkaline external pH. The Na+/H+ antipormovement of one ion down its concentration gradient with
ters partly explain why many alkaliphiles are resistant to
movement of another molecule uphill, against its gradient.
high salt (NaCl) concentrations: Sodium ions are expelled
If this is true, how could a Na+/H+ antiporter work to bring
while protons are sucked in. Important aspects of sodium
protons into a haloalkaliphile growing in high salt at pH 10?
circulation in alkaliphiles are depicted in Figure 5.15.
Since the Na+ concentration is lower inside the cell than
outside and the H+ concentration is higher inside than outside
In contrast to proteins within the cytoplasm, enzymes
(see Fig. 5.15), both ions are moving against their gradients.
secreted from alkaliphiles are able to work in very alkaline environments. The inclusion of base-resistant enzymes
In a strongly acidic (pH 2)
like proteases, lipases, and celluUnder alkaline stress (pH 9)
environment, amino acid
Na+/H+ antiport systems
decarboxylases
drain
lases in laundry detergents helps
scavenge protons from the
protons from the cell.
get our “whites whiter and our
environment.
RH
Cytochromes
brights brighter.” Other commercially useful alkaliphilic enzymes
RCOO–
include cyclodextrin glucanoH+
RH + CO2
+
transferase, which produces cycloUnder acidic conditions
Na
(pH 5), cells use the
RCOO– + H+
pH
7.8
dextrins from starch (discussed
transport of K+ or other
K+
in eTopic 5.4).
?
cations to maintain pH
H+

homeostasis. How is
unclear.

ATP

ADP
AD
DP + Pi

–
Symport

FIGURE 5.16



Proton circulation and pH homeostasis.

A typical E. coli cell uses various proton transport strategies
to maintain an internal pH near pH 7.8 in the face of different
external pH stresses. Proton pumping through cytochromes also
establishes a proton gradient, which drives flagellar rotation and
solute transport.

H

+

Flagellar motor
Solute

ATP sy
synthase

Cell membrane
H+

+

H+

E. coli cytoplasm is
negatively charged relative to
the exterior.

CHAPTER 5



ENVIRONMENTAL INFLUENCES AND CONTROL OF MICROBIAL GROWTH

pH Homeostasis and Acid Resistance





171

Neutralophiles, acidophiles, and alkaliphiles prefer
growth under neutral, low, and high pH conditions,
respectively.

When cells are placed in pH conditions below their optimum, protons can enter the cell and lower internal pH to
lethal levels. Microbes can prevent the unwanted influx of
 Acid and alkaline stress responses result when a given
protons in a variety of ways (Fig. 5.16). E. coli, for example,
species is placed under pH conditions that slow its
can counter proton influx by transporting a variety of catgrowth. The cell increases the levels of proteins designed
ions, such as K+ or Na+. How cation transport accomplishes
to mediate pH homeostasis and protect cell constituents.
H+ efflux is unclear. Some evidence suggests a link to the
role of K+ in osmoprotection. At the other extreme, under
extremely alkaline conditions, the cells can use the Na+/
H+ antiporters mentioned previously (and in Section 4.2) to
recruit protons into the cell in exchange for expelling Na+.
Many microorganisms can grow in the presence of molecuSome organisms can also change the pH of the medium
lar oxygen (O2). Some even use oxygen as a terminal electron
using various amino acid decarboxylases and deaminases.
acceptor in the electron transport system (ETS)—also
For instance, E. coli consumes organic acids when growing
known as the electron transport chain (ETC)—a series of
at low pH, but produces these acids while trying to grow
membrane proteins (for instance, cytochromes) that can
under alkaline conditions. Helicobacter pylori, the causative
help convert energy trapped in nutrients to a biologically
agent of gastric ulcers, employs an exquisitely potent urease
useful form. The use of O2 as the terminal electron acceptor
to generate massive amounts of ammonia, which neutralis called aerobic respiration (see Chapter 14).
izes the acid pH environment. These acid stress and alkaline
stress protection systems are usually not made or at least do
Oxygen Has Benefits and Risks
not become active until the cell encounters an extreme pH.
Electrons pulled from various energy sources (for example,
Many, if not all, microbes also possess an emergency
glucose) possess intrinsic energy that electron transport
global response system referred to as acid tolerance or acid
systems incrementally extract. Once the cell has drained
resistance. In a process analogous to the heat-shock response,
as much energy as possible from an electron, that elecbacterial physiology undergoes a major molecular reprotron must be passed to a final (terminal) electron accepgramming in response to hydrogen ion stress. The levels of
tor molecule, such as oxygen gas (O2), that diffuses away
a large number of proteins increase, while the levels of othin the medium. This clears the way for another electron
ers decrease. Many of the genes and proteins involved in the
to be passed down the chain (Fig. 5.17). The electron
acid stress response overlap with other stress response systems, including the heat-shock response. These physiological
3. Electron transport
Electron
responses include modifications in membrane lipid composisystems extract energy
transport
from the electrons and
tion, enhanced pH homeostasis, and numersystem
use that energy to pump
H+
H+ H+
ous other changes with unclear purpose.
H+ out of the cell.
Some pathogens, such as Salmonella, sense a
2. Shuttle molecules like NAD
–
– 2 e
move the electrons to series
change in external pH as part of the signal
–
2 e– 2 e
2
e
of membrane proteins called
indicating that the bacterium has entered a
electron transport systems.
+
HO
H+
H+ H ½O 2
Terminal
host cell environment (see eTopic 5.5).
2

5.5

To Summarize






Hydrogen ion concentration affects protein structure and function. Thus, enzymes
have pH optima, minima, and maxima.

NAD+ NADH + H+

Energy
source
Glucose

Oxygen

Glucose 6-P
(reduced)

1. Cells remove protons
and high-energy electrons
from energy sources like
glucose.

electron
acceptor

Acetate
(oxidized)
NADH + H+

Microbes use pH homeostasis mechanisms to keep their internal pH near
neutral when in acidic or alkaline media.

FIGURE 5.17

Adding weak acids to certain foods
undermines bacterial pH homeostasis
mechanisms, thereby preventing food
spoilage and killing potential pathogens.

more positive charges outside the cell than inside, resulting in an electrochemical
gradient (also called proton motive force). At the end of the ETS, the electron must be
passed to a final (terminal) electron acceptor (for example, O2), thus clearing the path
for the next electron. This net process is called respiration.

Cell membrane

 The role of oxygen as a terminal electron acceptor in
respiration. Pumping protons out of the cell by electron transport systems produces

172



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

TABLE 5.2+Examples of Aerobes and Anaerobes
Aerobic microbes

Facultative microbes

Microaerophilic microbes

Anaerobic microbes

Neisseria spp.
Causative organisms of
meningitis, gonorrhea

Escherichia coli
Normal gut biota; additional
pathogenic strains

Helicobacter pylori
Cause of gastric ulcers

Azoarcus tolulyticus
Degrades toluene

Pseudomonas fluorescens
Found in soil; degrades TNT and
aromatic hydrocarbons

Saccharomyces cerevisiae
Yeast; used in baking

Lactobacillus spp.
Ferment milk to form yogurt

Bacteroides spp.
Normal gut biota

Azotobacter spp.
Soil microorganisms; fix
atmospheric nitrogen

Bacillus anthracis
Cause of anthrax

Campylobacter spp.
One cause of gastroenteritis

Clostridium spp.
Soil microorganisms; causative
agents of tetanus and botulism

Rhizobium spp.
Soil microorganisms; plant
symbionts

Vibrio cholerae
Cause of cholera

Treponema pallidum
Cause of syphilis

Actinomyces spp.
Soil microorganisms; synthesize
antibiotics

Staphylococcus spp.
Found on skin; cause boils

transport system pumps protons (H+) out of the cell. The
resulting unequal distribution of H+ across the membrane
produces a transmembrane electrochemical gradient, a
kind of “biobattery” called the proton motive force (details
are discussed in Section 14.2). The overall process of electron transport and proton motive force generation is called
respiration if the electron donor is from an organic source
and lithotrophy if the source is inorganic (discussed in
Chapters 13 and 14).
Despite its importance for aerobic respiration, oxygen
and its breakdown products are dangerously reactive—a
serious problem for all cells. As a result, different species
have evolved to either tolerate or avoid oxygen altogether.
Table 5.2 gives examples of microbes that grow at different
levels of oxygen.

Aerobes versus Anaerobes

The relationships between microbes and oxygen are varied. Figure 5.18 shows a test tube with growth medium.
The top of the tube, closest to air, is oxygenated; the lower
part of the tube has much lower levels of oxygen. Some
microbes grow only at the top of the tube, while others
prefer to grow toward the bottom. Where in the tube a
microbe grows depends on that organism’s relationship
with oxygen. A strict aerobe is an organism that not only
exists in oxygen but also uses oxygen as a terminal electron
acceptor. The strict aerobe grows only with oxygen present and consumes oxygen during metabolism (aerobic respiration). An aerobe will grow only at the top of the tube
shown in Figure 5.18. In contrast, a strict anaerobe dies
in the least bit of oxygen (>5 μM dissolved O2).
Strict anaerobes do not use oxygen as an electron acceptor, but this is not why they die in air. Some anaerobes die

Desulfovibrio spp.
Reduce sulfate

Growth zones
Aerobic

Facultative

Dissolved oxygen
High oxygen

300 µM O2

Low oxygen

50 µM O2

“No” oxygen

5 µM O2

Microaerophilic

Anaerobic

FIGURE 5.18

test tube.



Oxygen-related growth zones in a standing

because they are vulnerable to reactive oxygen molecules
(also called reactive oxygen species, or ROS) produced
by their own metabolism. Other anaerobes have enzymes
that can protect them from ROS, but the dissolved oxygen raises the redox potential to a point that interferes with
the use of alternative (non-oxygen) electron acceptors that
the organism needs to make energy. Anaerobes will grow
at the bottom of the tube shown in Figure 5.18. As we
will discuss later, some bacteria previously considered strict
anaerobes are not so strict.
What makes reactive oxygen species? Any organism that possesses NADH dehydrogenase 2—aerobe or

CHAPTER 5



ENVIRONMENTAL INFLUENCES AND CONTROL OF MICROBIAL GROWTH



173

anaerobe—will, in the presence of oxygen, inadvertently
1. The production of
autooxidize the FAD (flavin adenine dinucleotide) cofacROS often begins
with FAD moving an
tor within the enzyme and produce danelectron to O2.
gerous amounts of superoxide radicals
2. These reactions
FAD
–
•
–
–
O2 + e
O2 Superoxide radical union
( O2 ) (Fig. 5.19). Superoxide will
generate ROS.
degrade to hydrogen peroxide (H 2O2),
another reactive molecule. Iron, present
Superoxide
as a cofactor in several enzymes, can then catalyze
+ dismutase
–
+
H
H2O2 Hydrogen peroxide
O2
a reaction with hydrogen peroxide to produce the
•
highly toxic hydroxyl radical ( OH). All of these
molecules seriously damage DNA, RNA, proFe2+
Fe3+
teins, and lipids. Consequently, oxygen is actually
H2O2
OH– + OH Hydroxyl radical
an extreme environment in which survival requires
(Fenton reaction)
special talents. Aerobes destroy reactive oxygen
species with an ample supply of enzymes such as
Catalase
2H2O2
2H2O + O2
3. These reactions
superoxide dismutase (to remove superoxide) and
destroy ROS.
peroxidase and catalase (to remove hydrogen perPeroxidase
2H2O2
2H2O + NAD+
oxide). Aerobes also have resourceful enzyme systems that detect and repair macromolecules damaged
FIGURE 5.19  Generation and destruction of reactive oxyby oxidation.
gen species (ROS). ROS species are marked yellow. The autooxi-

Anaerobes versus Facultative Microbes

Anaerobic microbes fall into several categories. Some anaerobes actually do respire by means of electron transport systems, but instead of using oxygen, they rely on alternative
terminal electron acceptors like nitrate (NO3 –) to conduct
anaerobic respiration and produce energy. Anaerobes of
another ilk do not possess cytochromes, cannot respire,
and so must rely on carbohydrate fermentation for energy
(that is, they conduct fermentative metabolism). In fermentation, ATP energy is produced through substratelevel phosphorylation in a process that does not involve
cytochromes. In either case, tolerance for ROS is low.
Facultative organisms are microbes that can live with or
without oxygen and grow throughout the tube shown in
Figure 5.18. Facultative anaerobes (such as E. coli) possess
enzymes that destroy toxic oxygen by-products, but they
have both fermentative and respiratory potential. Whether
a member of this group uses aerobic respiration, anaerobic
respiration, or fermentation depends on the availability of
oxygen and the amount of carbohydrate present. Aerotolerant anaerobes use only fermentation to provide energy but
contain superoxide dismutase and catalase (or peroxidase) to
protect them from ROS. These enzymes allow aerotolerant
anaerobes to grow in air (containing oxygen) while retaining
a fermentation-based (anaerobic) metabolism. Aerotolerant
anaerobes will grow throughout the tube in Figure 5.18.
Microorganisms that possess decreased levels of superoxide
dismutase and/or catalase will be microaerophilic, meaning they will grow only at low oxygen concentrations.
Some organisms previously considered anaerobes
(for example, Bacteroides fragilis) are really transiently

dation of flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) and the Fenton reaction
occur spontaneously to produce superoxide and hydroxyl radicals,
respectively. The other reactions require enzymes. FAD is a cofactor
for a number of enzymes (for example, NADH dehydrogenase 2).
Catalase and peroxidase detoxify hydrogen peroxide.

aerotolerant. These “anaerobes” tolerate oxygen because
they possess low levels of ROS-protective enzymes and
can even use very low levels of oxygen as terminal electron
acceptors. B. fragilis, part of the normal gastrointestinal
microbiota, may even help lower O2 levels in the intestine.
The fundamental composition of all cells reflects their
evolutionary origin as anaerobes. Lipids, nucleic acids, and
amino acids are all highly reduced—which is why our bodies are combustible. We never would have evolved that way
if molecular oxygen had been present from the beginning.
Even today, the majority of all microbes are anaerobic,
growing buried in the soil, within our anaerobic digestive
tract, or within biofilms on our teeth.

Thought Questions

5.6 If anaerobes cannot live in oxygen, how do they incorporate oxygen into their cellular components?
5.7 How can anaerobes grow in the human mouth, where
there is so much oxygen?

Culturing Anaerobes in the Laboratory

Many anaerobic bacteria cause horrific human diseases, such as tetanus, botulism, and gangrene. Some of

174



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

A.

B.

Catalyst in lid
mediates reaction.
H2 + ½O2 f H2O

Air lock

these organisms or their secreted toxins are even potential weapons of terror (for example, Clostridium botulinum). Because of their ability to wreak havoc on humans,
culturing these microorganisms was an early goal of
microbiologists. Despite the difficulties involved, conditions were eventually contrived in which all, or at least
most, of the oxygen could be removed from a culture
environment.
Three oxygen-removing techniques are used today.
Special reducing agents (for example, thioglycolate) or
enzyme systems (such as Oxyrase) that eliminate dissolved
oxygen can be added to ordinary liquid media. Anaerobes
can then grow beneath the culture surface. A second,
very popular way to culture anaerobes, especially on agar
plates, is to use an anaerobe jar (Fig. 5.20A). Agar plates
streaked with the organism are placed into a sealed jar
with a foil packet that releases H 2 and CO2 gases. A palladium packet hanging from the jar lid catalyzes a reaction
between the H 2 and O2 in the jar to form H 2O, and effectively removes O2 from the chamber. The CO2 released
is required by some reactions to produce key metabolic
intermediates. Some microaerophilic microbes, like the
pathogens Helicobacter pylori (the major cause of stomach
ulcers) and Campylobacter jejuni (a major cause of diarrhea), require low levels of O2 but elevated amounts of
CO2. These conditions are obtained by using similar gasgenerating packets.
For strict anaerobes exquisitely sensitive to oxygen,
even more heroic efforts are required to establish an
oxygen-free environment. A special anaerobic glove box
must be used in which the atmosphere is removed by vacuum and replaced with a precise mixture of N2 and CO2
gases (Fig. 5.20B).

JOAN SLONCZEWSKI

JACK BOSTRACK/VISUALS UNLIMITED

GasPak envelope
generates H2
and CO2.

Glove port

FIGURE 5.20 Anaerobic growth technology. A. An
anaerobe jar. B. Student researcher using an anaerobic chamber
with glove ports.


Thought Question

5.8 What evidence led people to think about looking for
anaerobes? Hint: Look up “Spallanzani,” “Pasteur,” and
“spontaneous generation” on the Internet.

To Summarize










Oxygen is a benefit to aerobes, organisms that can use
it as a terminal electron acceptor to extract energy from
nutrients.
Oxygen is toxic to all cells—for example, anaerobes—
that do not have enzymes capable of efficiently destroying reactive oxygen species (ROS).
Anaerobic metabolism can be either fermentative or
respiratory. Anaerobic respiration requires the organism
to possess cytochromes that can transfer electrons to terminal electron acceptors other than oxygen. Fermentative
metabolism uses substrate-level phosphorylation to generate ATP in a process that does not involve cytochromes.
Aerotolerant anaerobes grow in either the presence
or the absence of oxygen, but use fermentation as their
primary, if not only, means of gathering energy. These
microbes also have enzymes that destroy ROS, allowing
them to grow in oxygen.
Facultative anaerobes grow with or without oxygen and
have enzymes that destroy ROS. In addition, they possess both the ability for fermentative metabolism and respiration (anaerobic and aerobic). They can use oxygen as
a terminal electron acceptor.

5.6



ENVIRONMENTAL INFLUENCES AND CONTROL OF MICROBIAL GROWTH

Nutrient Deprivation
and Starvation

It is intuitively obvious that limiting the availability of a
carbon source or other essential nutrient will limit growth.
Less obvious are the dramatic molecular events that cascade through a starving cell. Optimizing growth rate when
nutrient levels are suboptimal is an important aim of freeliving bacteria, given that intestinal, soil, and marine environments rarely offer excess nutrients.

Starvation Activates Survival Genes

Numerous gene systems are affected when nutrients
decline (see Sections 10.2 and 10.3). Growth rate slows,
and daughter cells become smaller and begin to experience what is called a “starvation” response, in which the
microbe senses a dire situation developing but still strives
to find new nourishment. The resulting metabolic slowdown generates increased concentrations of critically
important small signaling molecules, such as cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cyclic AMP or cAMP) and guanosine tetraphosphate (ppGpp), which globally transform
gene expression. The highly soluble nature of these small
molecules means they can quickly diffuse throughout the
cell, promoting a fast response. During this metabolic
retooling, transport systems for potential nutrients are
produced even if the matching substrates are unavailable.
Cells begin to make and store glycogen, presumably as
an internal emergency store in case no other nutrient is
found. Some organisms growing on nutrient-limited agar
plates can even form colonies with intricate geometrical
shapes that help the population cope, in some unknown
way, with nutrient stress (Fig. 5.21).
As nutrient conditions worsen, the organism prepares for
famine by activating many different stress survival genes.

175

B.

JOHN FOSTER, U. OF SOUTH ALABAMA

A.



The products of these genes afford protection against
stressors such as reactive oxygen radicals or temperature
and pH extremes. No cell can predict the precise stresses it
might encounter while incapacitated, so it is advantageous
to be prepared for as many as possible. As described in
Section 4.6, some species undergo elaborate developmental
processes that ultimately produce dormant spores.
When severely stressed by starvation, some members of
a bacterial population appear to sacrifice themselves to save
others by undergoing what is termed programmed cell
death. The dying cells release nutrients that neighboring
cells use to survive. One of the mechanisms for programmed
cell death involves so-called toxin-antitoxin systems. For
each TA pair, the toxin protein will stop growth or kill the
cell, but the antitoxin (sometimes a protein, sometimes a
small RNA molecule) can inactivate the toxin.
An important toxin-antitoxin system in E. coli is the
MazE (antitoxin)–MazF (toxin) module (Fig. 5.22A).
Because toxin and antitoxin are simultaneously made,
healthy cells live. However, MazE is unstable (degraded by
the ClpAP protease) and must continually be replenished
by synthesis to inactivate MazF. If cells are starved, they
stop making MazE and F. MazE antitoxin is degraded,
leaving the more stable MazF free to cleave many cellular mRNA molecules. As a result, the cell first enters stasis, from which it can recover if more MazE is made. But if
MazE is not forthcoming, the cell dies and releases nutrients. The dying cell will also signal nearby cells to undergo
programmed cell death. A peptide cleaved from glucose6-phosphate dehydrogenase is released from the dying cell
and enters nearby cells. The peptide binds to MazE and
prevents it from neutralizing MazF. The MazF toxin, now
active, will eventually kill the bystander cell. Combined,
enough nutrients are released to rescue a subset of the population. Nancy Woychik at Rutgers University studies how
toxin-antitoxin systems contribute to latency of the pathogen Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Fig. 5.22B).

ESHEL BEN-JACOB, TEL AVIV UNIVERSITY

CHAPTER 5

FIGURE 5.21

 Effects of starvation
on colony morphology. A. Starving E. coli

colony (diameter, 6 cm). B. Paenibacillus
dendritiformis C morphotype grown on hard
agar (1.75%) under starvation conditions.
The colony consists of branches with chiral
twists (colored green), all with the same
handedness.

176



PART 1

A.



THE MICROBIAL CELL
No Stress

Synthesis
Syn
ntth
h

Starvation

Synthesis

Stop

Synthesis

E

F

X

D
DE
DEGRADE
EGRA
RAD
AD
AD
DE
E

MazE
M
a

MazF

E

G6PD

X

Protease

4. Fragment of
G6PD inactivates
antitoxin

E

F

G6PD
Degraded

E

Bystander

F

1. Antitoxin neutralizes
toxin activity. Cell lives.

Cleaves mRNA

Cleaves mRNA

Growth stasis

Growth stasis

2. Cell dies,
releases nutrients.

3. Cleavage of
G6PD

5. Cell dies,
releases nutrients.

B.

PHOTO COURTESY OF B.N. SINGH

FIGURE 5.22  Programmed cell
death in response to starvation.

Microbes Encounter Multiple
Stresses in Real Life

Bacterial stress responses have traditionally been studied
by exposing organisms to individual stresses. Escherichia
coli, for example, synthesizes a specific set of proteins when
exposed to high temperature and a different set of proteins
when exposed to high salt. Some proteins, however, may
be highly expressed under both conditions, but each stress
response also includes proteins unique to that stress.
In the world outside of the laboratory, by contrast,
environmental situations can be quite complex, involving multiple, not just single, stresses. An organism could
simultaneously undergo carbon starvation in a high-salt,
low-pH environment. A classic study by Kelly Abshire and
Fred Neidhardt examined this situation using the pathogen Salmonella enterica, a cause of diarrhea. S. enterica

A. The E. coli MazEF toxin-antitoxin system
is thought to play an important role in
bacterial survival during stress. MazE antitoxin is continually degraded by ClpAP and
must be replenished to neutralize MazF
toxin. Other toxin-antitoxin systems are
found in other bacterial species. Stresses
such as starvation, oxidative stress, or
antibiotics can activate this system.
G6PD = glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase. B. Nancy Woychik studies homologs of MazEF toxin-antitoxin systems in
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, the cause of
tuberculosis. Her lab explores how these
toxin-antitoxin systems contribute to the
latency of this pathogen.

invades human macrophage cells and survives in phagocytic vacuoles, where numerous stresses, such as low pH,
oxidative stress, and nutrient limitations, are simultaneously imposed on the bacteria. Comparing the proteins
synthesized by Salmonella growing in this compartment
with the proteins synthesized under single stresses in
the laboratory revealed an unexpected response pattern.
Although many stress-related proteins were induced in
the intracellular environment, no one set of stress-induced
proteins was induced in its entirety. Furthermore, several
bacterial proteins were induced by growth only within the
macrophage phagolysosome, suggesting the presence of
unknown intracellular stresses. Thus, caution is advised
when trying to predict cell responses to real-world situations based solely on controlled laboratory studies that
alter only single parameters.

CHAPTER 5



ENVIRONMENTAL INFLUENCES AND CONTROL OF MICROBIAL GROWTH

Humans Influence Microbial Ecosystems

Human activities have striking impacts on microbial
ecosystems. One example comes from the mining of coal
and minerals from the earth or, rather, from what happens
after those mines are abandoned. Mining usually takes
place below the water table, so water is continually pumped
out to prevent flooding. Once a mine is abandoned, pumping stops and the mine floods. Acid mine drainage develops from the oxidation of pyrite (FeS2) unearthed by the
mining operations. The exposed pyrite oxidizes in air to
form sulfuric acid that, along with soluble Fe2+, can drain
from the mine and destroy natural ecosystems. Acidophiles
such as Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans are key contributors
to pyrite oxidation.
Mining is not the only human activity affecting Earth’s
microbiota. Another example is eutrophication. Natural ecosystems are typically low in nutrients (oligotrophic;
eTopic 5.6) but teem with diversity, so that numerous species compete for the same limiting nutrients. Maximum
diversity in a given ecosystem is maintained, in part, by
the different nutrient-gathering profiles of competing
microbes. However, the sudden infusion of large quantities
of a formerly limiting nutrient, a process called eutrophication, can lead to a “bloom” of microbes, typically autotrophic cyanobacteria (formerly called blue-green algae; see
Section 18.2). One species initially held in check by the
limiting nutrient now exhibits unrestricted growth, consuming other nutrients as it grows to a degree that threatens the existence of competing species.
Humans cause eutrophication in several ways. Fertilizer
runoff from agricultural fields, urban lawns, and golf courses
is one source. Untreated or partially treated domestic sewage is another. Spilling large amounts of phosphates or
nitrogen into lakes—Lake Erie, for example (Fig. 5.23)—
powerfully stimulates cyanobacterial growth. The resulting bacterial “blooms” (wrongly called “algal blooms”)



177

can deplete the oxygen in the water and lead to fish kills.
Native fish species can disappear, to be replaced by species
more tolerant of the new conditions. The concept of limiting nutrients in ecosystems is covered further in Chapter 21.
Climate change caused by human activity is another
process that will gradually alter microbial ecosystems. Put
simply, the spewing of heat-trapping CO2 into the atmosphere by burning hydrocarbons is speeding Earth’s warming. Since 1980, the average atmospheric temperature has
risen 0.6°C (1.2°F). Konstantinos Konstantinidis from the
Georgia Institute of Technology, and Jizhong Zhou from
the University of Oklahoma recently completed a ten-year
study examining how a mere 2°C difference in soil temperature can affect a community of soil microorganisms. Using
an infrared light, the team warmed a patch of Oklahoma
prairie soil 2°C above that of an adjacent control patch of
soil. They then used DNA-based techniques to catalog the
microbial genera present (Fig. 5.24). Some taxonomic
groups of organisms became more dominant (Actinobacteria), while others became less abundant (Proteobacteria and
Acidobacteria). What future effects these kinds of changes
will have on the carbon and nitrogen cycles, as well as on
farm productivity, remain to be seen.

Control: Soil was
kept at ambient
temperature.

NASA IMAGE BY JEFF SCHMALTZ, LANCE/ELSDIS MODIS
RAPID RESPONSE, VISIBLE EARTH MARCH 21, 2012.

Heated: Soil was
heated 2ºC above
ambient temperature.

FIGURE 5.23  Eutrophication in Lake Erie. Cyanobacterial
bloom (bright blue-green color) in Lake Erie caused by excessive
phosphorous eutrophication.

Proteobacteria*
Actinobacteria*
Acidobacteria*
Planctomycetes*
Chloroflexi
Bacteroidetes*
Verrucomicrobia
Gemmatimonadetes
SPAM (candidate phylum)
*Significant difference in abundance

FIGURE 5.24



Effect of warming on the soil microbiome.

Two patches of Oklahoma soil were monitored for microbial taxa
over ten years. The two rings illustrate the average abundances of
phyla. SPAM = candidate division, microbes discovered in spring in
alpine and meadow soils.

178



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

Thought Question



Disinfection is the killing, or removal, of diseaseproducing organisms from inanimate surfaces; it does
not necessarily result in sterilization. Pathogens are
killed, but other microbes may survive.



Antisepsis is similar to disinfection, but it applies to
removing pathogens from the surface of living tissues,
like the skin. Antiseptic chemicals are usually not as toxic
as disinfectants, which frequently damage living tissues.



Sanitation is closely related to disinfection. It consists of
reducing the microbial population to safe levels and usually involves both cleaning and disinfecting an object.

5.9 Given a mixture of two microbes—one better at utiliz-

ing phosphate (microbe A) and the other better at utilizing
nitrogen (microbe B)—what would happen if excess nitrogen
was added to the mixed culture? What about both excess
phosphate and excess nitrogen?

To Summarize






Starvation is a stress that can elicit a molecular response
in many microbes. Enzymes are produced to increase
the efficiency of nutrient gathering and to protect cell
macromolecules from damage.
The starvation response is usually triggered by the
accumulation of small signaling molecules, such as cyclic
AMP or guanosine tetraphosphate.
Human activities can cause eutrophication, which
damages delicately balanced ecosystems by introducing
nutrients that can allow one member of the ecosystem to
flourish at the expense of other species.

5.7

Physical, Chemical,
and Biological Control
of Microbes

We have seen how microbes live; now, how do they die? A
primary goal of our health care system is to control or kill
microbes that can potentially harm us. Within the recent
past, infectious disease was an imminent and constant
threat to most of the human population. The average family in the United States prior to 1900 had four or five children, but parents could expect half of them to succumb to
deadly infectious diseases. What today would be a simple
infected cut, in years past held a serious risk of death, and
a trip to the surgeon was tantamount to playing Russian
roulette with an unsterilized scalpel. Improvements in sanitation procedures and antiseptics and the advent of antibiotics have, to a large degree, curtailed the incidence and
lethal effects of many infectious diseases. Success in this
endeavor has played a major role in extending life expectancy and in contributing to the population explosion.
A variety of terms are used to describe antimicrobial control measures. The terms convey subtle, yet vitally important, differences in control strategies and outcomes.


Sterilization is the process by which all living cells,
spores, and viruses are destroyed on an object.

Antimicrobials can also be classified on the basis of the
specific groups of microbes destroyed, leading to the terms
“microbicide,” “bactericide,” “algicide,” “fungicide,” and
“virucide.” These agents can be classified further as either
“-static” (inhibiting growth) or “-cidal” (killing cells). For
example, antibacterial agents may be bacteriostatic or bactericidal. Chemical substances are germicidal if they kill
pathogens (and many nonpathogens), but germicidal agents
do not necessarily kill spores.
Although these descriptions emphasize the killing of
pathogens, it is important to note that antimicrobial agents
can also kill or prevent the growth of nonpathogens. Many
public health standards are based on total numbers of
microorganisms on an object, regardless of pathogenic
potential. For example, to gain public health certification,
the restaurants we frequent must demonstrate low numbers of bacteria (pathogenic or not) in their food preparation areas.

Thought Question

5.10 Bacteriostatic antibiotics do not kill bacteria; they only
inhibit their growth. Why are they nevertheless effective at
treating bacterial infections? Hint: Is the human body a quiet
bystander during an infection?

Cells Treated with Antimicrobials
Die at a Logarithmic Rate

Exposing microbes to lethal chemicals or conditions does
not instantly kill all microorganisms. Microbes die according to a negative exponential curve, where cell numbers are
reduced in equal fractions at constant intervals. The efficacy
of a given lethal agent or condition is measured as decimal
reduction time (D-value), which is the length of time it
takes that agent (or condition) to kill 90% of the population
(a drop of one log unit, or a drop to 10% of the original
value). Figure 5.25 illustrates the exponential death profile of a bacterial culture heated to 100°C. The D-value is

CHAPTER 5



ENVIRONMENTAL INFLUENCES AND CONTROL OF MICROBIAL GROWTH

8

Log10 viable organisms

7
6
5
4
3

100%
10%
(90% killed)

2

D 100

1

D-value at 100ºC
(D100) = 1 minute.

0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Exposure (min)

FIGURE 5.25

 The death curve and the determination of
D-values. Bacteria were exposed to a temperature of 100°C, and

survivors were measured by viable count. The D-value is the time
required to kill 90% of cells (that is, the time it takes for the viable
cell count to drop by one log10 unit).

a little over 1 minute. The food industry uses D-value and
several other parameters to evaluate the efficiency of killing
(see Section 16.5).

Thought Question

5.11 If a disinfectant is added to a culture containing

1 × 106 CFUs per milliliter and the D-value of the disinfectant
is 2 minutes, how many viable cells are left after 4 minutes of
exposure?

Several factors influence the ability of an antimicrobial
agent to kill microbes. These include the initial population size (the larger the population, the longer it takes to
reduce it to a specific number), the population composition (are spores involved?), the concentration of the antimicrobial agent, and the duration of exposure. Although
the effect of concentration seems intuitively obvious,
an increase in concentration is matched by an increase
in death rate only over a narrow concentration range.
Increases above a certain level might not accelerate killing at all. For example, 70% ethanol is actually better than
pure ethanol at killing organisms, because some water is
needed to help ethanol penetrate cells. The ethanol then
dehydrates cell proteins.
Why, then, is death an exponential function? Why don’t
all cells in a population die instantly when treated with
lethal heat or chemicals? The reason is based, in part, on
the random probability that an agent will cause a lethal
“hit” in a given cell. Cells contain thousands of different



179

proteins and thousands of molecules of each one. Not all
proteins and not all genes in a chromosome are damaged
by an agent at the same time. Damage accumulates. Only
when enough molecules of an essential protein or a gene
encoding that protein are damaged will the cell die. Cells
that die first are those that accumulate lethal hits early.
Members of the population that die later have, by random
chance, absorbed more hits on nonessential proteins or
genes, sparing the essential ones.
Why, if 90% of a population is killed in 1 minute, isn’t
the remaining 10% killed in the next minute? It seems
logical that all should have perished. Yet after the second
minute, 1% of the original population remains alive. This
phenomenon can also be explained by the random-hit concept. Although fewer viable cells remain after 1 minute,
each has the same random chance of having a lethal hit as
when the treatment began. Thus, death rate is an exponential function, much like radioactive decay is an exponential
function.
A final consideration is the overall fitness of individual
cells. It is a mistake to assume that all cells in a population
are identical. At any given time, for instance, one cell may
express a protein that another cell has just stopped expressing (for example, superoxide dismutase). In that instant,
the first cell might contain a bit more of that protein. If
the protein is essential or confers a level of stress protection
(such as against superoxide), the cell with more of that protein can absorb more punishment before it dies. The presence of lucky individuals expressing the right repertoire of
proteins might also explain why death curves commonly
level off after a certain point.

Physical Agents That Kill Microbes

Physical agents are often used to kill microbes or control
their growth. Commonly used physical control measures
include temperature extremes, pressure (usually combined
with temperature), filtration, and irradiation.
High temperature and pressure. Even though microbes

were discovered less than 400 years ago, thermal treatment of food products to render them safe has been practiced for over 5,000 years. Moist heat is a much more
effective killer than dry heat, thanks to the ability of water
to penetrate cells. Many bacteria, for instance, easily withstand 100°C dry heat but not 100°C boiling water. We
humans are not so different, fi nding it easier to endure a
temperature of 32°C (90°F) in dry Arizona than in humid
Louisiana.
While boiling water (100°C) can kill most vegetative
(actively growing) organisms, spores are built to withstand
this abuse, and thermophiles prefer it. Killing spores and

180



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

Safety valve
Exhaust valve
(to remove steam
after sterilization)

Operating valve
(controls steam
from jacket to
chamber)
Pressure gauge

Steam to
chamber

each year in the United States. (For more on food poisoning, see Chapter 16.)

Thought Question

5.12 How would you test the killing efficacy of an autoclave?
Steam
Steam
chamber

Pasteurization. Originally devised by Louis Pasteur to

Air

Perforated shelf

Steam jacket

Automatic ejector
valve is thermostatically
controlled and closes on
contact with pure steam
when air is exhausted.
To waste
Steam supply
line

FIGURE 5.26



Sediment
screen
Thermometer
Pressure regulator
for steam supply

Steam autoclave.

thermophiles usually requires combining high pressure
and temperature. At high pressure, the boiling point of
water rises to a temperature rarely experienced by microbes
living at sea level. Even endospores quickly die under these
conditions. This combination of pressure and temperature is the principle behind sterilization using the steam
autoclave (Fig. 5.26). Standard conditions for steam sterilization are 121°C (250°F) at 15 psi for 20 minutes—a
set of conditions that experience has taught us will kill all
spores (except those of some thermophiles, which do not
affect food or human health). These are also the conditions produced in pressure cookers used for home canning
of vegetables.
Failure to adhere to these heat and pressure parameters
can have deadly consequences, even in your own home. For
instance, Clostridium botulinum is a spore-forming soil
microbe that commonly contaminates fruits and vegetables used in home canning. The improper use of a pressure
cooker while canning these goods will allow spores of this
pathogen to survive. Once the can or jar is cool, the spores
will germinate and begin producing their deadly toxin. All
of this happens while the canned goods sit on a shelf waiting to be opened and consumed. Once ingested, the toxin
makes its way to the nervous system and paralyzes the victim. Several incidents of this disease, called botulism, occur

save products of the French wine industry from devastating bacterial spoilage, pasteurization today involves
heating a particular food (such as milk) to a specific
temperature long enough to kill Coxiella burnetii, the
causative agent of Q fever, the most heat-resistant nonspore-forming pathogen known. In the process, pasteurization also kills other disease-causing microbes. Three
U.S. government–approved time and temperature combinations can be used for pasteurization of milk. The
LTLT (low-temperature/long-time) process involves
bringing milk to a temperature of 63°C (145°F) for
30 minutes. In contrast, the HTST (high-temperature/
short-time) method (also called “fl ash pasteurization”)
brings the milk to a temperature of 72°C (161°F) for only
15 seconds. Both processes accomplish the same thing—
the destruction of C. burnetii and other bacteria—but
they do not sterilize milk. A third process, known as
ultra-high-temperature (UHT) pasteurization—134°C
(273°F) for 1–2 seconds—reduces bacterial content even
more than the LTLT or HTST methods. UHT pasteurization produces nearly sterile milk with an unrefrigerated
shelf life of up to 6 months. This is important, especially
in developing countries, where refrigeration is not always
available.
Cold. Low temperatures have two basic purposes in micro-

biology: to temper growth and to preserve strains. Bacteria not only grow more slowly in cold, but also die more
slowly. Refrigeration temperatures (4–8°C, or 39–43°F)
are used for food preservation because most pathogens are
mesophilic and grow poorly, if at all, at those temperatures.
One exception is the Gram-positive bacillus Listeria monocytogenes, which can grow reasonably well in the cold and
causes disease when ingested.
Long-term storage of bacteria usually requires placing
solutions in glycerol at very low temperatures (–70°C).
Glycerol prevents the production of razor-sharp ice crystals that can pierce cells from without or within. This
deep-freezing suspends growth altogether and keeps
cells from dying. Another technique, called lyophilization, freeze-dries microbial cultures for long-term storage. In this technique, cultures are quickly frozen at very
low temperatures (quick-freezing also limits ice crystal

CHAPTER 5

Syringe filter



ENVIRONMENTAL INFLUENCES AND CONTROL OF MICROBIAL GROWTH

Filtration device
Unsterile media

Filtration. Filtration through micropore fi lters with pore

Sterile membrane
filter

Sterile solution
collected.

Sterile solution
collected in a
sterile container.

FIGURE 5.27



sizes of 0.2 μm can remove microbial cells, but not viruses,
from solutions. Samples from 1 milliliter to several liters
can be drawn through a membrane fi lter by vacuum or can
be forced through it using a syringe (Fig. 5.27). Filter sterilization avoids the use of heat, which can damage certain
materials. Strictly speaking, though, the solutions are not
really sterile, because these fi lters do not trap viruses.
Air can also be sterilized by filtration. This process
forms the basis of several personal protective devices. A surgical mask is a crude example, while laminar flow biological safety cabinets are more elaborate (and more effective).
These cabinets force air through high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filters and remove over 99.9% of airborne
particulate material 0.3 μm in size or larger. Biosafety
cabinets are critical to protect individuals working with
highly pathogenic material (Fig. 5.28A and B). Newer
technologies have been developed that embed antimicrobial agents or enzymes directly into the fibers of the filter (Fig. 5.28C). Organisms entangled in these fibers are
not just trapped; they are attacked by the antimicrobials
and lysed.

Connect to
vacuum.

Sterile membrane
filter

Membrane filtration devices.

formation) and placed under vacuum, where the resulting sublimation removes all water from the media and
cells, leaving just the cells in the form of a powder. These
freeze-dried organisms remain viable for years. Finally,
viruses and mammalian cells must be kept at extremely
low temperatures (–196°C), submerged in liquid nitrogen.

B.

A.

181

Liquid nitrogen freezes cells so quickly that ice crystals do
not have time to form.

Bottle top filter

Syringe with fluid
attached here.



C.

2

Filter fiber

3

3 µm

4

LABCONCO CORPORATION;

1

Side view

NIKKI-UNIVERSAL CO., LTD., 2000

5

Lysed organism

Blue = room air
Red = contaminated air
Green = filtered air

FIGURE 5.28  Biological safety cabinet. A. A scientist examines a sample under the hood. B. Schematic of the safety cabinet. Air
from the room enters the cabinet through the cabinet opening (1), or is pumped in (2) through a HEPA filter (3). It then passes behind the
negative-pressure exhaust plenum (4) and is passed from the cabinet through another HEPA filter (5). C. Immobilized enzyme filter. The
primary function of this enzyme filter is to kill airborne microorganisms caught on the surface of the filter, thus protecting against secondary
contamination by microorganisms in air filtration systems. The photo shows lysed bacteria (Bacillus subtilis). The cell walls have been
hydrolyzed by enzymatic action, and cell membranes are broken as a result of osmotic pressure pushing outward against the membrane.

182



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

COURTESY OF LOUISIANA STATE UNIVERSITY

health authorities worldwide are
range of 0.3–0.7 kGy) because they have less DNA per cell
increasingly concerned about food contaminated with
unit (less target per cell). It takes even more radiation to kill
pathogenic microorganisms such as Salmonella species,
a bacterial spore (D-values on the order of 2.8 kGy) because
E. coli O157:H7, Listeria monocytogenes, and Yersinia
they contain little water, the source of most ionizing damenterocolitica. Irradiation, the bombardment of foods with
age to DNA. Viral pathogens have the smallest amount
high-energy electromagnetic radiation, has long been a
of nucleic acid, making them resistant to irradiation doses
potent, if politically sensitive, strategy for sterilizing food
approved for foods (viruses have D-values of 10 kGy or
after harvesting. The food consumed by NASA astronauts,
higher). Infectious agents that do not contain nucleic acids
for example, has for some time been sterilized by irradiare an even bigger problem. Prions, for example, are misation as a safeguard against food-borne illness in space,
folded brain proteins that “self-replicate” and cause neurobut public pressure severely limited the mainstream use of
degenerative diseases (see Section 26.7). Because prions do
this technology over concerns about product safety and
not contain nucleic acids, the agent can be inactivated by
exposure of workers. Resistance to irradiation largely disirradiation only at extremely high doses. Thus, irradiation
appeared, however, after 2001, when anthrax spores were
of food is effective in eliminating parasites and bacteria, but
mailed across the eastern United States and irradiation was
is woefully inadequate for eliminating viruses or prions.
used to sterilize our mail. Numerous studies have proved
that foods do not become radioactive when irradiated, nor
Note: Electromagnetic radiation emitted by microwave ovens
are long-lived reactive molecules produced that are dandoes not directly kill bacteria. However, the heat generated when
gerous to humans.
electromagnetic radiation excites water molecules in an organism
Aside from ultraviolet light, which, owing to its poor
will kill the organism if the temperature attained is high enough.
penetrating ability, is useful only for surface sterilization, there are three other sources of irradiation: gamma
rays, electron beams, and X-rays. Radiation dosage is usually measured in a unit called the gray (Gy), which is the
Some Bacteria Are Highly Resistant
amount of energy transferred to the food, microbe, or
to Physical Control Measures
other substance being irradiated. A single chest X-ray delivDeinococcus radiodurans could be nicknamed “Conan the
ers roughly half a milligray (1 mGy = 0.001 Gy). To kill
Bacterium” and serve as the poster microbe for extremoSalmonella, freshly slaughtered chicken can be irradiated
philes (Fig. 5.29). It was discovered in 1956 in a can of
at up to 4.5 kilograys (kGy)—about 7 million times the
meat that had spoiled despite having been sterilized by
energy of a single chest X-ray. The Food and Drug Adminradiation. The microbe has the greatest ability to survive
istration has also approved the use of irradiation (4 kGy)
radiation of any known organism and could probably suron beef, pork, fruits, vegetables, oysters, seeds, shell eggs,
vive an atomic blast. The bacterium’s ability to withstand
and spices.
radiation may have evolved as a side effect of developing
When microbes present in food are irradiated,
water and other intracellular molecules absorb
the energy and form very short-lived reactive
A.
B.
chemicals that damage DNA. Unless the organism repairs this damage, it will die while trying to
replicate. Microbes differ greatly in their sensitivity to irradiation, depending on the size of their
genome, the rate at which they can repair damaged DNA, and other factors. Whether the food
to be irradiated is frozen or fresh also matters, as
it takes a higher dose of radiation to kill microbes
in frozen foods.
The size of the DNA “target” is a major factor
in radiation efficacy. Parasites and insect pests,
1 µm
which have large amounts of DNA, are rapidly
killed by extremely low doses of radiation, typiFIGURE 5.29  Deinococcus radiodurans. A. The amount of radiation D.
cally with D-values of less than 0.1 kGy (in this
radiodurans can survive is equivalent to that of an atomic blast. The nature of
instance, the D-value is the dose of radiation
the dark inclusion bodies in three of the four cells in this quartet is currently not
needed to kill 90% of the organisms). It takes
known. B. John Battista of Louisiana State University showed that D. radiodurans
has exceptional capabilities for repairing radiation-damaged DNA.
more radiation to kill bacteria (D-values in the
JOHN R. BATTISTA, LOUISIANA STATE UNIVERSITY

Irradiation. Public

CHAPTER 5



ENVIRONMENTAL INFLUENCES AND CONTROL OF MICROBIAL GROWTH

resistance to extreme drought, since dehydration and radiation produce similar types of DNA damage.
What properties account for this microbe’s amazing
resistance to radiation? One is that D. radiodurans possesses an unusual capacity for repairing damaged DNA.
Many mechanisms are involved, including a highly efficient double-strand-break DNA repair system involving
homologous recombination (see Section 9.5). Each cell of
this organism contains four to six copies of its two chromosomes and two plasmids. So even when its DNA is
irradiated and broken into thousands of fragments, overlapping intact fragments can be found and spliced together
in proper order. A second property that contributes to radiation resistance is the ability of D. radiodurans to aggressively protect its proteins, which are even more susceptible
to radiation than is DNA. This mechanism, discovered
by Michael Daly at the Uniformed Services University of
the Health Sciences in Maryland, involves the intracellular accumulation of large amounts of manganese that
can remove highly damaging free radicals generated by
radiation.
On the basis of this research, D. radiodurans was genetically engineered to treat radioactive mercury–contaminated
waste from nuclear reactors—a process called bioremediation (discussed in Chapter 22). The genes for mercury conversion were spliced from a strain of E. coli that is resistant
to particularly toxic forms of mercury and inserted into
D. radiodurans. The genetically altered superbug was able
to withstand the ionizing radiation and convert toxic waste
into forms that could be removed safely. Fortunately, there
is little need to worry about its becoming a superpathogen,
because the organism does not cause disease and is susceptible to antibiotics.

Chemical Agents

Disinfection by physical agents is very effective, but in
numerous situations their use is impractical (kitchen countertops) or plainly impossible (skin). In these instances,
chemical agents are the best approach. A number of factors influence the efficacy of a given chemical agent. These
include:






183



Corrosiveness. The disinfectant should not corrode the
surface or, in the case of an antiseptic, damage skin.



Stability, odor, and surface tension. The chemical
should be stable during storage, possess a neutral or
pleasant odor, and have a low surface tension so that it
can penetrate cracks and crevices.

The phenol coefficient. Phenol, fi rst introduced by Joseph

Lister in 1867 to reduce the incidence of surgical infections, is no longer used as a disinfectant, because of its
toxicity, but its derivatives, such as cresols and orthophenylphenol, are still in use. The household product Lysol is a
mixture of phenolics. Phenolics are useful disinfectants
because they denature proteins, are effective in the presence of organic material, and remain active on surfaces long
after application.
Although phenol is no longer used as a disinfectant, its
potency makes it the benchmark against which other disinfectants are measured. The phenol coefficient test consists
of inoculating a fixed number of bacteria—for example,
Salmonella enterica or Staphylococcus aureus—into dilutions of the test agent. At timed intervals, samples are withdrawn from each dilution and inoculated into fresh broth
(which contains no disinfectant). The phenol coefficient
is based on the highest dilution (lowest concentration) of
a disinfectant that will kill all the bacteria in a test after
10 minutes of exposure but leaves survivors after only 5
minutes of exposure. This concentration is known as the
maximum effective dilution. Dividing the reciprocal of the
maximum effective dilution for the test agent (for example,
ethanol) by the reciprocal of the maximum effective dilution for phenol gives the phenol coefficient (Table 5.3).
For example, if the maximum effective dilution for agent X

TABLE 5.3+Phenol Coefficients for Various
Disinfectants

Chemical agent
Phenol

The presence of organic matter. A chemical placed
on a dirty surface will bind to any inert organic material present, lowering the agent’s effectiveness against
microbes. It is not always possible to clean a surface prior
to disinfection (as in a blood spill), but the presence of
organic material must be factored into estimates of how
long to disinfect a surface or object.

Chloramine

The kinds of organisms present. Ideally, the agent
should be effective against a broad range of pathogens.

Tincture of iodine

Staphylococcus
aureus

Salmonella
enterica

1.0

1.0

133.0

100.0

Cresols

2.3

2.3

Ethanol

6.3

6.3

Formalin

0.3

Hydrogen peroxide
Lysol
Mercury chloride

—

0.7
0.001

5.0

3.2

100.0

143.0

6.3

5.8

184



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

Phenolics

Alcohols

Quaternary ammonium
compounds

Aldehydes

(CH2)15CH3

OH

HO

OH
Cl

H3C

Cl
Cl
Hexachlorophene

FIGURE 5.30



H

Cl

CH2
Cl Cl

C O
H
Formaldehyde

Ethanol

Phenol

C
OH

Isopropanol
(rubbing alcohol)

H

H
C CH2

Cl–

CH2

CH2

H2C

Cetylpyridinium chloride

O
CH3

+

N

H

CH2 OH

H3C

C
O

Glutaraldehyde

Gases

CH3
CH2 N R

+

Cl–

CH3
R = alkyl, C8H17 to C18H37

CH2

O
Ethylene oxide

CH2 CH2
O

C
O

Betapropiolactone

Benzalconium chloride
(mixture)

Structures of some common disinfectants and antiseptics.

is 1/900 and that of phenol is 1/90, then the phenol coefficient of X is 900/90 = 10; the higher the coefficient, the
higher the efficacy of the disinfectant.

Commercial Disinfectants

Ethanol, iodine, chlorine, and surfactants (for example,
detergents) are all used to reduce or eliminate microbial
content from commercial products (Fig. 5.30). The first
three are compounds that damage proteins, lipids, and
DNA. Highly reactive iodine complexed with an organic
carrier forms an iodophor, a compound that is watersoluble, stable, nonstaining, and capable of releasing iodine
slowly to avoid skin irritation. Wescodyne and Betadine
(trade names) are iodophors used, respectively, for the
surgical preparation of skin and for wounds. Chlorine is
another highly reactive disinfectant with universal application. It is recommended for general laboratory and hospital
disinfection and kills the HIV virus.
Detergents can also be antimicrobial agents. The
hydrophobic and hydrophilic ends of detergent molecules
(the coexistence of which makes the molecules amphipathic) will emulsify fat into water. Cationic (positively
charged) but not anionic (negatively charged) detergents
are useful as disinfectants because the positive charges can
gain access to the negatively charged bacterial cell and disrupt membranes. Anionic detergents are not antimicrobial
but do help in the mechanical removal of bacteria from
surfaces.
Low-molecular-weight aldehydes such as formaldehyde
(HCHO) are highly reactive, combining with and inactivating proteins and nucleic acids. This characteristic makes
them useful disinfectants.

Disposable plasticware like petri dishes, syringes,
sutures, and catheters are not amenable to heat sterilization or liquid disinfection. These materials are best sterilized using antimicrobial gases. Ethylene oxide gas (EtO)
is a very effective sterilizing agent; it destroys cell proteins,
is microbicidal and sporicidal, and rapidly penetrates packing materials, including plastic wraps. Using an instrument resembling an autoclave, EtO at 700 milligrams per
liter (mg/l) will sterilize an object after 8 hours at 38°C
or 4 hours at 54°C if the relative humidity is kept at 50%.
Unfortunately, EtO is explosive. A less hazardous gas sterilant is betapropiolactone. It does not penetrate as well as
EtO, but it decomposes after a few hours, which makes it
easier to dispose of than EtO.
A new procedure, known as gas discharge plasma sterilization, may replace EtO because it is less harmful to operators. Gas discharge plasma is made by passing certain gases
through a radio frequency electrical field to produce highly
reactive chemical species that can damage membranes,
DNA, and protein. It is not yet widely used.
Antimicrobial touch surfaces. Despite widespread use
of disinfectants and antibiotics by medical personnel,
hospital-acquired infections remain a major concern. A
promising antimicrobial technology that can help reduce
infections in hospitals and elsewhere involves embedding
antimicrobial compounds such as copper (Cu) in the surfaces that people touch. For example, a bed rail made with
copper can kill pathogens deposited by one person before
the organism can be transmitted to a second person touching the same surface. Upon contact with bacteria, metallic
copper releases toxic Cu+ ions that trigger the lysis of bacterial membranes within minutes, although the mechanism

CHAPTER 5



ENVIRONMENTAL INFLUENCES AND CONTROL OF MICROBIAL GROWTH



185

Bacteria Can Develop
Resistance to Disinfectants

It is widely known that bacteria can develop resistance to
antibiotics used to treat infections. This is a serious concern in the medical community. So, one might wonder
whether bacteria can also develop resistance against chemical disinfectants used to prevent infections. The answer is
yes—and no. It is difficult for a bacterium to develop resistance to chemical agents that have multiple targets and can
easily diffuse into a cell. Iodine, for example, has both of
these characteristics. However, disinfectants that have multiple targets at high concentrations may have only a single
target at lower concentrations—a situation that can foster the development of resistance. For instance, triclosan
(a halogenated bisphenol compound used in many soaps,
deodorants, and toothpastes) targets several cell constituents, making it nicely bactericidal at high concentrations.
However, at low concentrations triclosan only inhibits fatty
acid synthesis and is merely bacteriostatic. Organisms have
developed resistance to triclosan at low concentrations by
altering the fatty acid synthesis protein normally targeted
by triclosan.
Low-level resistance also can be achieved through
membrane-spanning, multidrug efflux pumps (described
in Section 4.2). For instance, the MexCD-OprJ efflux
system of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, a Gram-negative bacterium that causes infections in burn and cystic fibrosis
patients, can pump several different biocides, detergents,
and organic solvents out of the cell, thereby reducing their
efficacy. This finding and other reports of Pseudomonas
gaining resistance to disinfectants have led many clinicians
to advocate caution in the widespread use of certain chemical disinfectants.
Biofilm formation is another ingenious way that bacteria
survive exposures to disinfectants. A biofilm is a 3D community of bacterial cells attached to a solid surface (see Section 4.5). A biofilm can protect cells in several ways. For
example, the extracellular matrix proteins and polysaccharides that hold biofilms together also bind disinfectants,
slowing their penetration into the deeper recesses of the
structure. Slower penetration means that cells deep in the
biofilm have time to activate protective stress response systems before destructive levels of disinfectant reach them.
Biofilms also exhibit stratified growth patterns based in
part on nutrient access (see Fig. 4.30). Cells at the periphery have ample access to oxygen and nutrients, while cells
within do not. Nutrient starvation worsens the farther a

20 µm

FIGURE 5.31

 Mixed biofilm. 3D projection of a mixed 24-hour
biofilm of E. coli expressing mCherry fluorescent protein (red) and
Pseudomonas aeruginosa expressing green fluorescent protein
(GFP; green). Mixed-population biofilms can have properties distinct
from monospecies biofilms.

cell is from the surface. Because nutrient starvation activates stress response systems, each biofilm has stratified
layers of increasingly stress-resistant cells that can better
tolerate chemical insults.
Finally, biofilms, which contain multiple species in
nature, are opportunities for protective, interspecies collaborations (Fig. 5.31). Protective enzymes from one species could protect a nonproducing species from a chemical
insult, much as a big brother protects a little brother from a
bully. Multispecies biofilms can also be more massive than
monospecies biofilms. The food pathogen Escherichia coli
O157:H7 forms a biofilm with 400 times more volume
when grown with Acinetobacter calcoaceticus, an organism found in meatpacking plants. Increased volume alone
will slow the penetration of the disinfectant and protect the
collective.

Antibiotics Selectively Control
Bacterial Growth

Antibiotics as made in nature are chemical compounds
synthesized by one microbe to either kill or stop the growth
of other competing microbial species. Antimicrobial compounds that kill other cells are called bactericidal, whereas
compounds that merely stop growth are called bacteriostatic. Chapter 27 describes the various antibiotic modes
of action. When purified and administered to patients suffering from an infectious disease, antibiotics can produce
seemingly miraculous recoveries.

A. BRIDIER ET AL. 2011. BIOFOULING 27:1017–1032

involved is unclear (neither DNA damage nor reactive
oxygen species are involved). Companies are incorporating metallic copper into objects such as handrails, door
releases, and hospital bed rails.



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

A.

B.

Mold excretes penicillin,
inhibiting growth of bacteria.

USPS

C.

CHRISTINE L. CASE/SKYLINE COLLEGE

186

FIGURE 5.32

 Penicillin. A. Space-filling model of the penicillin G molecule produced by the Penicillium mold. B. U.S. postage stamp from
1999 showing Penicillium notatum. C. P. notatum excretes penicillin, which inhibits the growth of Staphylococcus aureus.

B.

ART GIRARD, ANNE KLEIN, & A.J. MILICI, PFIZER GLOBAL RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

A.

C.

FIGURE 5.33

1.25 µg/ml

2.5 µg/ml

5 µg/ml

10 µg/ml

D.

Effect of ampicillin (a penicillin derivative) on E. coli. Cells were incubated for
1 hour at the antibiotic concentrations shown. Swollen areas of cells in panels (B)–(D) reflect weakening cell walls (arrows). Cells shown are approx. 2 μm long.


As we saw in Chapter 1, penicillin (Fig. 5.32),
produced
by
Penicillium
notatum, was discovered serendipitously in 1929 by Alexander Fleming. Figure 5.32A
shows this molecule, which
mimics a part of the cell wall.
Because of this mimicry, penicillin binds to biosynthetic
proteins involved in peptidoglycan synthesis and prevents
cell wall formation. The drug
is bactericidal because actively
growing cells lyse without
the support of the cell wall
(Fig. 5.33). Other antibiotics target protein synthesis,
DNA replication, cell membranes, and various enzyme
reactions. These interactions
are described throughout
Parts 1–3 of this text.
So how do antibiotic-producing microbes avoid suicide? In some instances, the
producing organism lacks the
target molecule. Penicillium
mold, for instance, lacks peptidoglycan and is immune to
penicillin by default. Some
bacteria produce antimicrobial
compounds that target other
members of the same species.
In this case, the producing

CHAPTER 5



ENVIRONMENTAL INFLUENCES AND CONTROL OF MICROBIAL GROWTH

organism can modify its own receptors to no longer recognize the compound (as with some bacterial colicins).
Another strategy is to modify the antibiotic if it reenters the cell. This is the case with streptomycin produced
by Streptomyces griseus. Streptomycin inhibits bacterial
protein synthesis and does not discriminate between the
protein synthesis machinery of Streptomyces and that of
others. However, while making enzymes that synthesize
and secrete streptomycin, S. griseus simultaneously makes
the enzyme streptomycin 6-kinase, which remains locked
in the cell. If any secreted streptomycin reenters the cell,
this enzyme renders the drug inactive by attaching a phosphate group to it.
Because many microorganisms have become resistant
to commonly used antibiotics, pharmaceutical companies
continually search for new antibiotics using a variety of
approaches (see Special Topic 4.1). Traditional procedures
include scouring soil and ocean samples collected from all
over the world for new antibiotic-producing organisms and
chemically redesigning existing antibiotics so that they
can bypass microbial resistance strategies. Newer techniques allow scientists to “mine the genomes” of microbes
for potential drug targets and use computer-based methods to predict the structure and function of potential new
antibiotics.

Biological Control of Micro bes

Pitting microbe against microbe is an effective way to
prevent disease in humans and animals. One of the hallmarks of a healthy ecosystem is the presence of a diversity
of organisms. This is true not only for tropical rain forests and coral reefs, but also for the complex ecosystems
of human skin and the intestinal tract. In these environments, the presence of harmless microbial communities
can retard the growth of undesired pathogens. The pathogenic fungus Phytophthora cinnamomi, for example, causes
root rot in plants but is biologically controlled by Myrothecium fungi. Staphylococcus species normally present on
human skin produce short-chain fatty acids that retard the
growth of pathogenic strains. Another illustration is the
human intestine, which is populated by as many as 500
microbial species. Most of these species are nonpathogenic
organisms that exist in symbiosis with their human host.
Vigorous competition with members of the normal intestinal microbiota and the production of permeant weak acids
by fermentation helps control the growth of numerous
pathogens. A prominent example of this phenomenon is
the pathogen Clostridium difficile, whose growth is normally kept in check by gut microbiota.
Microbial competition has been widely exploited for
agricultural purposes and to improve human health



187

through the intake of probiotics. In general, a probiotic
is a food or supplement that contains live microorganisms
and improves intestinal microbial balance. Newborn baby
chicks, for instance, are fed a microbial cocktail of normal
gut microbes designed to quickly colonize the intestinal
tract and prevent colonization by Salmonella, a frequent
contaminant of factory-farmed chicken. In another example, Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium have been used to
prevent and treat diarrhea in children.
Russian biologist Ilya Mechnikov, winner of the 1908
Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine, was the first to
suggest that a high concentration of lactobacilli in the
gut microbiome is important for health and longevity in
humans. Yogurt is a probiotic that contains Lactobacillus
acidophilus and a number of other lactobacilli. It is often
recommended as a way to restore a normal balance to gut
microbiota (for example, after the microbiota has been
disturbed by antibiotic treatment), and it appears useful
in the treatment of some forms of inflammatory bowel
disease.
Phage therapy, another biocontrol method, was first
described in 1907 by Félix d’Herelle at France’s Pasteur
Institute, long before antibiotics were discovered. Bacteriophages are viruses that prey on bacteria (discussed in
Section 6.1). Each bacterial species is susceptible to a limited number of specific phages. Because a phage infection
often causes bacterial lysis, it was considered feasible to
treat infectious diseases with a phage targeted to the pathogen. At one time, doctors used phages as medical treatment for illnesses ranging from cholera to typhoid fever. In
some cases, a liquid containing the phage was poured into
an open wound. In other cases, phages were given orally,
introduced via aerosol, or injected. Sometimes the treatments worked; sometimes they did not. When antibiotics
came into the mainstream, phage therapy largely faded.
Now that strains of bacteria that are resistant to standard
antibiotics are on the rise, the idea of phage therapy has
enjoyed renewed interest from the worldwide medical community (Special Topic 5.1).
Commercial phage products are now available to target the food-borne pathogens E. coli O157:H7, Salmonella
enterica, and Listeria monocytogenes. E. coli O157:H7, for
instance, is a pathogen that can contaminate hamburger
and cause bloody diarrhea. The phage product contains
several different phages and is sprayed onto the hides of
cattle 1–4 hours before slaughter. Cattle carcasses are
steam-pasteurized and acid-washed to diminish bacterial
contamination. E. coli cells that manage to survive these
treatments will be infected and killed by the phage, reducing the consumer’s risk of disease. Using multiple phages
in each preparation nearly eliminates the risk that phage
resistance will develop in the pathogen.

188



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL



Nurit Beyth, Leron Khalifa, and Ronen Hazan.

dead stain to show bacteria in a tooth prepared without any
contamination (Fig. 4A), in a tooth prepared with E. faecalis
contamination (Fig. 4B), and in a contaminated tooth simultaneously treated with phage (Fig. 4C). Live bacteria (green)
are seen within the dentin tubules in Figure 4B but not in

200 nm

FIGURE 2



Enterococcus phage EFDG1.

L. KHALIFA, ET AL. 2015. APPL. ENVIRON. MICROB. 81:2696.

Biofilms play an important role in many infectious disease processes. Examples include
Pseudomonas aeruginosa lung infections
that plague cystic fibrosis patients and lifethreatening heart valve infections caused by
Enterococcus faecalis. It is difficult to cure
these types of infections, because many
of the pathogens responsible are resistant
to antibiotics and because biofilm architecture may hinder antibiotic and immune
cell access to bacteria nestled in the deep
recesses of the structure. What’s more,
biofilms provide a reservoir of bacteria for
chronic infections throughout the body.
With antibiotics failing, is there an alternative? A recent study by Ronen Hazan, Leron
Khalifa, and Nurit Beyth from Hebrew UniFIGURE 1
versity (Fig. 1) suggests that phage therapy
can be used to destroy biofilm infections
without antibiotics.
The model they used was tooth infection following endodontic dental procedures. Endodontic procedures remove
the nerve of a tooth because the pulp around it is infected.
Drilling to remove infected pulp and the inflamed nerve will
inadvertently allow entry of oral microbiota, such as Enterococcus faecalis, into dentinal tubules. Dentinal tubules are
thin, branching tubes that extend radially from the pulp
(the center of the tooth), through the dentine and then
stop at the enamel. Once it is within the tubules and the
canal is sealed, E. faecalis can form a biofilm infection of the
dentine.
The authors used an Enterococcus-specific bacteriophage called EFDG1 (Fig. 2) to first determine whether
the phage could destroy a 2-week-old biofilm of E. faecalis
grown in a plastic dish. The confocal fluorescent images in
Figure 3 show a biofilm without phage treatment and a similar biofilm 7 days after phage treatment. The results suggest
that phages are promising candidates for killing well-established E. faecalis biofilms.
The scientists next tested whether phage treatment
would prevent root canal infections. Extracted teeth with
exposed nerve canals were autoclaved and contaminated
with a suspension of E. faecalis. Root canal procedures were
performed on the teeth, and the canals were sealed. After
2 days, cross sections were made and stained with live/

DR. SHUNIT COPPENHAGEN-GLAZER

SPECIAL TOPIC 5.1++ Phage “Smart Bombs” Target Biofilms

CHAPTER 5



ENVIRONMENTAL INFLUENCES AND CONTROL OF MICROBIAL GROWTH

the tubules treated with phage (Fig. 4C). Note that the root
canal itself stained nonspecifically, even in the absence of
bacteria (Fig. 4A). The results show that EFDG1 is an efficient killer of E. faecalis biofilms in this ex vivo model of
root canal infection and may be a complementary strategy
to antibiotic treatment, especially for antibiotic resistant
microbes.



189

Leron, Khalifa, Yair Brosh, Daniel Gelman, Shunit
Coppenhagen-Glazer, Shaul Beyth, et al. 2015.
Targeting Enterococcus faecalis biofilms with phage
therapy. Applied and Environmental Microbiology
81:2696–2705.

Sealed canal

Dentin tubules

RESEARCH QUESTION
How would you test whether Enterococcus faecalis can
develop resistance to the EFDG1 phage? List other potential drawbacks to using phage as a treatment for human
infections.

A. No bacteria

Bacteria in
dentin tubules

B. E. faecalis

Untreated

FIGURE 3

 Two-week-old biofilm of Enterococcus faecalis
was either untreated (top) or treated with phage EFDG1 for
7 days (bottom). Confocal fluorescence microscopy.

DR. SHUNIT COPPENHAGEN-GLAZER

+
EFDG1

L. KHALIFA, ET AL. 2015. APPL. ENVIRON. MICROB. 81:2696.

C. E. faecalis + EFDG1

FIGURE 4  Horizontal root sections of teeth subjected
to endodontic treatment. Confocal fluorescence microscopy.

A. Tooth without bacteria or phage. B. Tooth was irrigated with
bacteria only. C. Tooth was irrigated with bacteria and phage
EFDG1. Stained bacteria (green from live/dead viability stain) are
depicted in the dentinal tubules surrounding the root canal (red
arrow). Note that the root canal is stained nonspecifically, even in
the absence of bacteria.

CHAPTER 6



VIRUSES



193

CHAPTER 6
Viruses

A

6.1 Viruses in Ecosystems

ll kinds of cells, including bacteria, eukaryotes, and archaea, can be infected by viruses.
Viruses infect a host cell and use the cell’s
machinery to form progeny virions. In ecosystems,
viruses cycle nutrients, control host populations,
and promote host diversity. Viruses may kill their
host cells, or they may copy themselves into their
host genome. In humans, endogenous viral DNA
evolved into many portions of our genome. And now,
researchers engineer viruses to attack tumors, and to
conduct gene therapy.

6.2 Virus Structure
6.3 Viral Genomes and Classification
6.4 Bacteriophages: The Gut Virome
6.5 Animal and Plant Viruses
6.6 Culturing Viruses

C U R R E N T R E S E A RC H

highlight

A N I N T E RV I E W W I T H

Chlorovirus infects chlorella algae. This giant marine virus
has genes for metabolic enzymes and tRNA—surprising for
a virus. In Michael Rossmann’s laboratory, Xinzheng Zhang
determined the chlorovirus 3D structure using cryo-electron
microscopy. Cryo-EM reveals the inner coil of DNA surrounded by the protein capsid and envelope. The capsid spike contacts the algal surface and then opens, allowing viral DNA to
penetrate the host cell. Within the cell, the viral DNA forms
virus factories that make about a thousand progeny virions.

XINZHENG ZHANG, VIROLOGIST AND ELECTRON
MICROSCOPIST, INSTITUTE OF BIOPHYSICS, CHINESE

CHINESE ACADEMY OF SCIENCE

ACADEMY OF SCIENCES

Source: Adapted from Zhang et al. 2011. PNAS 108:14837.

Spike

100 nm

ZHANG AND ROSSMAN. COVER OF JOUR. OF VIR. 2012. VOL. 86, NO. 17.

Chlorovirus DNA

What exciting discovery has your
microscopy revealed about this virus
of algae?

Using cryo-electron microscopy, we
were able to capture several essential
steps of how the chlorovirus enters the
host cells. The infection starts when the
spike on the unique vertex of the virus
recognizes the cellular receptors. The
virus then digests the cell wall by its encoded enzyme. Meanwhile, the virus undergoes uncoating around the unique vertex. Without the cell wall and the virus capsid shell, the viral
membrane can fuse with the cellular membrane to release
the viral genome into the host cell. It is amazing that the
virus can accomplish such a comprehensive job.
What is the importance of algal viruses in the natural
world?
Phytoplankton (marine algae) play an important role in
Earth’s carbon cycle. In natural environments, viruses such
as algal viruses help control the population of phytoplankton.
Algal viruses are important in ecosystems for controlling
algal blooms.
193

194



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

SOCIETY FOR GENERAL MICROBIOLOGY, READING, U.K.

overgrow, they can generate a bloom that covers thousands
of square kilometers (Fig. 6.1C). The pale clouds in the
water are the reflected light from billions of calcite plates,
or “coccoliths,” that coat each algal cell. Yet within a few
days, this gigantic bloom is dissipated by viruses.
Throughout the ocean, viruses play a decisive role in
controlling algal blooms. Consumer organisms apparently cannot grow fast enough to
control such blooms, but viruses
Packaged
Unfilled
spread rapidly through the popuA.
Virus
capsid
B.
capsid
lation. By lysing the algae as they
grow, viruses return algal carbon
and minerals to the surface water
before the algae starve to death
and their bodies sink. When biomass sinks, its minerals become
unavailable for phototrophs and
their consumers. Thus, viruses
are major players in the cycling of
atmospheric CO2.
All cellular organisms are
infected by viruses. In humans,
1 µm
250 nm
most of our own viruses go unnoC.
ticed, and some actually contribute to our health. But the viruses
we hear about are those that cause
epidemics, such as seasonal influenza and the AIDS pandemic.
In research, viruses provided
both tools and model systems for
our discovery of the fundamental principles of molecular biology. The first genes mapped, the
first regulatory switches defined,
and the first genomes sequenced
were all those of viruses. Vectors
for gene cloning and gene therapy continue to be derived from
viruses (see Chapter 12). Our
understanding of viruses, particularly bacterial viruses, called
bacteriophages, provides a background for the molecular biology we will encounter in Part 2
of this book (Chapters 7–12).
And remarkably, we now engineer human viruses to deliver
gene therapy and kill cancers
(discussed in Chapter 11).
In Chapter 6 we introduce the
FIGURE 6.1  Viruses control an algal bloom. A. A virus attaches to the surface of a marine
major
themes of virus structure
alga, Emiliana huxleyi (SEM). B. Progeny virions assemble within an alga (Pavlova sp.). C. Bloom
and
function,
and the ways that
of E. huxleyi off Plymouth, England, detected by satellite remote sensing. Marine algal blooms are
viruses
manipulate
host cells for
controlled by viruses.
IMAGE COURTESY JEFF SCHMALTZ, MODIS RAPID RESPONSE TEAM, NASA GSFC

SOCIETY FOR GENERAL MICROBIOLOGY, READING, U.K.

Viruses are everywhere. In the oceans, viruses are the most
numerous and genetically diverse forms of life. The number of viruses infecting bacteria and algae can reach 107
(10 million) per milliliter. Viruses act as a dominant consumer of marine microbes. Figure 6.1 shows an example of marine viruses infecting the algae Emiliana huxleyi
(Fig. 6.1A) and Pavlova (Fig. 6.1B). When marine algae

CHAPTER 6



VIRUSES



195

their own reproduction. The molecular biology of viral
infection and replication is explored further in Chapter 11.
Viral disease pathology and epidemiology are discussed in
Chapters 25–27.

complex viruses, the protective protein may be called a
head coat or a core particle (discussed in Sections 6.3–6.5.)

6.1

Different types of viruses infect different specific host
cells. A virus that infects bacteria is called a bacteriophage
(Fig. 6.2A). Bacteriophage T2 infects the host bacterium,
E. coli. The T2 and T4 phages are “tailed” phages, whose
capsid has a tail that inserts the viral genome into the host
cell. Within the host, the phage genes direct production
and assembly of progeny virions. Virions are released when
the host cell lyses. As cells lyse, their disappearance can be
observed as a plaque, a clear spot within a lawn of bacterial
cells (Fig. 6.2B). Each plaque arises from a single virion, or
phage particle, that lyses a host cell and spreads progeny to
infect adjacent cells. The plaque count represents the number of individual infective virions from the phage suspension that was spread on the plate.
A virus that infects humans is the measles virus
(Fig. 6.2C). The measles virus has an envelope that is
derived from the host cell plasma membrane as the virus
exits the host cell. As the virus infects a new host cell, the
envelope fuses with the host cell plasma membrane, releasing the viral contents into the cytoplasm of the cell. After
replicating within the infected cell, newly formed measles virions become enveloped by host cell membrane as
they bud out of the host cell. The spreading virus generates a rash of red spots on the skin of infected patients
(Fig. 6.2D) and can be fatal (one in 500 cases).
Plants are infected by viruses such as tobacco mosaic
virus (TMV). Within the plant cell, virions accumulate
to high numbers (Fig. 6.2E) and travel through interconnections to neighboring cells. Infection by tobacco
mosaic virus results in mottled leaves and stunted growth
(Fig. 6.2F). Plant viruses cause major economic losses in
agriculture worldwide.
Historically, viruses were defined as nonliving particles,
because at first the virion was the only form to be visualized
and understood. The Russian botanist Dmitri Ivanovsky
(1864–1920) and the Dutch microbiologist Martinus Beijerinck (1851–1931) first proposed the existence of viruses
as infectious agents that passed through a filter too small for
cells to pass. Certain kinds of these infectious agents were
actually crystallized from solution. Wendell Stanley (1904–
1971) earned the 1946 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for the
first crystallization of a virus, tobacco mosaic virus (TMV).
He later crystallized poliovirus. The crystallization of viruses
reinforced their definition as nonliving.
But what happens after a virus infects a cell? The first
replication cycles discovered were those of viruses that
infect bacteria, known as bacteriophages or phages.
Bacteriophage infections were first studied by English

Viruses Infect Cells

Viruses in Ecosystems

What is a virus? A virus may be defined as a noncellular
particle, or virion, that infects a host cell, where it reproduces (Fig. 6.2). The virion includes a genome composed
of DNA or RNA, enclosed by a capsid of protein. In more

LEE SIMON. 1969. VIROLOGY38:285

B.

JEAN KAYIRA/MICROBELIBRARY

Bacteriophage

A.

0.4 µm

D.

COURTESY OF CLAIRE MOORE AND SHMUEL ROZENBLATT,
TEL AVIV UNIVERSITY;

C.

Virus
envelope
2 µm

E.

LOWELL GEORGIA/SCIENCE SOURCE

Capsid

F.

1 µm

FIGURE 6.2

Virus infections and disease. A. Bacteriophage
T2 particles pack in a regular array within an E. coli cell (TEM). B. Bacteriophage infection forms plaques of lysed cells on a lawn of bacteria. C. Measles virions bud out of human cells in tissue culture (TEM).
D. Child infected with measles shows a rash of red spots. E. Tobacco
leaf section is packed with tobacco mosaic virus particles. F. Tomato
leaf infected by tobacco mosaic virus shows mottled appearance.


NORM THOMAS/SCIENCE SOURCE

THOMAS SHALLA. 1964. J. CELL. BIOL.21: 253

TMV
virions



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

Nucleus

Replication
complex
Tracked
movement
of replication
complex

5 µm

FIGURE 6.3



Replication complexes of hepatitis C virus.

Membranous replication complexes surround the nucleus of an
infected liver cell in tissue culture. The virus expresses replication
proteins fused to a fluorescent protein (GFP), shown pink.

bacteriologist Frederick William Twort (1877–1950) and
by French microbiologist Félix d’Herelle (1873–1949). To
actually reveal what went on in the host cell, Ernst Ruska
(1906–1988) used the newly invented electron microscope
(discussed in Chapter 2).
The electron micrographs in Figure 6.2 show startling
views of progeny virions infecting cells. However, they fail to
show the dynamic nature of virus replication. A remarkable
view of viral replication emerges from fluorescence microscopy (Fig. 6.3). For an RNA virus such as poliovirus or
hepatitis C virus, virions are assembled within “virus factories,” virus-induced cell compartments called a replication
complex. The micrograph in Figure 6.3 shows a cell from
rat liver tissue culture infected by hepatitis C virus. The liver
cell nucleus is surrounded by replication complexes composed of viral proteins and host-derived membranes (pinkorange fluorescence). Within each replication complex,
fluorescence arises from a viral gene fused to a gene encoding a fluorescent protein (GFP). The replication complexes
fluoresce against the dark background. The complexes move
around within the cell, as tracked by video recording. It can
be argued that the viral replication complexes themselves
behave like intracellular parasites.

Integrated Viral Genomes

Some viruses do more than replicate within a cell: they integrate their own genomes into the host genome. In effect, such

A. BENNO WÖLK, ET AL. 2008. J. VIROL 82:10519

196

viruses become a part of the host organism. A virus that integrates its genome into the DNA of a bacterial genome is called
a prophage. Within a human cell, an integrated viral genome
is called a provirus. A permanently integrated provirus transmitted via the germ line is called an endogenous virus.
How were integrated viral genomes discovered? In the
1950s, genetic analysis of bacteriophage lambda in E. coli
showed evidence of phage gene expression from within host
genomes. Bacteriophage lambda is discussed at length
in Chapter 11. Early in the twentieth century, American
cancer researcher Peyton Rous (1879–1970) discovered that
some avian viruses cause tumors. The tumor generation
results from integration of a viral genome. For this discovery,
Rous won the 1966 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine.
But the biggest surprise emerged from decades of study
of the genomes of host organisms. Many host cell traits turn
out to be expressed by integrated viral genomes, or prophages, that actually confer benefits on their host. For example, Nostoc cyanobacteria possess a prophage that encodes
nitrogenase, an enzyme for nitrogen fixation. Many human
pathogens, such as Staphylococcus aureus, contain prophages
encoding toxins. Human genomes show evidence of much
genetic material arising from viral genomes that integrated
into host DNA, only to mutate and get “stuck” in the host.
As much as half of the human genome may have arisen from
viruses or from virus-like elements of DNA called transposons (discussed in Chapter 9). For example, some endogenous viral genomes express placental proteins that are
essential for early development of human embryos.

Dynamic Nature of Viruses

Emerging evidence supports a dynamic view of viral existence, and leads us to revisit the question: What is a virus?
Is a virus a living organism? We now know that a virus may
interconvert among three very different forms (Fig. 6.4):


Virion, or virus particle. The virion is an inert particle consisting of nucleic acid enclosed by a protein capsid. Some viruses package enzymes and possess a lipid
envelope. A virion does not carry out any metabolism or
energy conversion.



Intracellular replication complex. Within a host cell,
the viral gene products direct the cell’s enzymes to
assemble progeny virions at “virus factories” called replication complexes. Assembly requires host ribosomes,
as well as intricate collaboration between host and viral
proteins.



Viral genome integrated within host DNA. Some
types of viral genomes may integrate within a host chromosome and replicate as part of the host. Integration
may be permanent; alternatively, the viral genome may
be reactivated to start assembling virions.

CHAPTER 6
Virions produced
Viral components
synthesized within
host cell

Viral
genome

Virion

Capsid

Integrated genome

Viral genome
integrated into
host genome

FIGURE 6.4

 Virus as a subcellular organism. The virion, or
virus particle, consists of a nucleic acid genome contained by a protein
capsid. A virion may infect a host cell and cause the cell’s enzymes to
synthesize progeny virions. Alternatively, infection may lead to integration of the viral genome within the host cell genome. Integration
may last indefinitely, or else may lead to production of virions.

The inert nature of the virion (particle), which lacks
metabolism, argues that viruses are nonliving. However,
we know that cellular life-forms such as bacteria can convert into inert forms such as endospores that remain viable
for thousands of years. The virion assembly process argues
that viruses are living organisms. Assembly includes metabolism and production of progeny, processes we see for obligate
intracellular bacteria such as chlamydias. Furthermore, the
genomes of large viruses such as chloroviruses show evidence
of reductive evolution (evolutionary loss of genes) from a cell.
On the other hand, genome integration argues for
a view of viruses as host cell components. Many bacteria
regulate phage-encoded genes along with their own genes
(discussed in Chapter 10). For example, Vibrio cholerae, the
cause of cholera, uses bacterial genes to regulate expression
of the cholera toxin, which is encoded by an integrated prophage. For the V. cholerae bacterium, the viral prophage is a
functional part of the cell.
How and where did viruses originate? Did they form
within host cells, or did they arise as independent entities?
Giant viral genomes encode numerous metabolic enzymes,
including aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (enzymes that
attach an amino acid to the transfer RNA for translation).



VIRUSES



197

The size and complexity of giant viruses argue that these
viruses evolved by reductive evolution of an intracellular
parasitic bacterium. Similar arguments are made for large
viruses such as the smallpox and herpes viruses. On the
other hand, small viruses with small RNA genomes, such
as influenza virus and HIV, look more like something that
arose from parts of a cell. For example, the key retroviral
enzyme reverse transcriptase (which copies RNA to DNA)
shows homology to telomerase, a host cell enzyme that
maintains chromosome ends. Viral origins are discussed
further in eTopic 6.1.

Viral Ecology

While viruses are the tiniest of biological entities, they play
starring roles in ecosystems. Acute viruses (which rapidly kill
their hosts) act as predators or parasites to limit host population density. They also recycle nutrients from their host
bodies. An increase in host population density increases the
rate of transmission of viral pathogens. As the host population declines, viruses are less likely to find a new host before
they lose infectivity, while many of the remaining hosts have
undergone selection for resistance. Thus, viruses can limit
host density without causing extinction of the host.
In a community of multiple host species, the overall
effect of viruses is to increase host diversity. Each viral species has a limited host range and requires a critical population density to sustain the chain of infection. In marine
phytoplankton, a virus limits its host species to a population density far lower than what is sustainable by the
available resources, such as light for photosynthesis. The
resources then support other species resistant to the given
virus (but susceptible to other ones). Thus, overall, marine
viruses prevent the dominance of any one species and foster
the evolution of many distinct host species. The continual
threat of marine viral epidemics explains the great diversity of phytoplankton ranging from silica-shelled diatoms
to toxin-producing dinoflagellates.
Persistent viruses (viruses that don’t immediately kill
the host) may benefit the host population overall. Most
important, viruses transfer genes across species, conferring
traits such as the ability to metabolize new food sources.
Humans harbor many obscure herpes and cold-type viruses
that stimulate normal development of the immune system.
In natural mammal populations, a persistent virus can act
as a bioweapon that kills off competitor populations susceptible to the virus. An example is the koala retrovirus,
KoRV, which has become endogenous (persistent) in many
koala populations of Australia. When KoRV is transmitted to koalas that lack the retrovirus, it kills most of those
newly infected—except for the few in which the virus persists. In these infected animals, the immune system controls the virus but cannot eradicate it.

198



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL
FIGURE 6.5

 The relationship of polydnaviruses, wasps, and
caterpillars. Parasitoid wasps lay their eggs inside a living insect caterpil-

Integrated
provirus
(polydnavirus)

Virions generated
in wasp ovary

Parasitoid
wasp

Insect
larva

Ovipositor
Polydnavirus

Wasp egg

Viruses of
autotrophs

Autotrophs
Infection

Viral
reproduction

Viral shunt
Uptake

Organic
matter
Uptake
Viral
reprod
reproduction

Viral shunt
nt

Integrated viral genomes can evolve complex symbiotic
interactions with multiple hosts, combining mutualism
and parasitism. An example is the relationship of polydnaviruses, wasps, and caterpillars (Fig. 6.5). Parasitoid
wasps lay their eggs inside a living insect caterpillar, where
the larvae must hatch and feed without stimulating the
caterpillar’s defense. The wasp genome contains an integrated genome (or provirus) of a virus called polydnavirus.
The polydnavirus forms its own genomes and virions only
within the wasp ovary. When the wasp deposits her eggs
inside the host caterpillar, she also deposits her mutualistic
virions. The virions express proteins that prevent the caterpillar cells from undergoing encapsulation, a process that
would otherwise wall off the wasp eggs and kill them.
In marine ecosystems, viruses play a significant role in
the cycling of food molecules (Fig. 6.6). In ocean food
webs, phytoplankton is consumed by grazers, and grazers are eaten by higher trophic consumers (discussed
in Chapter 21). But at each level, some of the carbon
fixed as biomass sinks to the ocean floor. There, benthic
microbes metabolize so slowly that most carbon is effectively removed from the carbon cycle. At the same time,
viral infection and lysis convert the
bodies of phytoplankton, grazers,
and carnivores into detritus consisting of small organic particles and
Growth
soluble molecules. The viral detritus gets taken up by heterotrophs,
and minerals are absorbed by autotrophs. This uptake of viral detritus is called the viral shunt. The
viral shunt returns some organic
Higher
matter to microbial consumers in
Grazers
trophic
the upper region of the ocean (dislevels
cussed in Chapter 21). Some carbon
is thus diverted from the ocean sink
and instead plays a significant part
in the CO2 cycle. The viral shunt
also plays a major part in cycling
phosphorus in the oceans.
Growth

Infection
Vi
Viruses
off
heterotrophs

lar. When a female wasp deposits her eggs inside the caterpillar, she also
deposits her symbiogenic polydnavirus virions. The virions express wasp
genes in the caterpillar, where they prevent the encapsulation process that
would otherwise wall off the wasp egg and kill it.

FIGURE 6.6  Marine viruses recycle organic
matter. Viruses divert the flow of organic mole-

Heterotrophs

cules from marine phytoplankton and bacteria back
to metabolism, avoiding loss by sedimentation.

CHAPTER 6

Thought Question

6.1 Suppose a certain virus depletes the population of an

algal bloom. If some of the algae are genetically resistant, will
they grow up again and dominate the producer community?



VIRUSES



199

yielded several major classes of antiviral drugs, such as AZT
and protease inhibitors. The molecular biology behind
anti-HIV drugs is discussed in Chapters 11 and 27.

Thought Question

6.2 Search for some specific viruses on the Internet. Which
viruses do you think have a narrow host range, and which have
a broad host range?

Viral Disease

When viral infection causes harm to an animal or plant, the
host has a disease. Each species of virus infects a particular group of host species, known as its host range. Some
viruses can infect only a single species; for example, HIV
infects only humans. Close relatives of humans, such as
the chimpanzee, are not infected by HIV, although they
are susceptible to a highly related virus, simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV). By contrast, West Nile virus, transmitted by mosquitoes, infects many species of birds and
mammals. West Nile virus has a much broader host range
than HIV and SIV.
For humans, viruses cause many forms of illness. The
influence of viral diseases on human history and culture
would be hard to overstate. More people died of influenza in the global epidemic of 1918 than in the battles
of World War I. Poliovirus is famous for causing the outbreaks of poliomyelitis that swept the United States during
the first half of the twentieth century. President Franklin Roosevelt, himself a victim of the disease, established a
national foundation called the March of Dimes to develop
a vaccine. The spectacular success of the March of Dimes
set the pattern for future public support of research on
cancer and AIDS.
Chronic viral infections, however, are more common
than acute disease, and are an everyday part of our lives.
The most frequent infections of college students are due
to respiratory pathogens such as rhinovirus (the common
cold) and Epstein-Barr virus (infectious mononucleosis),
as well as sexually transmitted viruses such as herpes simplex virus (HSV) and papillomavirus (genital warts). Some
viruses, such as rhinoviruses, are eliminated rapidly by our
immune system, whereas others, such as herpes, establish a
lifelong latent infection. Viruses also impact human industry; for example, bacteriophages (literally, “bacteria-eaters”) infect cultures of Lactococcus during the production
of yogurt and cheese. Plant pathogens such as cauliflower
mosaic virus and rice dwarf virus cause substantial losses in
agriculture.
In contrast to our vast arsenal of antibiotics (effective
against bacteria), the number of antiviral drugs remains
small. Because the machinery of viral growth is largely
that of the host cell, viruses present relatively few targets
that can be attacked by antiviral drugs without harming
the host. An exception is human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV), the cause of AIDS. Molecular studies of HIV have

To Summarize












Viruses can exist as a virion (inert virus particle), as the
intracellular assembly of virion components, or as a viral
genome integrated within host cell DNA.
All classes of organisms are infected by viruses. Usually the hosts are limited to a particular host range of
closely related strains or species.
Acute virus infection limits host population density. Virus-associated mortality may increase the genetic
diversity of host species.
Persistent viruses remain in hosts, where they may
evolve traits that confer positive benefits in a virus-host
mutualism.
Marine viruses infect most phytoplankton, releasing
their minerals in the upper water, where they are available for other phototrophs. Viral activity substantially
impacts the global carbon balance.
Viruses transfer genes between host genomes. Viral
gene transfer is a major source of cell genome evolution.

6.2

Virus Structure

The structure of a virion keeps the viral genome intact, and
it enables infection of the appropriate host cell. First, the
stable capsid protects the viral genome from degradation
and enables it to be transmitted outside the host. Second,
in order for the viral genome to reproduce, the virion must
either insert its genome into the host cell or disassemble
within the host. In the process, the original particle loses
its stable structure and its own identity as such. But if viral
reproduction succeeds, then it yields numerous progeny
virions.
A virion possesses a genome of either DNA or RNA,
contained by proteins that compose the capsid. The form
of the virion depends on the species of virus. The virion
may be symmetrical or asymmetrical, or combine aspects

200



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL
C.

B.

A.

Capsid
proteins

Fivefold axis

DNA

Threefold axis
Twofold axis

Threefold
Depth into
virion

0 10

30

50

Fivefold

Twofold

65 nm

0 10 30 50 65 nm

Depth into
virion

FIGURE 6.7

 Herpes: icosahedral capsid symmetry. A. Icosahedral capsid of herpes simplex 1 (HSV-1), with envelope removed.
Imaging of the capsid structure is based on computational analysis of cryo-TEM. Images of 146 virus particles were combined digitally
to obtain this model of the capsid at 2-nm resolution. B. Icosahedral symmetry includes fivefold, threefold, and twofold axes of rotation.
C. The icosahedral capsid contains spooled DNA. Source: A, C. Z. Hong Zhou et al. 1999. J. Virol. 73:3210.

of both. The papillomavirus virion, for example, consists
solely of a capsid containing a genome. Some viruses, such
as the tailed bacteriophages, have an elaborate delivery
device to transfer the viral genome into the host cell. Other
viruses possess a membrane envelope. The protein capsid of
an enveloped virus is called a core particle.
Understanding virus structure is crucial for devising vaccines and drug therapies. For example, the Gardasil vaccine for human papillomavirus, HPV (recommended for
all children before adolescence), is composed of capsid proteins from four different HPV strains. The molecular basis
of viral structure and drugs is presented in Chapter 11.

Thought Question

6.3 What will happen if a virus particle remains intact within
a host cell and fails to release its genome?

Symmetrical Virions

A symmetrical virus may have a capsid of one of two types:
icosahedral or filamentous (helical). Some have an intermediate form, such as the HIV core. The advantage of geometrical symmetry is that it provides a way to form a package out
of repeating protein units generated by a small number of
genes and encoded by a short chromosomal sequence. The
smaller the viral genome, the more genome copies can be
synthesized from the host cell’s limited supply of nucleotides.
Nevertheless, some symmetrical viruses, such as herpes virus
and mimivirus, have much larger genomes. Large genomes
offer a greater range of functions for viral components.

Icosahedral viruses. Many viruses package their genome

in an icosahedral (20-sided) capsid. An icosahedral
capsid takes the form of a polyhedron with 20 identical
triangular faces. In the capsid, each triangle can be composed of three identical but asymmetrical protein units.
An icosahedral capsid is found in the herpes simplex virus
(Fig. 6.7A). Each triangular face of the capsid is determined by the same genes encoding the same protein subunits. The actual form of viral subunits can vary greatly,
generating very different complex shapes for different viral
species. But no matter what the pattern of subunits in the
triangular unit, the structure overall shows the rotational
symmetry of an icosahedron (Fig. 6.7B): threefold symmetry around the axis through two opposed triangular
faces, fivefold symmetry around an axis through opposite points, and twofold symmetry around an axis through
opposite edges.

Thought Question

6.4 For a viral capsid, what is the advantage of an icosahedron,
as shown in Figure 6.7, instead of some other polyhedron?

Virus particles can be observed by standard transmission electron microscopy (TEM), but the details of
capsid structure as in Figure 6.7A require digital reconstruction of cryo-EM images (discussed in Section 2.6).
Recall from Chapter 2 that in cryo-EM, the viral samples
for TEM are flash-frozen, preventing the formation of
ice crystals. Flash-freezing enables observation without

B.

Envelope

Tegument

100 nm

100 nm

FIGURE 6.8  Envelope and tegument surround the herpes capsid. A. Section
showing envelope and tegument proteins surrounding capsid (cryo-EM). B. Cutaway
reconstruction of the herpes virion (cryo-EM tomography).

stain. The electron beams penetrate the object; thus,
images of individual capsids actually provide a glimpse
of the virus’s internal contents. By digitally combining
and processing cryo-TEM images from a number of capsids, a 3D reconstruction is built for the entire virus particle. Within the icosahedral capsid, the herpes genome is
spooled and tightly packed. Figure 6.7C shows that the
double-stranded DNA of the herpes genome is packed
under high pressure. A molecular motor powered by
ATP drives viral DNA into the host nucleus (discussed in
Chapter 11).
In some icosahedral viruses, such as HIV, the capsid
(called a core particle) is enclosed in an envelope membrane.
The envelope is composed of host-derived membrane from
the host cell in which the virion formed; it also contains
proteins specified by the viral genome. The HIV envelope
derives from host plasma membrane, whereas other viruses,
such as herpes virus, derive their envelope from intracellular membranes such as the nuclear membrane or endoplasmic reticulum. The envelope and capsid contents of herpes
virus are shown in Figure 6.8.

A.

B.

ALASDAIR STEVEN, NIH

Capsid



VIRUSES



201

The space between the capsid and
the envelope contains “tegument”
proteins, such as enzymes that interact with the host cell to depress its
defense responses. Tegument proteins are expressed during infection
of a host cell, and then get packaged
in the virion. Both viral and host
proteins may be packaged as tegument. The mature envelope bristles
with glycoprotein spike proteins that
attach it to the capsid. The spike proteins enable the virus to attach and
infect the next host cell. Further
details of herpes structure and function are presented in Section 11.5.

Note:

Distinguish the viral envelope (phospholipid membrane
derived from a host cell membrane) from the bacterial cell envelope (protective layers outside the bacterial cell membrane). The
bacterial envelope is discussed in Chapter 3.

Filamentous viruses. A second major category of virus struc-

ture is that of filamentous viruses. A famous example is Ebola
virus (Fig. 6.9A), which causes a fatal disease of humans and
related primates; the virus caused a major epidemic in 2014
(discussed in Chapter 28). A filamentous bacteriophage that
infects E. coli is phage M13 (Fig. 6.9B). Filamentous bacteriophages cause problems for human medicine and industry. One infects the Gram-positive species Propionibacterium
freudenreichii, a key fermenting agent for Swiss cheese.
Another filamentous phage, CTXϕ, integrates its sequence
into the genome of Vibrio cholerae, where it carries the deadly
toxin genes required for cholera. On the other hand, filamentous phages have been used in nanotechnology to nucleate
the growth of crystalline “nanowires” for electronic devices.
The filamentous bacteriophage M13 (Fig. 6.9B)
consists of a relatively simple capsid of protein monomers.

Tail fibers

0.2 µm

FIGURE 6.9  Filamentous viruses. A. Ebola virus filaments (SEM).
B. The filamentous bacteriophage M13 has a relatively simple helical capsid
that surrounds the genome coiled within (TEM).

1 µm

MARCUS DRECHSLER, U. OF
BAYREUTH

A.

SCIENCE SOURCE

NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF ARTHRITIS AND MUSCULOSKELETAL AND SKIN
DISEASES

CHAPTER 6

202



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

laid down in a spiral array. Such
a tube can be imagined as a plaRNA genome
nar array of subunits that coils
around such that each row connects to the row above, generating a spiral. The length of the
helical capsid may extend up to
50 times its width, generating a
2.3 nm
flexible filament.
Capsid
Unlike an icosahedral capmonomer
sid, which usually has a fixed
size, a helical capsid can vary in
length to accommodate different lengths of nucleic acid. FurHelical thermore, some viruses package
capsid
several genome segments into
separate helical capsids. For
example, influenza virus packages several different genome
segments into separate heli18 nm
cal packages of different sizes,

FIGURE 6.10 Tobacco mosaic virus: helical symmetry. A. The helical filament of tobacco mo- contained together within a
saic virus (TMV) contains a single-stranded RNA genome coiled inside. B. Components of the TMV virion.
membrane envelope. Separate
chromosome packaging enables
influenza
virus
to
pack
different
numbers of RNA segThe monomers are stacked around a coiled genome conments into different virions. Such virions are thus defecsisting of a circle of single-stranded DNA. At one end of
tive, but the process enables rapid evolution of new strains
the filament, short tail fibers mediate specific attachment
(discussed further in Chapter 11).
to the host. The filament attaches to the F pilus of an E. coli
B.

J.-Y. SGRO, U. OF WISCONSIN–MADISON

A.

bacterium containing an F plasmid that encodes pili.
Filamentous viruses show helical symmetry. The pattern of capsid monomers forms a helical tube around the
genome, which usually winds helically within the tube. In
a helical capsid, the genome is a single-stranded DNA (as
in phage M13) or RNA (as in tobacco mosaic virus). Figure 6.10 shows how the RNA strand of tobacco mosaic
virus winds in a spiral within a tube of capsid monomers

Tailed Viruses

Some bacteriophages supplement the icosahedral capsid or
head coat with an elaborate delivery device. For example,
bacteriophage T4 (Fig. 6.11A) has an icosahedral “head”
containing the pressure-packed DNA, attached to a helical “neck” that channels the nucleic acid into the host cell.

B.

A.

Phage T4
Genome

Collar
Neck

Tail fibers

Tailsheath

300 nm

Baseplate

FIGURE 6.11 Bacteriophage T4 capsid. A. Phage T4 particle with protein capsid containing packaged double-stranded DNA genome.
The capsid has a sheath with tail fibers that facilitate attachment to the surface of the host cell. After attachment, the sheath contracts and
the core penetrates the cell surface, injecting the phage genome. B. E. coli infected by phage T4 (colorized blue, TEM).


GEORGE CHAPMAN/GETTY IMAGES

Head: 100 nm

CHAPTER 6

The tail baseplate has six jointed tail fibers that stabilize
the structure on the host cell surface (Fig. 6.11A and B).
After phage infection, the production of virions within a
cell requires a factorylike assembly line of phage tail parts
(described for phage T4 in eTopic 11.1).

VIRUSES



203

the capsid or in the tegument between the core envelope and
the outer membrane, which is coated with surface tubules of
protein. Large asymmetrical viruses contain so many enzymes
that they appear to have evolved from degenerate cells.
Vaccinia virus offers opportunities for new applications, such as conversion to vaccines for other viruses, and
engineering to combat tumors. For example, students in
Paulo Verardi’s laboratory at the University of Connecticut (Fig. 6.12C) recently engineered an on/off switch for
vaccinia that will make the virus safer for immunocompromised patients. The switch involves a recombinant tetracycline repressor gene, whose product confers resistance to
tetracycline. Repressor controls and engineering are discussed in Chapters 10 and 12.

Asymmetrical Virions

Many viruses have a capsid or core particle that is asymmetrical. Influenza viruses are RNA viruses that lack capsid symmetry. Instead, the RNA segments are coated with
nucleocapsid proteins (discussed in detail in Chapter 11).
The poxviruses, such as vaccinia (cowpox, the source of
smallpox vaccine) have a double-stranded DNA genome stabilized by covalent connection of its two strands at each end
(Fig. 6.12A and B). The core envelope encloses the nucleocapsid-coated DNA, as well as a large number of accessory
proteins. The accessory proteins are needed early in viral
infection, such as initiation proteins for the transcription of
viral genes and RNA-processing enzymes that modify viral
mRNA molecules. The proteins may be found either inside

A.



Viroids and Prions

Are there infectious agents even simpler than small viruses?
For some infectious agents, the nucleic acid genome is itself
the entire infectious particle; there is no protective capsid.
Such agents are called viroids, which are infectious agents

Surface
tubule
Outer
membrane

B.
Outer
membrane

Core
envelope

Core
envelope

A. J. MALKIN ET AL. 2003. J. VIROL.77:6332

Envelope
protein
DNA
genome
Tegument
Accessory
proteins

Loop-connected end
C.

PETER MORENUS/UCONN PHOTO

FIGURE 6.12

 Vaccinia poxvirus. A. Vaccinia virion observed
in aqueous medium by atomic force microscopy (AFM). B. A pox
virion includes an outer membrane and a core envelope membrane
containing envelope proteins enclosing the double-stranded DNA
genome and accessory proteins. The DNA is stabilized by a hairpin loop at each end. C. Allison Titong and Paulo Verardi examine
vaccinia virus in tissue culture, to develop advanced vaccines and
cancer treatments.

204



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

Potato spindle tuber viroid−circular ssRNA
C G G A A C U A A A C U C G U GG U U C C
U UGA
CG C C A A GG
U C C U UGG

UGU
U U

GG U U C A C A C C U
C C G A U U U G U GG G
C

GA C

AA AA
GG A
C U C GG A G G A G C G C U U C A G
A G A A GGCGG
C U C C U G A GC A G A A A A GA
G
A
G
C
C
C
U
CG
U
U
U
U
U
C
G
C
C
A
A
G
U
C
GGGG C U U C G U U C A U U C U A
AA
A
A G C
UC UC
A CAA

GUC
GC
C
C A C C C U UCC U U U C U U C G G G U
U U C C U CG C G C C C G C A G G AC C A C C C C U C G C C C C C U U U
GC UG
U CGC U U C GG
U
U U U G GG A
A A A G CC G C C C U
U G A G G A CA G C C G G C G A C C C G U G A G G G G U G G CA G G A A A A A A C G G U C A A G C G A G G U C
C
U AA



G
C
A AA

C
G

C

U
G C
G C
C
G
G

Viroids: infective RNA. Potato spindle tuber viroid consists of a circular single-stranded RNA (ssRNA) that hybridizes internally.

of plants. A viroid encodes no genes, but it hijacks the plant
cell’s RNA polymerase to replicate itself. Viroids infect
many kinds of fruits and vegetables, entering the plant cell
through a damaged cell wall. For example, citrus viroids
cause economic losses in the citrus industry.
The potato spindle tuber viroid (Fig. 6.13) consists
of a circular, single-stranded molecule of RNA that doubles back on itself to form base pairs interrupted by short,
unpaired loops. This unusual circularized form avoids
breakdown by host RNase enzymes. The RNA folds up
into a globular structure that interacts with host cell proteins. The RNA is replicated by host RNA polymerase. The
host RNA polymerase normally requires a DNA template,
but the replication process is modified during viroid infection. During infection, the RNA polymerase thus replicates
progeny copies of the viroid, which encodes no products
other than itself. Viroids can cause as much host destruction as “true viruses,” and some authors, particularly in
plant pathology, classify them as “viruses without capsids.”
Some viroids have catalytic ability, comparable to
enzymes made of protein. An RNA molecule capable of
catalyzing a reaction is called a ribozyme (discussed in
Chapter 8). Viral ribozymes may be able to cleave themselves or other specific RNA molecules. Their ability to
cleave very specific RNA sequences has applications in
medical research, such as cleaving human mRNA involved
in cancer.
Can an infectious agent propagate without a genome of
its own? A remarkable class of infectious agents is believed
to consist solely of protein. These agents, known as prions,
are thought to be aberrant proteins arising from the host
cell. Prions gained notoriety when they were implicated in
brain infections such as Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, a variant form of which is known as “mad cow” disease because
it may be transmitted through defective proteins in beef
from diseased cattle. Other diseases believed to be caused
by prion transmission include scrapie, a disease of sheep;
and kuru, a degenerative brain disease that was found in
a tribe of people who customarily consumed the brains of
deceased relatives.

In prion-associated diseases, the infective agent is
unaffected by treatments that destroy R NA or DNA,
such as nucleases or UV irradiation. A prion is an aberrant form of a normal cell protein that assumes an abnormal conformation or tertiary structure (Fig. 6.14A).
The prion form of the protein acts by binding to normally folded proteins of the same class and altering
their conformation to that of the prion. The multiplying
prion then alters the conformation of other normal subunits, forming harmful aggregates in the cell and ultimately leading to cell death. In the brain, prion-induced
cell death leads to tissue deterioration and dementia

A.

Normal conformation

Abnormal conformation

B.

FIGURE 6.14

RALPH C. EAGLE/SCIENCE SOURCE

FIGURE 6.13

UACUA
C

U
A C
G
G C



Prion disease.

A. The normal conformation of a
prion, compared to the abnormal
conformation. The abnormal
form “recruits” normally folded
proteins and changes their
conformation into the abnormal
form. (PDB code: 1AG2)
B. Section of a human brain
showing “spongiform” holes typical of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.

CHAPTER 6

(Fig. 6.14B). Prion diseases are unique in that they can
be transmitted by an infective protein instead of by DNA
or R NA, and they propagate the conformational change
of existing molecules without synthesizing entirely new
infective molecules.
A prion disease can be initiated by infection with an
aberrant protein. More rarely, the cascade of protein misfolding can start with the spontaneous misfolding of an
endogenous host protein. The chance of spontaneous misfolding is greatly increased in individuals who inherit certain alleles encoding the protein; thus, Creutzfeld-Jakob
disease can be inherited genetically from one person with
one mutant allele.

To Summarize















A virion consists of a capsid or a core particle enclosing a nucleic acid genome. For some viruses, the capsid is further enclosed by an envelope of membrane
with embedded proteins.
A viral capsid is composed of repeated protein subunits—a structure that maximizes the structural capacity while minimizing the number of genes needed for
construction.
The capsid or core particle packages the viral genome
and delivers it into the host cell.



VIRUSES



205

for the mode of infection, and for the course of a viral
disease. Viral genomes are used as the basis of virus
classification.

Viral Genomes: Small or Large

Small viruses commonly have a small genome, encoding fewer than ten genes. For example, cauliflower mosaic
virus (diameter 50 nm) has a genome encoding only seven
genes (Fig. 6.15A), which actually overlap each other in
sequence. This overlap in sequence is made possible by the
use of different reading frames—start positions to define
the first base of the codon for translation to an amino acid
sequence (discussed in Chapter 8).
Many small viral genomes consist of RNA. RNA viruses
include some of today’s most important human pathogens, such as influenza virus, hepatitis C virus, and human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV). The RNA genome of avian
leukosis virus (Fig. 6.15B) has protein-encoding genes
grouped by functional categories of core capsid, replication
enzymes, and envelope proteins (proteins embedded in the
envelope phospholipid bilayer).
At the opposite end of the scale, the “giant viruses” have
genomes of double-stranded DNA comprising 500–2,500

A. Cauliflower mosaic virus genome (DNA)

Icosahedral capsids have regular, icosahedral symmetry.
Gene 7

Filamentous (helical) capsids have uniform width,
generating a flexible filamentous virion.
Enveloped virions consist of a genome (RNA or DNA)
packaged by nucleocapsid proteins. The packaged
genome (or core particle) and tegument or accessory
proteins are enclosed within phospholipid membrane
derived from the host cell. The envelope includes virusspecific spike proteins.

DNA strands
Gene 6

Gene 1
Gene 2
Gene 3

Gene 5

Gene 4

Viroids that infect plants consist of RNA hairpins with
no capsid.
Prions are infectious proteins that induce a cell’s native
proteins to fold incorrectly and impair cell function.

6.3

Viral Genomes and
Classification

Viral genomes are structurally more diverse than those of
cells. A given type of virus may have a genome that consists
of either RNA or DNA, single- or double-stranded, linear
or circular. The form of the genome has key consequences

B. Avian leukosis virus genome (RNA)
gag
pol
LTR

Core

FIGURE 6.15

Enzymes

env

LTR

Envelope

Simple viral genomes. A. Cauliflower mosaic
virus has a circular genome of double-stranded DNA, whose strands
are interrupted by nicks. The genome encodes seven overlapping
genes. B. Avian leukosis virus, a single-stranded RNA retrovirus
resembling eukaryotic mRNA. Three genes (gag, pol, and env)
encode polypeptides that are eventually cleaved to form a total of
nine functional products. LTR = long terminal repeat.


206



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

A.

B.
Mamavirus

200 nm

100 nm

FIGURE 6.16



DIDIER RAOULT/CNRS

DIDIER RAOULT, MEDITERRANEAN UNIVERSITY, MARSEILLE

Sputnik
virophage

Giant virus infecting an ameba. A. Mimivirus is larger than some bacteria (TEM). B. Sputnik virophage infects Mamavi-

rus, a relative of Mimivirus (TEM).

JENNY E. ROSS/GETTY IMAGES

A.

B.

0.2 µm

FIGURE 6.17

 Giant virus from Siberia. A. The Siberian
tundra is melting. B. Pithovirus, a virus as large as E. coli, was
isolated from tundra frozen for 30,000 years (TEM).

JULIA BARTOLI AND CHANTAL ABERGEL, IGS AND CNRS-AMU

genes. A giant virus called mimivirus (diameter 300 nm),
which infects amebas and may cause human pneumonia, is
itself as large as some bacteria (Fig. 6.16A) and has a bacterium-sized genome of 1.2 million base pairs, encoding more
than 1,000 genes. Discovered in 2003 by French virologist Didier Raoult and colleagues, mimivirus has a genome
that encodes numerous cellular functions, including DNA
repair and protein folding by chaperones. The virus gains
entry to its ameba host by phagocytosis, because its large
particle size makes the virus particle resemble a bacterium
that the ameba could engulf for food. Once taken up, the
mimivirus capsid opens to release viral enzymes and DNA.
Within the ameba’s cytoplasm, the viral enzymes generate
a replication complex that produces progeny mimiviruses.
Mimiviruses are so large that they can actually become
infected themselves by smaller viruses, such as the Sputnik
virophage, or “virus-eater” (Fig. 6.16B).
A surprising source of giant viruses is the frozen polar
environments of the Arctic and Antarctic regions. Antarctic lakes reveal giant viruses related to Mimivirus and the
Sputnik virophage. The Arctic tundra of Siberia reveals even
more remarkable viruses, such as Pithovirus (Fig. 6.17).
Pithovirus is an unusual lozenge-shaped virus, nearly the
size of bacteria such as E. coli. Jean-Marie Claverie and colleagues from Aix-Marseille University isolated Pithovirus
from Siberian tundra frozen for 30,000 years. Remarkably, a virion so old was successfully inoculated into an
ameba host, where it generated progeny virions. In 2015,
yet another Siberian giant virus, Mollivirus sibericum, was
revived and found to package ribosomal proteins from its
host ameba—the first virus ever shown to contain parts of
a ribosome. The revival of ancient viruses leads to concern

CHAPTER 6

that as tundra melts during inevitable climate change, the
melting permafrost will release human pathogens from
550,000
long-dead hosts such as buried victims of smallpox.
Giant viruses are intriguing because their
600,000
genomes specify so many enzymes with housekeeping cell functions, such as nutrient trans- 650,000
port, mRNA translation, and even cell
motility (Fig. 6.18). Such large cell-like
700,000
genomes suggest the likelihood that a
virus evolved from a parasitic cell.

450,000

400,000



VIRUSES

350,000

500,000

300,000
250,000
200,000

150,000

100,000

50,000

750,000

The International Committee
on Taxonomy of Viruses

800,000

207



Mimivirus
(1,181,404 bp)

0

How do we classify the bewildering diver- 850,000
sity of viruses? Today we classify organisms
Gene categories
Amino acid transport and metabolism
by the relatedness of their gene sequences.
900,000
Nucleotide transport and metabolism
The definition of a virus species, however,
Translation of mRNA to protein
is problematic, given the small size and high
Transcription of DNA to RNA
950,000
DNA replication, recombination, repair
mutability of viral genomes and the ability of
Membrane and envelope biogenesis
different viruses to recombine their genome segMotility
1,000,000
ments within an infected host cell. Furthermore,
Protein modification, turnover, chaperones
Secondary metabolites
1,050,000
not all viruses are monophyletic—that is, descended
Other or unknown
1,100,000
from a common ancestor. In fact, different classes of
1,150,000
viruses appear to have evolved from different sources—for
example, from parasitic cells or from host cell components
FIGURE 6.18  Genome of Mimivirus. The genome of this
such as DNA replication enzymes. Viruses are classified by
giant virus specifies numerous enzymes with cell functions.
genome composition, virion structure, and host range.
For purposes of study and communication, a working
different hosts can show surprising similarities in genetclassification system has been devised by the International
ics and structure. For example, both rabies virus and
Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses (ICTV). The ICTV
potato yellow dwarf virus are enveloped, bullet-shaped
classification system is based on several criteria:
viruses of the rhabdovirus family.
 Genome composition. The nucleic acid of the viral
genome can vary remarkably with respect to physical
Note: In nomenclature, families of viruses are designated by
structure: It may consist of DNA or RNA, it may be
Latin names with the suffix “-viridae”: for example, Papillomavirisingle- or double-stranded, it may be linear or circular,
dae. Nevertheless, the common forms of such family names are
also used—for example, “papillomaviruses.” Within a family, a virus
and it may be whole or segmented (that is, divided into
species is simply capitalized, as in “Papillomavirus.”
separate “chromosomes”). Genomes are classified by the
Baltimore method (discussed next).


Capsid symmetry. The protein capsid or core particle may
be helical or icosahedral, with various levels of symmetry.



Envelope. The presence of a host-derived envelope, and
the envelope structure if present, are characteristic of
related viruses.



Size of the virus particle. Related viruses generally
share the same size range; for example, enteroviruses
such as poliovirus are only 30 nm across (about the size
of a ribosome), whereas poxviruses are 200–400 nm, as
large as a small bacterium.



Host range. Closely related viruses usually infect the
same or related hosts. However, viruses with extremely

The Baltimore Virus Classification

Given the wide variety of viral structures, how do we determine their relatedness? In general, viruses of the same
genome class (such as double-stranded DNA) show greater
evidence of shared ancestry with each other than with
viruses of a different class of genome (such as RNA). In
1971, David Baltimore proposed that the primary distinctions among classes of viruses be the genome composition
(RNA or DNA) and the route used to express messenger
RNA (mRNA). Baltimore, together with Renato Dulbecco (1914–2012) and Howard Temin (1943–1994), was
awarded the 1975 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine
for discovering how tumor viruses cause cancer.

208

A.



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

Group VII:
Double-stranded DNA
pararetrovirus
Requires plant host
reverse transcriptase to
make dsDNA.

FIGURE 6.19

 Baltimore classification of viral genomes.

Group I:
Double-stranded DNA
Uses its own or host
DNA polymerases
for replication.
+ DNA
± DNA

Group II:
Single-stranded DNA
Requires DNA polymerase
to generate a complementary
strand.

– DNA
Group VI:
Retrovirus
Packages its own
reverse transcriptase
to make dsDNA.

+ RNA

+ mRNA

± RNA

– RNA
Group V:
(–) Single-stranded RNA
Requires RNA-dependent
RNA polymerase to make
mRNA and replicate its
genome.

A. Seven categories of viral
genome composition and replication mechanism. B. David
Baltimore (left), with a graduate
student at the California Institute
of Technology. Baltimore won the
1975 Nobel Prize in Physiology or
Medicine for his work on retroviruses; co-winners were Renato
Dulbecco and Howard Temin.

+ RNA
Group IV:
(+) Single-stranded RNA
Requires RNA-dependent
RNA polymerase to make
a template for mRNA and
genome replication.

B.

merase or use that of the host for genome replication.
Their genes can be transcribed directly by a standard
RNA polymerase, in the same way that a cellular chromosome would be transcribed. The RNA polymerase
used can be that of the host cell, or it can be encoded
by the viral genome.
CALIFORNIA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY

All cells and viruses need to make messenger RNA to
produce their fundamental protein components. The production of mRNA from the viral genome is central to a
virus’s ability to propagate its kind. Cellular genomes
always make mRNA by copying double-stranded DNA.
For viruses, however, different kinds of genomes require
fundamentally different mechanisms to produce mRNA.
The different means of mRNA production generate distinct groups of viruses with shared ancestry.
So far, the genome composition and mechanisms of replication and mRNA expression define seven fundamental groups
of viral species (Fig. 6.19). Examples of these seven fundamental groups are shown in Table 6.1. A more extensive taxonomic survey of viral species is presented in Appendix 2.
Group I. Double-stranded DNA viruses such as the
herpes and smallpox viruses make their own DNA poly-

Group III:
Double-stranded RNA
Requires RNA-dependent
RNA polymerase to make
mRNA and genomic RNA.

Group II. Single-stranded DNA viruses such as canine
parvovirus require the host DNA polymerase to generate
the complementary DNA strand. The double-stranded
DNA can then be transcribed by host RNA polymerase.
Group III. Double-stranded RNA viruses require a
viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase to generate
messenger RNA by transcribing directly from the RNA
genome. Since the RNA polymerase is required immediately upon infection, such viruses package a viral RNA
polymerase with their genome before exiting the host
cell. A major class of double-stranded RNA viruses is
the reoviruses, including rotavirus, a cause of diarrhea
in children. Another reovirus has been engineered to
destroy human tumors without infecting normal cells.
This “oncolytic” reovirus, called Reolysin, is now in
clinical trials for cancer therapy.
Group IV. (+) sense single-stranded RNA viruses consist of a positive-sense (+) strand (the coding strand) that
can serve directly as mRNA to be translated to viral proteins. Replication of the RNA genome, however, requires
synthesis of the template (–) strand [complementary to
the (+) strand] by a viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase to form a double-stranded RNA intermediate.

210



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

Positive-sense (+) RNA viruses include enteroviruses
such as poliovirus, the coronaviruses, and the flaviviruses
that cause West Nile encephalitis and hepatitis C.
Group V. (–) sense single-stranded RNA viruses such
as influenza virus have genomes that consist of template,
or “negative-sense,” RNA. Thus, they need to package
a viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase for transcribing (–) RNA to (+) mRNA. The (–) strand RNA viral
genomes are often segmented; that is, they consist of
multiple separate linear chromosomes—a key factor in the
evolution of killer strains of influenza (see Section 11.2).
Group VI. Retroviruses, or RNA reverse-transcribing viruses, such as HIV and feline leukemia virus,
have genomes that consist of (+) strand RNA. Instead
of RNA polymerase, they package a reverse transcriptase, which transcribes the RNA into a double-stranded
DNA (for details, see Section 11.3). The doublestranded DNA is then integrated into the host genome,
where it directs the expression of the viral genes.
Group VII. Pararetroviruses, or DNA reversetranscribing viruses, have a replication cycle that
requires reverse transcriptase. For example, hepatitis B
virus (a hepadnavirus) first copies its double-stranded
DNA genomes into RNA, and then reverse-transcribes
the RNA to progeny DNA using a reverse transcriptase
packaged in the original virion. In contrast, plant pararetroviruses, such as cauliflower mosaic virus (CaMV, a
caulimovirus), generate an RNA intermediate that replicates using a reverse transcriptase made by the host
cell. Many plant genomes include a gene for reverse
transcriptase. Cauliflower mosaic virus is of enormous agricultural significance for its use as a vector to
construct pesticide-resistant food crops.

Molecular Evolution of Viruses

The phylogeny, or genetic relatedness, of viruses can be
determined within families. For example, the herpes family includes double-stranded DNA viruses that cause several human and animal diseases, such as chickenpox,
oral and genital herpes infection, and respiratory and
genital infections in horses. Herpes genomes consist of
double-stranded DNA, 120–220 kilobases (kb) encoding
about 70–200 genes; an example is that of varicella-zoster
virus, the causative agent of chickenpox (Fig. 6.20A). The
genome includes two “unique” segments of genes, one
long and one short (U L and US), joined by two inverted
repeats (IRs). Other herpes genomes share similar structure, though they differ in gene order and IR position.
The relatedness of different herpes viruses that evolved
from a common ancestor can be measured by comparing

A. Varicella-zoster virus (VZV) genome (120 kb)
Inverted repeat (IR)
IR
US
Unique long region (UL )

61 genes

10 genes

B.

Alpha herpes viruses
Varicella-zoster (VZV)
100

Equine herpes (EHV-1)
77

Equine herpes (EHV-4)
Herpes simplex (HSV-1)
Herpes simplex (HSV-2)

Root
(common ancestor)

Beta herpes viruses
Cytomegalovirus

100
73

Herpes 6 (HHV-6)
Herpes 7 (HHV-7)

90

Gamma herpes viruses
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)
Herpesvirus saimiri (HVS-2)

87
82

Equine herpes (EHV-2)
Murine herpes (MHV-68)

FIGURE 6.20



Phylogeny of herpes viral genomes.

A. Genome structure of human varicella-zoster virus (VZV), the
causative agent of chickenpox. B. Phylogeny of human and animal
herpes viruses, based on whole-genome sequence analysis comparing clusters of orthologous groups of genes. Numbers measure
percentage of DNA sequence shared by two divergent genomes.

their genome sequences. Comparison is based on orthologous
genes, or orthologs. Orthologs are genes of common ancestry
in two genomes that share the same function (a topic discussed
in Chapter 8). For cellular organisms, we often use the ribosomal RNA gene sequences to measure relatedness. Viruses
have no ribosomal RNA, but closely related viruses share other
orthologous genes. In pairs of orthologs, the amount of difference in sequence correlates approximately with the time following divergence from a common ancestor (a topic discussed
in Chapter 17). A tree of genomic divergence (or phylogeny)
was devised for herpes viruses (Fig. 6.20B). The comparison
of all gene pairs places herpes strains into three related classes
designated alpha, beta, and gamma (Fig. 6.20B). The alpha
class includes human varicella-zoster virus and the oral and
genital herpes viruses (HSV-1 and HSV-2), as well as equine

CHAPTER 6

herpes virus. The beta class includes cytomegalovirus, a common cause of congenital infections (present at birth), as well as
two lesser-known viruses. The gamma class includes EpsteinBarr virus (the cause of infectious mononucleosis), as well as
several viruses of animals. Divergence of phylogenetic trees is
discussed further in Chapter 17.
Gene comparison generates a tree for closely related
viruses such as herpes. But how can we assess phylogeny
of more distantly related viruses that share no genes—
and even have genomes of different kinds of nucleic acids?
Unlike cells, viruses do not possess genes common to all
species. Furthermore, viral genomes are highly mosaic; that
is, they evolved from multiple sources. Mosaic genomes
result from recombination or reassortment of chromosomes from different viruses coinfecting a host.
In some cases, phylogeny is inconsistent with the fundamental chemical composition of the genome. For example,
Siphophage (dsDNA) phage k

Gram-positive
hosts

Lactobacillus or
Streptococcus

Gram-negative
hosts

Lactobacillus
Podophage

Plectrophage
(ssDNA)

Gram-positive
bacillus

Myophage Gram(dsDNA)
negative
phage T4 enteric

Mycobacteria

Gramnegative

Gramnegative
E. coli

Siphophage



Microphage (ssDNA)
phage 𝛟X174



211

some DNA bacteriophages actually share closer ancestry
with RNA bacteriophages than they do with DNA animal
viruses. This is because two or more viruses can coinfect a
cell and exchange genetic components. Thus, the genomic
content of a virus can be influenced by its host range.
Thought Question

6.5 How could viruses with different kinds of genomes
(RNA versus DNA) combine and share genetic content in their
progeny?

To Summarize


The bacteriophage proteomic tree.

Comparison of all proteins encoded by each genome predicts
distinct groups of bacteriophages. Within each group, there are
subgroups of phages with shared hosts, since sharing of hosts
facilitates genetic recombination and horizontal transfer of genes
between different phages. Source: Based on Forest Rohwer and Rob A.
Edwards. 2002. J. Bacteriol. 184:4529.

VIRUSES

As more viral genomes are sequenced, classification methods have been devised to take advantage of sequence information without requiring gene products common to all species.
One promising approach is that of proteomics, analysis of
the proteome, the proteins encoded by genomes (discussed
in Chapter 10). Proteins are identified through biochemical
analysis of virus particles and through bioinformatic analysis of protein sequences encoded in the genomes. Proteomic
analysis is useful for distantly related viruses because protein sequences often show relatedness that is obscured in
the nucleic acid sequence by silent mutations (discussed in
Chapter 9). Even if only a few proteins are shared by any two
viruses, statistical comparison of all proteins in a set of viral
species reveals underlying degrees of relatedness.
Inophage
An example of virus classification based on pro(ssDNA)
teomic analysis is that of the “proteomic tree” of bactephage M13
riophages proposed by Forest Rohwer and Rob Edwards
(Fig. 6.21). Unlike earlier trees based on a single common
Gramgene sequence, the proteomic tree is based on the statistinegative
hosts
cal comparison of phage protein sequences predicted by
Leviphage
the genomic DNA of many different species of phages.
(ssRNA)
The proteomic analysis predicts major evolutionary
categories of phage species that share common host
bacteria. For example, phages that infect GramE. coli
negative hosts will show more genetic commonality with each other than with phages that infect
Gram-positive hosts. Shared hosts have a signifiGramcant impact on phage evolution because coinfecting
negative
a host enables phages to exchange genes.

Podophage
(dsDNA)
phage T7

FIGURE 6.21







Viruses contain infective genomes of RNA or DNA.
A viral genome may be single- or double-stranded,
linear or circular.
Giant viruses have 200–2,000 genes and may have
evolved from intracellular parasitic cells.
Smaller viral genomes comprise fewer than ten genes.
Such viruses might have evolved from cell parts.

212











PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

Classification of viruses includes genome composition,
virion structure, and host range.
The Baltimore virus classification emphasizes the
form of the genome (DNA or RNA, single- or doublestranded) and the route to generate messenger RNA.
Phylogeny of closely related viruses can be calculated by
comparing all related pairs of genes from the viral genomes.
Proteomic classification of distantly related viruses
includes information from all viral proteins. Statistical
analysis reveals common descent of viruses infecting a
common host.

6.4

Bacteriophages:
The Gut Virome

Viruses display a remarkable diversity of ways to replicate
within a host cell. Here, we discuss the key modes of bacteriophage replication, and their consequences for host cells.
We focus on the best-known bacteriophages, those of the
mammalian intestinal community. Gut bacteriophages, or
“coliphages,” are part of a microbial community that modulates human digestion, the immune
system, and mental health.
Historically, bacteriophages have
provided some of the most fundamental insights in molecular biology.
In 1952, Alfred Hershey and Martha
Chase showed that the transmission
LPS
of DNA by a bacteriophage to a host
cell led to the production of progeny bacteriophages, thus confirming
that DNA is the hereditary material.
OmpF
In 1950, André Lwoff and Antoinette Gutman showed that a phage
genome could integrate itself within a
bacterial genome—the first recognition that genes could enter and leave
a cell’s genome. Other fundamental
concepts of the genetic unit and the
basis of gene transcription came from
experiments on bacteriophages, as
discussed in Chapters 7–9.

Bacteriophages
Infect a Host Cell

To commence an infection cycle,
bacteriophages need to contact
and attach to the surface of an

appropriate host cell. Contact and attachment are mediated
by cell-surface receptors, proteins on the host cell surface
that are specific to the host species and that bind to a specific viral component. A cell-surface receptor for a virus is
actually a protein with an important function for the host
cell, but the virus has evolved to take advantage of the protein. For example, phages that infect Salmonella enterica
can use outer membrane proteins such as OmpF or TolC,
which is part of a drug efflux complex (Fig. 6.22). Alternatively, a phage might bind to LPS (lipopolysaccharide; see
Chapter 3). The phage-receptor binding is usually highly
specific; a bacterium can evolve resistance through singleamino-acid mutations in its protein. The lambda phage
receptor protein (maltose porin) of E. coli is described in
Chapter 11.
Most bacteriophages (phages) inject only their genome
into a cell through the cell envelope, thus avoiding the
need for the capsid to penetrate the molecular barrier of the
cell wall. For example, the phage T4 virion has a sheath that
contracts, bringing the head near the cell surface to inject
). The pressure of the spooled
its DNA (Fig. 6.23A
DNA—as high as 50 atmospheres (atm)—is released,

FIGURE 6.22

 Phages bind Salmonella
receptors. Various kinds of host molecules can

serve as a phage receptor, such as LPS components,
membrane proteins and complexes (OmpF and TolC),
and flagellar proteins.

Flagellar
motor

Flagellar filament
Hook-assembly
proteins

TolC

Flagellar hook
L-ring
TolC
P-ring
AcrA

AcrB

MS-ring

C-ring

± DNA
A. Phage T4 DNA insertion
Sheath contracts,
and viral DNA enters
bacterium.

B. Phage lambda reproductive cycle
Host genome

Phage attaches to host
cell and inserts DNA.

Phage T7 virion

W. MARGOLIN, ET AL. 2013. SCIENCE 339:576.

Phage T4 attaches
to bacterium.

Outer membrane
Cell wall

Inner membrane

Phage
particle

Lysogeny

Linear dsDNA cyclizes
to circular DNA.

Phage DNA integrates
into host genome to form
prophage.

Lytic cycle
Cell synthesizes
capsid proteins.

Phage recombines by re-joining
the ends of its genome and
enters the lytic cycle.

Cell replicates phage
DNA. DNA is packaged
into capsids.

Stress induces excision
of phage DNA.

Integrated phage DNA
reproduces with host genome.

Phage lyses cell, and
progeny phages are
released.

FIGURE 6.23



Bacteriophage reproduction: lysis and lysog-

Integrated phage DNA replicates
with host genome.

eny. A. Phage T4 attaches to the cell surface by its tail fibers and then
contracts to inject its DNA. The empty capsid remains outside as a “ghost.”
Inset: Cryo-EM model of phage T7 injecting DNA. B. Lysis occurs when the phage genome reproduces progeny phage particles, as many as
possible, and then lyses the cell to release them. In phage lambda, lysogeny can occur when the phage genome integrates itself into that of
the host. The phage genome is replicated along with that of the host cell. The phage DNA, however, can direct its own excision by expressing a
site-specific DNA recombinase. This excised phage chromosome then initiates a lytic cycle.

214



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

expelling the DNA into the cell. After the genome has been
inserted, the phage capsid remains outside, attached to the
cell surface. The empty capsid is termed a “ghost” because
of its pale appearance in an electron micrograph.
The lytic cycle. A lytic cycle of replication generates a large

number of progeny phages and then lyses the defunct cell.
The lytic replication cycle requires these steps:


Host recognition and attachment. A phage particle
must contact a receptor molecule and adhere to a host cell.



Genome entry. The phage genome must enter the host
cell and gain access to the cell’s machinery for gene
expression.



Assembly of phages. Phage components must be expressed
and assembled. Components usually “self-assemble”; that
is, the joining of their parts is favored thermodynamically.



Exit and transmission. Progeny phages must exit the
host cell, and then reach new host cells to infect.

In a lytic cycle, when a phage particle injects its genome
into a cell, it immediately reproduces as many progeny
phage particles as possible (Fig. 6.23B). The process of
reproduction involves replicating the phage genome, as well
as expressing phage mRNA to make enzymes and capsid
proteins. Some phages, such as T4, digest the host DNA to
increase the efficiency of phage production. Phage particles
assemble, and the host cell lyses, releasing progeny phages.
The phage adsorbs to its host receptor and inserts its
double-stranded DNA into the host cytoplasm. The phage
genes are then expressed by the host cell RNA polymerase
and ribosomes. “Early genes” are expressed early in the
lytic cycle. Other phage-expressed proteins then work
together with the cellular enzymes and ribosomes to replicate the phage genome and produce phage capsid proteins.
The capsid proteins self-assemble into capsids and package
the phage genomes—a process that takes place in defined
stages, like a factory assembly line. At last, a “late gene”
from the phage genome expresses an enzyme that lyses the
host cell wall, releasing the mature virions. Lysis is also
referred to as a burst, and the number of virus particles
released is called the burst size.
Lysogeny. A temperate phage, such as phage lambda, can
infect and lyse cells like a virulent phage, but it also has an
alternative pathway: to integrate its genome as a prophage
(see Fig. 6.23B). The phage is said to “lysogenize” the
host, leading to a state called lysogeny. Phage lambda has
a linear genome of double-stranded DNA, which circularizes upon entry into the cell. The circularized genome then
recombines into that of the host by site-specific recombination of DNA. In site-specific recombination, a recombinase enzyme aligns the phage genome with the host DNA

and exchanges the DNA backbone linkages with those of
the host genome. (This process of DNA backbone recombination is explained in Chapter 9.) The DNA recombination event thus integrates the phage genome into that of
the host. Now integrated, the phage genome is called a
prophage. The presence of the prophage prevents further
infection (superinfection) by other virions of the same type.
In lysogeny, the prophage DNA is replicated along with
that of the host cell as the host reproduces (Fig. 6.23B).
The host gains the benefit of resistance to superinfection.
Implicit in the term “lysogeny,” however, is the ability of
such a strain to generate a lytic burst of phage. For a lysogen to enter lysis, the prophage directs its own excision
from the host genome by an intramolecular process of sitespecific recombination. The two ends of the phage genome
exchange their DNA linkages so as to come apart from the
host DNA, which now closes its circle with the prophage
removed. As the phage DNA exits the host genome, it circularizes and initiates a lytic cycle, destroying the host cell
and releasing phage particles.
How does a lysogen “decide” to reactivate and begin a
lytic cycle? The decision between lysogeny and lysis is determined by proteins that bind DNA and repress the transcription of genes for virus replication (discussed in Chapter 11).
Exit from lysogeny into lysis can occur at random, or it can
be triggered by environmental stress such as UV light, which
damages the cell’s DNA. The regulatory switch of lysogeny
responds to environmental cues indicating the likelihood
that the host cell will survive and continue to propagate the
phage genome. If a cell’s growth is strong, it is more likely
that the phage DNA will remain inactive, whereas events
that threaten host survival will trigger a lytic burst. Similarly,
in animal viral infections such as herpes, an environmental
stress triggers reactivation of a virus that was dormant within
cells (a latent infection). Reactivation of a latent herpes infection results in painful outbreaks of skin lesions.
During the exit from lysogeny, the virus can acquire
host genes and pass them on to other host cells. The process of transferring host genes is known as transduction.
Sometimes a transducing bacteriophage picks up a bit of
host genome and transfers it to a new host cell. In another
kind of transduction, the entire phage genome is replaced
by host DNA packaged in the phage capsid, resulting in
a virus particle that transfers only host DNA. Host DNA
transferred by viruses can become permanently incorporated into the infected host genome, providing genes that
express products useful to the host (Table 6.2).
The mechanisms of phage-mediated transduction are
discussed in Chapter 9. In natural environments, phage
transduction mediates much of the recombination of
bacterial genomes. In the laboratory, the ability of phages
to transfer genes provided some of the first vectors for
recombinant DNA technology (see Chapter 12).

CHAPTER 6



VIRUSES



215

TABLE 6.2-Integrated Viral Genomes that Provide Host Traits
Prophage
(host infected)

Bacterial product
from prophage gene

Human endogenous
retrovirus (HERV)

Human protein or regulator provided
by HERV

Phage C1
(Clostridium botulinum)

Botulnum toxin
(c1)

HERV-W

Syncytin-1 (retroviral Env protein; placental fusion)

Beta phage (Corynebacterium
diphtheriae)

Diphtheria toxin
(tox)

HERV-FRD

Syncytin-2 (retroviral Env protein; placental
fusion)

Lambda
(E. coli O157:H7)

Cell envelope protein
(bor)

HERV

INSL4 (insulin-like protein 4; placental
development)

Phage 933
(E. coli O157:H7)

Shiga toxin
(stx)

HERV-E

MID1 (midline development; prevents Opitz
syndrome)

Epsilon 34
(Salmonella enterica)

LPS synthesis
(rfb)

HERV-E

Apolipoprotein C1 (liver function)

Epsilon 34
(Salmonella enterica)

Type III secreted toxin
(sopE)

HERV-E

Endothelin type-B receptor (placenta function)

TSST-1
(Staphylococcus aureus)

Toxic shock syndrome
(speA)

HERV-L

Beta-1,3-galactosyltransferase (colon and mammary
gland function)

CTXphi (Vibrio cholerae)

Cholera toxin
(ctxAB)

LINE-1

ATRN (soluble attractin; modulates inflammation)

The slow-release cycle. A slow-release replication cycle differs from lysis and lysogeny in that phage particles reproduce without destroying the host cell (Fig. 6.24). Slow
release is performed by fi lamentous phages such as phage
M13. In slow-release replication, the single-stranded circular DNA of M13 serves as a template to synthesize a
double-stranded intermediate. The double-stranded intermediate slowly generates single-stranded progeny genomes,
which are packaged by supercoiling and coated with capsid proteins. The phage particles then extrude through the
cell envelope without lysing the cell. The host cell continues to reproduce, though more slowly than uninfected
cells do, because many of its resources are diverted to virus
production.

Thought Question

+ DNA
Slow release
Phage inserts
single-stranded DNA.
Phage
particle

Host genome

Phage DNA forms a
double-stranded circle.
Replicative
form
Cell replicates circular,
single-stranded DNA.

6.6 What are the relative advantages and disadvantages

(to a virus) of the slow-release strategy, compared with the
strategy of a temperate phage, which alternates between lysis
and lysogeny?

FIGURE 6.24  Bacteriophage replication cycle: slow
release. In the slow-release replication cycle, a filamentous phage
produces phage particles without lysing the cell. The host continues to reproduce itself, but more slowly than uninfected cells do
because many of its resources are being used to make phages.

Phages assemble and exit
without lysis.

While phages
reproduce and
exit cell, the cell
reproduces
slowly.

216



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

SPECIAL TOPIC 6.1- $Virus to the Rescue
When your environment heats up, what can help you survive?
Viruses can, according to Marilyn Roossinck, at the Samuel
Roberts Noble Foundation in Oklahoma, and her student
Regina Redman. Redman and Roossinck identified a mysterious virus in a fungus, Curvularia protuberata, which grows
associated with a panic grass, Dichanthelium lanuginosum, in
Yellowstone National Park. The fungus, C. protuberata, grows
as an “endophyte” within the vasculature of the grass—a
highly common form of symbiosis (discussed in Chapter 21).
What is remarkable about this fungus-plant pair is that each
partner confers thermal tolerance (heat resistance) on the
other (Fig. 1). Together, the plant and fungus grow at temperatures as high as 65°C—which commonly occur in the vicinity
of Yellowstone’s thermal springs. Separately, the fungus and
plant each grow at temperatures no higher than 38°C, typical
of their species.
A.

Roossinck knew that fungi harbor many diverse viruses,
and that viruses often mediate fungus-plant interactions.
She hypothesized that a fungal virus might be involved in the
thermotolerance. To hunt for a virus, she used northern blot
(probing RNA transcripts with labeled DNA) to analyze the
fungal RNA for small double-stranded segments (dsRNA) typical of fungal viruses (double-stranded RNA; Table 6.1, Group
III). The northern blot revealed two viral dsRNAs that form the
genome of a previously unknown virus. Roossinck ultimately
named the virus Curvularia thermal tolerance virus (CThTV).
But does thermal tolerance require the virus? To answer
this question, Roossinck had to isolate CThTV virions from
the virus’s fungal host (Fig. 2A). She then conducted experiments comparing plants colonized by fungi with and without
the virus. She found that only the fungi infected with CThTV
could enable the plant Dichanthelium lanuginosum to grow
B.

Virus

65˚C

Contains fungus

Plant

FIGURE 1

Fungus
Curvularia
protuberata

COURTESY OF SYMBIOGENICS

No fungus

Plants colonized by virus-infected fungus survive heat shock. A. A Yellowstone grass colonized
by fungi harboring a virus grows taller than grass lacking fungi. B. Regina Redman, now at Symbiogenics, discovered the
role of the fungal virus in thermal resistance. Source: Modified from Marilyn Roossinck. 2011. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 9:99.


Integrated Viruses as Host Cell Parts

Many prophages and endogenous viruses function as part
of their host cell. Table 6.2 shows examples of prophages
that express virulence genes for pathogenic bacteria—a
benefit to the pathogen, enabling it to better colonize the
host animal. For example, phage C1 in Clostridium botulinum expresses the peptide botulinum toxin. This toxin
causes the paralysis associated with botulism (and is also
the basis of the Botox cosmetic treatment.) In Corynebacterium diphtheriae, the cause of diphtheria, the diphtheria
toxin is expressed by beta phage. Other virulence factors
(proteins that enhance disease) expressed by prophages
include envelope proteins that help defend the bacterium
from the immune system.

Analogous to bacterial prophages, many human genes
and gene control elements have evolved from human
viruses, particularly human endogenous retroviruses
(HERVs). Retroviruses are a category of virus that includes
HIV, the cause of AIDS (discussed in Section 6.5, and in
greater detail in Chapter 11). HERVs are reverse-transcribing RNA viruses whose DNA copies became permanently
fixed in our chromosomes. For example, placental proteins
called “syncytin” mediate cell fusion during an early stage
of placental development, allowing the fused syncytium to
implant in the uterine lining and access the maternal blood
supply. Two genes for syncytin evolved from HERV genes
encoding retroviral envelope proteins. The details of the
remarkable story of endogenous retroviruses—and the

CHAPTER 6

at high temperature. Remarkably, the virus-infected fungus could also confer thermal tolerance on tomato plants
(Fig. 2B). Thus, the virus-fungus mutualism may confer a
specific thermotolerance property on various plant species—
including plants important for agriculture.
Redman has now joined the Symbiogenics agricultural
research firm, to extend her work using endophytic fungi to
protect commercial rice plants from heat and salt stress. The
viral components of these fungus-plant mutualisms are as
yet unknown, but they offer exciting prospects for sustaining
agriculture during climate change.

RESEARCH QUESTION



VIRUSES



217

reactive oxygen ions produced by the plant’s stress response
to high temperature. Can you propose an experiment to test
this hypothesis?
Márquez, Luis M., Regina S. Redman, Russell J. Rodriguez,
and Marilyn J. Roossinck. 2007. A virus in a fungus in a
plant: Three-way symbiosis required for thermal tolerance.
Science 315:513–515.
Redman, Regina S., Yong Ok Kim, Claire J. D. A. Woodward,
Chris Greer, Luis Espino, et al. 2011. Increased fitness of
rice plants to abiotic stress via habitat adapted symbiosis:
A strategy for mitigating impacts of climate change. PLoS
One 6:e14823.

Researchers hypothesize that the mechanism by which the
CThTV-infected fungus protects the plant is to inactivate the
A.

B.

LUIS M. MÁRQUEZ ET AL. 2007. SCIENCE 315:513.

100 nm

Fungus has virus

LUIS M. MÁRQUEZ ET AL. 2007. SCIENCE 315:513.

Tomato plants with fungus: 65ºC shock
No virus

FIGURE 2  Virus confers thermotolerance on tomato plants. A. Virus (CThTV) isolated from a fungus that confers thermotolerance. B. Tomato plants with fungus lacking virus (left) die after exposure at 65°C; with virus present (right), plants survive.

related story of retroviral gene therapy—are discussed in
Chapter 11.
The virus-host relationship often evolves in response to
environmental stress. The role of virus-host mutualism in
stressed plants offers exciting possibilities for agriculture
(see Special Topic 6.1).

Bacterial Defenses

In natural environments, viruses commonly outnumber
cellular microbes by tenfold or more. So how have host
cells evolved to defend themselves? Several remarkable
resistance mechanisms have evolved. Their molecular basis
is explained in greater detail in Chapters 7 and 9.

Genetic resistance. All bacteria acquire random mutations in
their genomes as they reproduce (see Chapters 7 and 9). When
attacked by bacteriophages, bacterial populations undergo
natural selection; mutants that happen to be harder to infect
will survive. Bacteria resist phage infection by expressing a
gene that encodes an altered host receptor protein, which fails
to bind the viral coat protein. Alternatively, a different cellular protein evolves to block phage binding to the receptor. An
evolutionary “arms race” ensues, in which phages may evolve
enzymes that cleave the host defense molecules.
Restriction endonucleases. Bacteria modify their DNA by

adding methyl groups to bases within certain sequences.
The bacteria then express restriction endonucleases,

218



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

enzymes that cleave DNA lacking the methylated patterns—which includes potential virus DNA (see Chapter 7). However, phage genomes composed of RNA or of
modified DNA (such as phage T4, discussed in Chapter 11)
escape cleavage by these enzymes.
CRISPR: a bacterial immune system. Amazingly, bacteria

possess an adaptive defense against viruses that is analogous to an immune system. (Adaptive immunity of humans
is presented in Chapter 24.) The bacterial adaptive defense
involves short DNA sequences homologous to DNA of
phages that could infect the cell. The sequences are called
clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats
(CRISPR). When a phage attacks a bacterium, if bacterial
enzymes succeed in destroying the phage DNA, they may
copy a tiny piece of it as a CRISPR segment, inserted as
a spacer at the head of a long line of about 30 CRISPR
sequences (Fig. 6.25).

Thought Question

6.7 How might a phage evolve resistance to the CRISPR host
defense (outlined in Fig. 6.25)?

Now the adapted host cell “remembers” infection by the
specific phage—along with many other previous phages
from previous infections that had inserted other spacers.
The next time the adapted host cell is attacked by the same
phage, all of its genomic CRISPR sequences are expressed
as RNA. The CRISPR RNA is cleaved into small sequences
(crRNA) containing one spacer from the original bacterial
DNA. The crRNA binds to the Cascade protein complex
(or Cas complex), which now detects phage DNA homologous to its virus-derived crRNA. The Cas-crRNA complex
proceeds to cleave the phage DNA, preventing phage replication. For more details of this exciting molecular defense
system, see Chapter 9.

The Gut Bacteriophage Community

How do bacteriophages impact microbial communities?
The best-understood phage community is that of the gut
virome. A virome is a community of viruses within a host
ecosystem (for example, the human or other animal intestinal tract). We present some of the major phage-host interactions within the human intestinal tract in Figure 6.26.
Note that this simplified diagram omits the viruses that

Cell membrane

Double-stranded
viral DNA

Viral DNA forms
new spacer.

Inactivation
of viral DNA

FIGURE 6.25

CRISPR
defense of bacterial
cell. A piece of phage DNA

Spacers



gets copied as a “spacer”
into the host genome. If the
bacterium survives infection,
later reinfection by the same
kind of phage causes transcription of the spacers into
CRISPR RNA. A processed
spacer (crRNA) joins the Cas
complex to recognize and
cleave the phage DNA.

Host bacterial DNA
Transcription
Targeting of
viral DNA

CAS-crRNA
complex

RNA

Processed crRNAs

CHAPTER 6

Ingested phages
and bacteria



VIRUSES



219

Peyer’s patch
(gut immune system)

Phage tranfers host
DNA (transduction).
Phage infects
host.

Phage may stimulate
the immune system.
Intestinal lumen contains
bacteria and phages.
Host population
distribution changes.

Lysogen
Lysogen

Lysogenized bacteria
have enhanced traits.

FIGURE 6.26



The gut bacteriophage community.

Lysogenized bacteria
express virulence
such as toxins.

Bacteriophages enter the intestine, where they infect
intestinal bacteria. Most intestinal bacteria carry prophages.
Phages also modulate the immune system.

infect human body cells; we focus here on the phages that
infect gut bacteria.
The human intestines contain a remarkably dense microbial community. Bacterial and archaeal cells are estimated
at 1011–1013 cells per gram, whereas phage particles are
estimated at 109 per gram. The phage count is likely underestimated, as it is based on detection by electron microscopy and plate counts of viability (discussed in Section 6.6).
In addition, more than half the genomes sequenced from
gut bacteria show lysogeny, commonly with several different types of prophage in a given genome. The prophages
may protect the gut bacteria from superinfection by some
of the many types of phages present in the gut.
The gut community receives continual influx of new
bacteria and phages, while shedding present members
(Fig. 6.26). When a new type of phage enters, what happens? If the phage encounters a susceptible host bacterium, it may undergo a lytic cycle, lysogeny, or slow release,
depending on the phage’s genetic program. Cell lysis may
have the effect of depopulating a dominant population of
the bacterial community. What is the result? One possible
result is intestinal “dysbiosis,” deterioration of health due

Excreted phages
and bacteria

to loss of health-enhancing bacteria. Another bacterial species, less healthy for the host, may increase in population.
But now, a different phage species (DNA shown red) may
depopulate the newly risen species, restoring equilibrium
in the community. Still other phages may transfer useful
genes from newcomer bacteria, such as genes encoding
enzymes to metabolize new kinds of food molecules.
Some prophages of pathogenic bacteria express virulence
factors, such as the Shiga toxin of Shigella and of E. coli
O157:H7 (Table 6.2). At the same time, research yields
intriguing evidence for phage effects that are positive:


Phages may limit the bacterial numbers to levels that
the human immune system can tolerate. Lysogenized
bacteria may use quorum sensing to detect host cell populations and “decide” whether to start a lytic cycle.



Phage particles may modulate immune system activity by suppressing T-cell activation and tumor formation
(T-cells are discussed in Chapter 24).



Phages may attack biofilms. Biofilms of pathogens such as
Pseudomonas aeruginosa may be eroded by phage infection.

220



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

The positive potential of bacteriophages has led researchers to investigate the engineering of phages for phage therapy. An idea dating back to the early twentieth century,
phage therapy was eclipsed by the rise of antibiotics. Today,
as we face growing antibiotic resistance in pathogens, we are
taking another look at therapeutic uses of bacteriophages
(Chapters 5 and 11).

To Summarize


Host cell-surface receptors mediate the attachment of
bacteriophages to a cell and confer host specificity.



Lytic cycle. A bacteriophage injects its DNA into a host
cell, where it utilizes host gene expression machinery to
produce progeny virions.



Lysogeny. Some bacteriophages can insert their genome
into that of the host cell, which then replicates the phage
genome along with its own. A lysogenic bacterium can
initiate a lytic cycle.



Gene transfer. Genes are transferred by phage processes
of transduction and lysogeny.



Slow release. Some bacteriophages use the host machinery to make progeny that bud from the cell slowly, slowing growth of the host without lysis.



Bacterial host defense. Bacteria have evolved several
forms of defense against bacteriophage infection, such as
altered receptor proteins, restriction endonucleases, and
CRISPR integration of phage DNA sequences.



The gut bacteriophage community includes phages that
infect, lyse, or lysogenize bacterial hosts. Gut phages impact
bacterial community structure, transfer genes among bacteria, and modulate the human gut immune system.

6.5

Animal and Plant Viruses

Animal and plant viruses solve problems similar to those
faced by bacteriophages: host attachment, genome entry and
gene expression, virion assembly, and virion release. The more
complex structure of eukaryotic cells, however, requires viral
replication cycles that are more complex. Viral reproduction
may involve intracellular compartments such as the nucleus or
secretory system and may depend on tissue and organ development in multicellular organisms. Studies of animal virus
replication reveal potential targets for antiviral drugs, such as
protease inhibitors for HIV (discussed in Chapter 11).

Note:

The virus replication cycles in this chapter are simplified.
For greater molecular detail of selected viruses, see Chapter 11.

Animal Viruses Show Tissue Tropism

Like bacteriophages, animal viruses evolve by the fitness
advantage of binding specific receptor proteins on their
host cell. An example of a human virus-receptor interaction is that of rhinovirus (see Table 6.1, Group IV),
which causes the common cold. R hinovirus attaches
to ICAM-1, a human glycoprotein (protein with sugar
chains) needed for intercellular adhesion (Fig. 6.27A).
The rhinovirus binds to a domain of ICAM-1 essential for ICAM-1 to bind a lymphocyte protein called
integrin.
The host receptors play a key role in determining the
host range, the group of host species permitting infection.
Within a host, receptor molecules can also determine the
viral tropism, or ability to infect a particular tissue type
within a host. Some viruses, such as Ebola virus, exhibit
broad tropism, infecting many kinds of host tissues,
whereas others, such as papillomavirus, show tropism for
only one type (in the case of papillomavirus, the epithelial tissues). Tropism may depend on the virus’s ability to
interact with the cytoplasm, or it may require the presence
of an appropriate host cell receptor protein that can bind
the viral surface attachment protein. For example, poliovirus infects only a specific class of human cells that display
the immunoglobulin-like receptor protein PVR. Mice lack
the PVR protein on their cell surfaces, and they are not
normally infected by polio, but when transgenic mice were
engineered to express PVR on their cells, the mice could
then be infected.
Tissue-specific receptors determine the host tropism
of avian influenza strain H5N1. The H5N1 strain infects
birds by binding to a glycoprotein receptor on cell surfaces of the avian respiratory tract. The H5N1 strain
requires a receptor protein with a sialic acid sugar chain
terminating in galactose linked at the C-3 position (alpha2,3), common in the avian respiratory tract. In humans,
however, most nasal upper respiratory cells have receptors with galactose linked at the C-6 position (alpha-2,6).
Human cells with the C-3 linkage are more common in
the lower respiratory tract. That is why avian influenza
H5N1 infection of humans has been relatively rare. However, only a small mutation in the H5N1 envelope protein could enable it to bind to the alpha-2,6 receptor more
effectively, allowing rapid transmission between humans.
The molecular basis of influenza infection is discussed
further in Chapter 11.

Thought Question

6.8 How could humans undergo natural selection for resis-

tance to rhinovirus infection? Is such evolution likely? Why or
why not?

CHAPTER 6

A. Host receptor binding



VIRUSES



221

B. Coated RNA genome enters cytoplasm
COO–

Cytoplasm

Measles virus (paramyxovirus)
Cell exterior
S

ICAM-1

Envelope protein
Receptor
protein

S

RNA genome coated by
nucleocapsid protein

S
S
S
S

Coated RNA
enters cytoplasm.

S
S
S S

Fibrinogen

Cytoplasm

S S

Cell membrane

NH 3+
Binding site for
lymphocyte integrin

Rhinovirus-binding site

C. Uncoating within endosomes

D. Uncoating at the nuclear membrane
Hepatitis C

Cytoplasm

Cytoplasm

Receptor
protein

Receptor
protein

Cell membrane

Lysosome fuses with
and acidifies endosome.
H+
H+

Cell membrane

Endosome
Endosome

H+

Viral envelope fuses with
endosome membrane.

Uncoating of
RNA genome

Docking onto
nuclear membrane

H+ (acidity)
Nucleus
Uncoating of
dsDNA genome

FIGURE 6.27

Adenovirus

Nuclear membrane

 Receptor binding and genome uncoating. A. Rhinovirus attaches to the intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM-1), a
glycoprotein required by the host cell to bind a lymphocyte integrin, a cell-surface matrix protein required for cell-cell adhesion. After binding
a specific receptor on the host cell membrane, an animal virus enters the cell, where its genome is uncoated. B. Measles virus: The coated RNA
genome enters the cytoplasm. C. Hepatitis C: The genome is uncoated within an endosome. D. Adenovirus: The genome is uncoated at the
nuclear membrane. Source: Part A based on J. Bella et al. 1998. PNAS 95:4140.

222



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

Genome entry and uncoating. Most animal viruses, unlike

bacteriophages, enter the host cell as virions. The contents
of the virion (genome and matrix proteins) may then interact with the cell in several different ways. For example, measles virus, a paramyxovirus, enters the cell by binding host
receptor proteins, thereby causing the viral envelope to fuse
with the host cell membrane (Fig. 6.27B). The measles
RNA genome coated by nucleocapsid proteins is released
directly into the cytoplasm. For other types of viruses, the
entire virion is internalized within an endosome. The internalized capsid undergoes uncoating, a process in which
the capsid comes apart, releasing the viral genome into the
cytoplasm. Uncoating is shown for a flavivirus, hepatitis C
virus (Fig. 6.27C). The hepatitis C virion is fi rst taken up
by endocytosis. In endocytosis, the cell membrane forms a
vesicle around the virion and engulfs it, forming an endocytic vesicle. The endocytic vesicle fuses with a lysosome,
whose acidity activates entry of the capsid into the cytoplasm. The capsid then comes apart, and the viral genome
is uncoated.
Yet other kinds of viruses, such as adenovirus, enter the
cell by endocytosis but require transport to the nucleus
(Fig. 6.27D). Following endocytosis and lysosome fusion,
the adenoviral genome loses some of its capsid proteins
(partial uncoating). A capsid protein then disrupts the
endocytic membrane, allowing the remaining capsid to
exit. The capsid then docks at a nuclear pore and injects
its DNA genome into the nucleus. The adenoviral DNA is

A.

replicated by its own adenoviral DNA polymerase (carried
in the virion), but it uses host nuclear histones for DNA
packing, as well as host transcription factors available in
the nucleus.

Animal Virus Replication Cycles

How does a virus replicate within an animal cell? The replication cycle of a given virus depends on the form of the
viral genome. A DNA genome can use some or all of the
host replication enzymes. An RNA genome, however, must
encode either an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase to generate an RNA template or a reverse transcriptase to generate a DNA template, in the case of retroviruses.
DNA virus replication. An example of a double-stranded
DNA virus is human papillomavirus (HPV) (see Table 6.1,
Group I), the cause of genital warts (Fig. 6.28A). HPV
is the most common sexually transmitted disease in the
United States and one of the most common worldwide.
Certain strains infect the skin, whereas others infect the
mucous membranes through genital or anal contact (sexual
transmission). Like phage lambda, papillomavirus has an
active reproduction cycle and a dormant cycle in which the
viral genome integrates into that of the host.
HPV initially infects basal epithelial cells (Fig. 6.28B).
In the basal cells, papilloma virions enter the cytoplasm by
receptor binding and membrane fusion. The virion then

B.

KEN GREER/VISUALS UNLIMITED

1. HPV infects basal
cells, where it remains
dormant.

2. Keratinocytes
differentiate; virus
replication is activated.

± DNA

3. Shedding cells
release HPV virions.

HPV integration into host
genome may transform
cells into cancer.

FIGURE 6.28

Human papillomavirus. A. Certain strains of human papillomavirus (HPV) cause warts on the genitals or anus.
B. HPV infects basal epithelial cells, where the DNA uncoats but remains dormant. As cells differentiate, new virions are synthesized and released by shedding cells. Some HPV proteins transform host cells into cancer cells.


CHAPTER 6



VIRUSES



223

dsDNA virus
Receptor protein
Epithelial cell
Genome is
uncoated.
Nuclear pore
Host RNA
polymerase

Transcription

mRNAs

DNA
replication

mRNAs

Translation

Host DNA
polymerase
Capsid
proteins
Assembly
Nucleus

Only shedding
epithelial cells
release virions.

FIGURE 6.29  Papillomavirus life
cycle. HPV, a double-stranded DNA
virus, enters the cytoplasm, where the
protein coat disintegrates. The viral
DNA enters the nucleus for replication
and transcription by host polymerases.

Progeny
virions

undergoes uncoating via disintegration of the protein capsid or coat, releasing its circular, double-stranded genome
(Fig. 6.29). The uncoated viral genome enters the nucleus,
where it is replicated by the host DNA polymerase and
transcribed by the host RNA polymerase. The viral mRNA
molecules then return to the cytoplasm for translation of
capsid proteins, which return to the nucleus for assembly
of virions.
The process of HPV reproduction is complicated by
the developmental progression of basal cells into keratinocytes (mature epithelial cells), and ultimately cells to be
shed or sloughed off from the surface (see Fig. 6.28B).

Viral replication is largely inhibited until the basal cells
start to differentiate into keratinocytes. Host cell differentiation induces the viral DNA to replicate and undergo
transcription by host polymerases. The mRNA transcripts
then exit the nuclear pores, as do host mRNAs, for translation in the cytoplasm. The translated capsid proteins,
however, return to the nucleus for assembly of the virion.
Nuclear virion assembly is typical of DNA viruses (with
the exception of poxviruses, which replicate entirely in the
cytoplasm).
How do HPV virions disseminate, and how may they
cause cancer? As the keratinocytes containing HPV complete differentiation, the cells start to come apart and are
shed from the epithelial surface. Cells release HPV virions
during this shedding process. But in the basal cells, HPV has
an alternative pathway of integrating its genome into that
of the host (analogous to phage lysogeny). The integrated
genome can transform host cells into cancer cells. Cells
are transformed to cancer through increased expression of
viral oncogenes (cancer-causing genes; see eTopic 26.1). The
oncogenes inhibit the expression of host tumor suppressor
genes. Certain HPV strains are more likely to cause cancer
than others. The most common strains are preventable by
the Gardasil vaccine.
RNA virus replication. The picornaviruses include poliovirus, the cause of paralytic poliomyelitis; and rhinoviruses,
which cause the common cold (see Table 6.1, Group IV).
Picornavirus genomes contain (+) strand RNA, allowing
the virus to replicate entirely in the cytoplasm, without any
DNA intermediates.
A picornavirus binds to a surface receptor, such as
ICAM-1 for rhinovirus or the PVR receptor for poliovirus. The (+) strand RNA is uncoated by insertion through
the cell membrane into the cytoplasm—much as a bacteriophage inserts its genome into a cell (Fig. 6.30). The role
of endocytosis is debated; poliovirus requires no endocytosis, but the rhinovirus genome may require endocytosis and
low-pH induction.
After uncoating, a gene in the picornavirus RNA is
translated by host ribosomes to make RNA-dependent
RNA polymerase. The polymerase uses the viral RNA
template to make (–) strand RNA. The (–) strand RNA
then serves as a template for other viral mRNAs, as well
as for progeny genomic (+) RNA. These RNA molecules
are synthesized within virus-induced vesicles or replication complexes formed from the endoplasmic reticulum. Capsid proteins are synthesized by host ribosomes,
and the capsids self-assemble in the cytoplasm. Virions
then assemble at the cell membrane and are released by
subverting lysosomes, which attempt to digest them.
For greater detail of the poliovirus replication cycle,
see eTopic 11.3.

224



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

(+) RNA genome

+ RNA

Reverse
transcriptase

RNA
genome

+ RNA

Receptor
protein
(+) RNA genome
is inserted into
cytoplasm.

DNA

Envelope
protein
Virion binds
receptor protein.

Nucleus
Uncoating of envelope
releases capsid.

+

RNA-dependent
RNA polymerase
Viral (+) RNA is
translated to make
RNA-dependent
RNA polymerase.

ER

Uncoating of capsid releases
(+) RNA and viral reverse
transcriptase.

+
+

RT Reverse transcriptase

+

dsDNA copy of genome

(–) RNA
synthesis

Viral-induced
vesicle from ER

Capsid
proteins

Translation yields
viral proteins.

dsDNA integrates
into host genome.

–
+ RNA

(+) RNA
synthesis

RT
Host RNA
Pol II

Assembly +

Host RNA polymerase
transcribes viral DNA.

Progeny
virions

Glycoproteins

Capsid
proteins
Assembly

FIGURE 6.30

 Picornavirus life cycle. A picornavirus inserts
its (+) strand RNA into the cell. Reproduction occurs entirely in the
cytoplasm. A key step is the early translation of a viral gene to make
RNA-dependent RNA polymerase.

Budding

FIGURE 6.31

Note that other kinds of RNA viruses, such as influenza
virus, encapsidate a (–) strand genome. In this case, the
(–) strand must serve as the template to generate mRNA,
as well as a (+) secondary template for (–) strand progeny
genomes. Influenza virus replication includes other interesting molecular complications, discussed in Chapter 11.
RNA retroviruses. Retroviruses include human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), the causative agent of AIDS;
and feline leukemia virus (FeLV), the cause of feline leukemia, a disease that commonly affl icts domestic cats (see
Table 6.1, Group VI). A retrovirus such as HIV uses a
reverse transcriptase to make a DNA copy of its RNA
genome (Fig. 6.31). Instead of being translated from
an early gene, the reverse transcriptase is actually carried

 Retrovirus life cycle. A retrovirus such as
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) uses reverse transcriptase
to copy its RNA into double-stranded DNA. The DNA then enters
the nucleus to recombine in the host genome, where a host RNA
polymerase generates viral mRNA and viral genomic RNA.

within the virion, bound to the RNA genome with a primer
in place. The virion contains two (+) strand RNA copies of
the HIV genome, each carrying its own reverse transcriptase. Virions infect helper T cells and other lymphocytes of
the active immune system (discussed in Chapter 24). After
uncoating in the cytoplasm, the viral RNA is copied into
double-stranded DNA.
The DNA copy then enters the nucleus, where a viral
integrase enzyme integrates the DNA into the host genome.
To generate virions, a host RNA polymerase transcribes the

CHAPTER 6

viral genome into viral mRNA and viral genomic RNA.
The reverse transcriptase has a high error rate, generating
slightly different versions of the virus—some of which can
evade host defenses and antiviral drugs. The viral mRNA
reenters the cytoplasm for translation to produce coat proteins, reverse transcriptase, and envelope proteins. The
coat proteins are transported by the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) to the cell membrane, where virions self-assemble
and bud out. Alternatively, a retrovirus may transmit from
cell to cell through cytoplasmic nanotubes (introduced in
Chapter 3), which avoid viral destruction by the immune
system.
At a certain point, infected cells can suddenly begin to
generate large numbers of virions, destroying the immune
system. The cause of accelerated reproduction is poorly
understood, although it involves cytokines released under
stress conditions such as poor health or pregnancy. HIV
replication is activated via protein regulators encoded by the
virus. The full process of HIV reproduction is described in
Chapter 11.

Thought Question

6.9 From the standpoint of a virus, what are the advantages

and disadvantages of replication by the host polymerase, compared with using a polymerase encoded by its own genome?

Oncogenic viruses. As many as 20% of human cancers are

caused by oncogenic viruses, such as Epstein-Barr virus
(which causes lymphomas) and hepatitis C virus (which
causes liver cancer). (Hepatitis C replication is discussed
in eTopic 11.4.) When these viruses infect a cell, instead of
destroying it the virus may transform the cell to divide and
grow out of control. For a virus, the advantage of cancer
transformation is that it expands the population of infected
cells that produce virus particles, or that replicate a viral
genome hidden within a host chromosome.
How do oncogenic viruses cause cancer? Several different mechanisms enable different types of viruses to
transform normal host cells to proliferate abnormally and
form tumors.




Oncogenes. A retrovirus such as feline leukemia virus
(FeLV) may carry an oncogene, which can transform the
host cells. Usually an oncogene encodes an abnormal
form of a host protein that controls cell proliferation.
Genome integration. Certain DNA viruses, such as
human papillomavirus, can integrate their genome
into a host chromosome. The integrated viral genome
expresses proteins that stimulate host cell division and
may ultimately lead to growth of tumors.





VIRUSES



225

Cell cycle control. Oncogenic viruses such as papillomaviruses express oncogenes for proteins that interact
with cell cycle controls and can stimulate uncontrolled
growth.

Viral capacities for gene transfer and host genome control may be manipulated artificially and used for gene therapy. In fact, some of the most dangerous viruses, such as
HIV, are being engineered to make nonvirulent gene delivery devices (discussed in Section 11.4).
Chronic viral infections. Some human viruses appear in

our bodies indefi nitely, causing either mild disease or
none. For example, anelloviruses commonly appear in
our blood plasma, without known disease. Children frequently shed enteroviruses (viruses of the intestinal tract,
related to poliovirus) with no known effects. Some evidence supports the idea that low-level chronic viral infections might actually enhance the function of our immune
system.

Plant Virus Replication Cycles

All kinds of plants are subject to viral infection. Plant
viruses pose enormous challenges to agriculture, especially
where the concentrated growth of a single strain of food
crop (monoculture) provides ideal conditions for a virus
to spread.
Plant virus entry to host cells. In contrast to animal
viruses and bacteriophages, plant viruses infect cells by
mechanisms that do not involve specific membrane receptors. The reason may be that plant cell membranes are covered by thick cell walls impenetrable to virion uptake or
genome insertion. Thus, the entry of plant viruses usually requires mechanical transmission, nonspecific access
through physical damage to tissues, such as abrasions of
the leaf surface caused by a feeding insect. Mechanical
transmission of plant viruses is limited by the cell wall.
Most plant viruses gain entry to cells by one of three
routes:


Contact with damaged tissues. Viruses such as tobacco
mosaic virus appear to require nonspecific entry into
broken cells.



Transmission by an animal vector. Insects and nematodes transmit many kinds of plant viruses. For example,
the geminiviruses are inoculated into cells by planteating insects such as aphids, beetles, and grasshoppers.



Transmission through seed. Some plant viruses enter
the seed and infect the next generation.

An economically important plant virus is the potyvirus called plum pox virus, a major pathogen of plums,

PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL
C.

B.
SCOTT BAUER, AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH SERVICE, USDA

FREDERICK E. GILDOW, PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIVERSITY

A.

MARINA BARBA, ISTITUTO SPERIMENTALE PER LA PATOLOGIA VEGETALE



FREDERICK E. GILDOW, PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIVERSITY

226

D.

FIGURE 6.32

 Plum pox is caused by potyvirus. A. Potyvirus, a filamentous (+) strand RNA virus, approximately 800 nm in length
(TEM). B. Potyvirus is transmitted by aphids, which suck the plant sap and release the virus into the damaged tissues. C. Streaking of flowers
caused by potyvirus infection. D. Ring-shaped pockmarks appear on the infected fruit.

peaches, and other stone fruits. Plum pox virus, a Group
IV (+) strand RNA virus, is transmitted by aphids
(Fig. 6.32). Following infection, the spread of the virus
generates streaked leaves and flowers, as well as ringshaped pockmarks on the surfaces of the fruit and of the
stone within.
Plant virus transmission through plasmodesmata. Within

a plant, the thick cell walls prevent a lytic burst or budding out of virions. Instead, plant virions spread to
uninfected cells by traveling through plasmodesmata
(singular, plasmodesma). Plasmodesmata are membrane
channels that connect adjacent plant cells (Fig. 6.33).
The outer channel connects the cell membranes of the
two cells; the inner channel connects the endoplasmic
reticulum.
Passage through the plasmodesmata requires action
by movement proteins whose expression is directed by
the viral genome. In some cases, the movement proteins
transmit the entire plant virion; in other cases, only the
nucleic acid itself is small enough to pass through. The
infection strategies of plant viral genomes may have features in common with those of viroids, which lack capsids
altogether.

(see Table 6.1, Group VII). CaMV is an important tool
for biotechnology because it has a highly efficient promoter
for gene transcription, allowing high-level expression of
cloned genes. Vectors derived from caulimoviruses are used
to construct transgenic plants.
CaMV is transmitted by secretions from an insect
whose bite damages plant tissues, providing access to the

Cell membrane

Cellulose cell wall

Cytoplasm
Nucleus

DNA pararetroviruses. Pararetroviruses possess a DNA

genome that requires transcription to RNA in the cytoplasm, followed by reverse transcription to form DNA
genomes for progeny virions. Some pararetroviruses, such as
hepadnavirus, infect humans, but the best-known pararetrovirus is cauliflower mosaic virus (CaMV), a caulimovirus

Nucleus

Plasmodesma

Endoplasmic
reticulum

Vacuole

FIGURE 6.33



Plant cells connected by plasmodesmata.

Plasmodesmata offer a route for plant viruses to reach uninfected
cells.

CHAPTER 6

cytoplasm (Fig. 6.34). The CaMV
genome moves from the cytoplasm to
the cell nucleus through a nuclear pore.
Within the nucleus, two promoters on
its DNA genome direct transcription
to RNA. The two RNA transcripts exit
the nucleus for translation by host ribosomes to make viral proteins. A host
reverse transcriptase, present in plant
cells, copies the RNA into DNA viral
genomes. After virions are assembled in
the cytoplasm, virus-encoded proteins,
called movement proteins, help transfer the virions through plasmodesmata
into an adjacent cell.
A CaMV promoter sequence is
commonly used in gene transfer vectors for plant biotechnology because
transcription of the gene (such as
one that confers pesticide resistance
on the host) linked to the viral promoter is very efficient. In the field,
10% of cruciferous vegetables are typically infected with caulif lower mosaic
virus. Some critics of gene technology fear that the prevalence of the
CaMV promoter in transgenic crops
may lead to the evolution of new
pararetroviruses.

dsDNA genome is
transmitted through
aphid bite.



VIRUSES

DNA



227

+ RNA

Plant host cell
Nucleus
Uncoating of
capsid releases
genome.
RNA
transcription

RNA

Host reverse transcriptase
RT transcribes RNA to viral DNA.

Assembly
of virions

Progeny
virions

Virions travel through
plasmodesma to
uninfected cell.

Mature virion
with DNA

Capsid
protein
Viral gene
products
are translated.

FIGURE 6.34

Movement protein

Caulimovirus life cycle. The cauliflower mosaic virus (CaMV), a DNA
pararetrovirus, uses host RNA polymerase to copy its DNA into RNA and uses host reverse
transcriptase (RT) to make DNA copies.


Animal and Plant Host Defenses

How do animals and plants defend themselves from virus
infection? Since viruses are ubiquitous, a wide range of
defense mechanisms have evolved. Defenses important for
humans are part of our immune system, presented in Chapters 23 and 24.

cleared. The basis of this resistance is a defective allele
encoding a T-lymphocyte cell-surface protein that acts as
a coreceptor, which is required for binding of virus HIV-1.
The role of coreceptors in HIV infection and resistance is
discussed further in Chapter 11.

Genetic resistance. As we saw for bacteria, animal and

Immune system. The immune system of humans and other
animals possesses extensive cellular machinery to thwart
viral infection. A component of our innate immunity is the
class of proteins called interferons, which recognize general signs of viral infections such as the presence of doublestranded RNA (see Chapter 23). For adaptive immunity,
viral proteins expressed in the cell membrane of an infected
cell are recognized by specific antibodies that stimulate immune cells to destroy the infected cell and halt its
viral production. The antibodies recognize a specific virus
strain, such as a strain of influenza virus to which the individual has been exposed previously. For example, during
the 2009 flu epidemic, many individuals over the age of
50 had some protection arising from exposure to a similar
strain in an earlier epidemic (see Chapter 24).

plant hosts continually experience mutations, some of
which lead to strains that resist viral infection by halting adsorption or some other key step of the virus’s replication cycle. When a virus becomes widespread, natural
selection favors resistant strains. But commercial livestock
and crops are typically a monoculture in which no resistant variants are available. Thus, when an outbreak arises,
an entire crop may be destroyed. To save a crop, it may be
interbred with a wild strain that possesses genes conferring resistance.
An example of genetic resistance in humans is resistance
to HIV/AIDS. In populations where HIV prevalence is
high, rare individuals emerge whose cells are not infected,
or are infected at such low rates that the virus is eventually

228



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

RNA interference. RNA interference, or RNAi, is a mecha-

nism by which mRNA molecules expressed by a viral genome
are recognized by a host protein-RNA complex that shuts
down further expression. RNA interference was first discovered in plants, where the system is most extensive, but it
is now known to be widespread among all eukaryotes and
archaea (discussed in Chapter 9). The mechanisms of RNA
interference are now being engineered for use in gene therapy
to halt gene expression in cancer and in inherited diseases.



RNA viruses use an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase
to transcribe their messenger RNA.



Retroviruses use a reverse transcriptase to copy their
genomic sequence into DNA for insertion in the host
chromosome.



Oncogenic viruses transform the host cell to become
cancerous. Mechanisms of oncogenesis by different
types of viruses include insertion of an oncogene into
the host genome, integration of the entire viral genome,
and expression of viral proteins that interfere with host
cell cycle regulation.



Plant viruses enter host cells by transmission through a
wounded cell surface or an animal vector. Plant viruses
travel to adjacent cells through plasmodesmata.



Pararetroviruses contain DNA genomes but generate
an RNA intermediate that requires reverse transcription
to DNA for progeny virions.



Emerging viral pathogens increase during environmental change.

Emergence of Viral Pathogens

Where does a “new virus” come from? Most human pathogens come from other humans, or from related animals
called vectors. Certain human-infecting viruses persist in
the wild, such as rabies virus and West Nile virus. Their persistence requires broad host ranges; rabies infects many different mammals, whereas West Nile virus infects birds as
well as humans and horses. Understanding the epidemiology of rabies or of West Nile encephalitis requires understanding the behavior and seasonal migration patterns of
wild organisms. In 2002, the SARS respiratory disease was
caused by a coronavirus previously unknown to science.
The coronavirus was eventually traced genetically to viruses
found in bats and in civet cats marketed for food, in the area
of Guangdong, China, where the human outbreak began.
Other emerging viruses arise as variants of endemic
milder pathogens. Viruses long associated with a host,
such as the common-cold viruses (rhinoviruses), tend to
have evolved a moderate disease state that provides ample
opportunities for host transmission. A virus that “jumps”
from an animal host, however, may cause a more acute syndrome with higher mortality. The best-known cases are the
exceptionally virulent emerging strains of influenza, which
generally result from intracellular recombination of human
strains with strains from pigs or ducks (discussed in Chapter 11). For example, in 2013 the avian influenza strain
H7N9 emerged from poultry in China, where it killed several people before it was contained. Changing distribution
patterns of insect vectors and animal hosts can generate
new epidemics of a pathogen in regions where the virus
could not spread before. Such changes in distribution can
be brought about by many factors, including global climate
change (eTopic 6.2 and Chapter 28).

To Summarize


Host cell-surface receptors mediate animal virus attachment to a cell and confer host specificity and tropism.



Animal DNA viruses either inject their genome or
enter the host cell by endocytosis. The viral genome
requires uncoating for gene expression.

6.6

Culturing Viruses

To learn how microbes grow, we culture them in the laboratory. So how do we culture a virus? A complication of
virus culture is the need to grow the virus within a host
cell. Therefore, any virus culture system must be a double culture of host cells plus viruses. Culturing viruses of
multicellular animals and plants involves additional complications, as viruses show tropism for particular tissues or
organs. Viruses may replicate in tissue culture, but the tissue culture does not show all the properties of an organ
within a living organism. Therefore, a virus propagated in
tissue culture will evolve to lose some of the virulence factors needed to infect an animal.

Batch Culture

Batch culture, or culture in an enclosed vessel of liquid
medium, enables growth of a large population of viruses
for study. Bacteriophages can be inoculated into a growing culture of bacteria, usually in a culture tube or a flask.
The culture fluid is then sampled over time and assayed for
phage particles. The growth pattern usually takes the form
of a step curve (Fig. 6.35).
To observe one cycle of phage reproduction, phages are
added to host cells at a multiplicity of infection (MOI,
ratio of phage to cells) such that every host cell is infected.
The phage particles immediately adsorb to surface receptors
of host cells and inject their DNA. As a result, intact virions

CHAPTER 6

105

1010

Phages/ml

5

Burst size =

104

Rise
period

103

10 phages/ml
200 phageinfected cells/ml

= 500 phages/
cell infected

Eclipse
period
0

0

FIGURE 6.35

10



Plaque-forming units/ml

Cell lysis complete



VIRUSES



229

Intracellular
virions

108

Extracellular
virions

106

Latent
period

104

Eclipse
period

102
Rise period

20
Time (min)

30

40

One-step growth curve for a bacteriophage.

After initial infection of a liquid culture of host cells, the titer of virus
drops near zero as all virions attach to the host. During the eclipse
period, progeny phages are being assembled within the cell. As cells
lyse (the rise period), virions are released until they reach the final
plateau.

are virtually undetectable in the growth medium. This
short period after infection is called the eclipse period.
For some species, it is possible to distinguish between the
eclipse period and a latent period, the time during which
the inserted phage genome directs production of progeny
virions. The virions accumulate within the cell but have not
yet emerged in the medium. In animal viruses, the latent
period is less distinct because large numbers of virions usually generate progeny through budding out of the host cell
(Fig. 6.36).

Note:

The “latent period” of a lytic virus is the period between
initial phage-host contact and the first appearance of progeny
phage. This must be distinguished from the “latent infection” of a
virus that maintains its genome within a host cell without reproducing virions.

As cells begin to lyse and liberate progeny viruses, the
culture enters the rise period, during which virus particles
appear in the growth medium. The rise period ends when
all the progeny viruses have been liberated from their host
cells. If the number of viruses that go on to inoculate additional host cells is small, then the virus concentration at the
end point divided by the original concentration of inoculated phage approximates the burst size—that is, the number of viruses produced per infected host cell. To estimate
the burst size, we can divide the concentration of progeny
virions by the concentration of inoculated virions, assuming that all the original virions infect a cell.
The burst size, together with the cell density prior
to lysis, determines the concentration of the resultant

0

4

8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36 40 44 48 52
Hours after virus adsorption

FIGURE 6.36

 One-step growth curve for a virus. The titer
of extracellular virus drops to near zero during the latent period, as
all virions adsorb to the host. Then progeny virions begin to emerge
by budding out from the infected cell. For an animal virus, the
growth curve may take hours to level off; the “burst” event is not
defined as clearly as for phages.

suspension of virus particles, called a lysate. In the case
of bacteriophages, a lysate of phage particles can be
extremely stable, remaining infective at room temperature for many years. Eukaryotic viruses, however, tend
to be less stable and need to be maintained in culture or
deep freeze.

Thought Question

6.10 Why does bacteriophage reproduction give a step

curve, whereas cellular reproduction generates an
exponential growth curve? Could you design an experiment
in which viruses generate an exponential curve? Under what
conditions does the growth of cellular microbes give rise to
a step curve?

Tissue Culture of Animal Viruses

In the case of animal and plant viruses, the multicellular
nature of the host is an important factor in the pathology
and transmission of the pathogen (discussed in Chapters 25
and 26). Animal viruses can be cultured within whole animals by serial inoculation, where virus is transferred from
an infected animal to an uninfected one. Culture within
animals ensures that the virus strain maintains its original virulence (ability to cause disease). But the process
is expensive and laborious, involving the large-scale use
of animals.
A historic event in 1949 was the first successful growth
of a virus in tissue culture. Poliovirus, the causative agent



PART 1



THE MICROBIAL CELL

0 h: Uninfected

8 h: Cells detach

24 h: Cells lyse and clump

200 µm

R. COMPANS, EMORY UNIVERSITY, SCHOOL OF MEDICINE

230

FIGURE 6.37

 Poliovirus replication in human tissue culture. Before infection (0 hours), the cultured cells grow in a smooth layer.
At 8 hours, infected cells have detached from the culture dish. By 24 hours, cells have lysed or in some cases clumped with other cells.

of the devastating childhood disease poliomyelitis, was
grown in human cell tissue culture (Fig. 6.37) by John F.
Enders, Thomas J. Weller, and Frederick Robbins at Children’s Hospital in Boston. As heralded that year in Scientific American, “It means the end of the ‘monkey era’ in
poliomyelitis research.… Tissue-culture methods have provided virologists with a simple in vitro method for testing
a multitude of chemical and antibiotic agents.” Since then,
tissue culture has remained the most effective way to study
the molecular biology of animal and plant viruses and to
develop vaccines and antiviral agents.
Some viruses can be grown in a tissue culture of cells
growing confluently on a surface. The cells must be
immortalized—that is, genetically altered—to continue
cell division indefinitely. The fluid bathing the tissue layer
is sampled for virus concentration. As in the case of bacteriophage batch culture, we can define an eclipse period, a
latent period before appearance of the first progeny virions
in the culture fluid, and a rise period. In tissue culture, the
time course of animal virus replication is usually much longer (hours or days) than that of bacteriophages (typically
less than an hour under optimal conditions). The burst
size of animal viruses, however, is typically several orders
of magnitude larger than that of phages. The reason for the
larger burst size is probably that the volume of a host cell is
much larger than that of a bacterial host, thus providing a
larger supply of materials to build virions.
Thought Question

6.11 What kinds of questions about viruses can be addressed
in tissue culture, and what questions require infection of an
animal model?

Plaque Isolation and Assay
of Bacteriophages

For the investigation of cellular microbes, an important
tool is the culturing of individual colonies on a solid substrate that prevents dispersal throughout the medium, as
described in Chapters 1 and 4. Plate culture of colonies
enables us to isolate a population of microbes descended
from a common progenitor. But viruses cannot be isolated
as “colonies.” The reason is that although viruses can be
obtained at incredibly high concentrations, they disperse in
suspension. Even on a solid medium, viruses never form a
solid visible mass comparable to the mass of cells that constitutes a cellular colony.
In viral plate culture, viruses from a single progenitor lyse their surrounding host cells, forming a clear area
called a plaque. Each plaque arises from a single infected
bacterium that bursts, its phage particles diffusing to
infect neighboring cells. To perform a plaque assay of
bacteriophages, a diluted suspension of phages is mixed
with bacterial cells in soft agar, and the mixture is then
poured over a nutrient agar plate (Fig. 6.38). Where no
bacteriophages are present, the bacteria grow homogeneously as a “lawn,” an opaque sheet over the surface
(confluent growth). Where there is a bacteriophage, it
infects a cell, replicates, and spreads progeny phages to
adjacent cells, killing them as well (Fig. 6.39). The loss
of cells results in a round, clear area seemingly cut out of
the bacterial lawn. Plaques can be counted and used to
calculate the concentration of phage particles, or plaqueforming units (PFUs), in a given suspension of liquid
culture. The liquid culture can be analyzed by serial dilution in the same way one would analyze a suspension of
bacteria.

CHAPTER 6

1. Add phages
to bacteria.
E. coli in rich broth culture

Phage stock
2. Add phage-infected
bacteria to molten top agar.
Molten top
agar

3. Pour immediately
onto the agar plate.



231

Plaques offer a convenient way to isolate
a recombinant DNA molecule contained in
a bacteriophage vector (discussed in Chapter 12). In Figure 6.39B, the blue plaques
result from a phage vector carrying the gene
encoding the enzyme beta-galactosidase.
This enzyme converts a colorless compound into a blue dye. When the indip
ccator gene is interrupted by an inserted
rrecombinant gene, the phage produces
white plaques, which indicate the successful
w
production of recombinant DNA phages.
pr
pro

Pla
Plaque
Isolation
Is
and Assay
of Animal
Anima Viruses
4. Rotate to spread evenly.
Agar solidifies.

Bottom agar plate
5. Incubate at
37°C overnight.
Bacterial lawn

Soft agar (0.75%)
Bottom agar (1.5%)
Each plaque contains about
106 phages from one parent.

FIGURE 6.38

 Plating a phage suspension to count
isolated plaques. A suspension of bacteria in rich broth culture

is inoculated with a low proportion of phage particles (multiplicity
of infection is approximately 0.1). Each plaque arises from a single
infected bacterium that bursts, its phage particles diffusing to infect
neighboring cells.

GNU

VIRUSES

Multiplicity of infection
(MOI) = 0.1

50°C H2O bath

Plaques

For animal viruses, the plaque assay has to be modified
because it requires
re
infection of cells in tissue culture. Tissue culture usually
u
involves growth of cells in a monolayer
on the surface
surfa of a dish containing fluid medium, which
would quickly
quick disperse any viruses released by lysed cells.
To solve this
thi problem, in 1952 Renato Dulbecco, at the
California IInstitute of Technology, modified the tissue
culture procedure
proc
for plaque assays (Fig. 6.40A). In Dulbecco’s meth
method, the tissue culture with liquid medium is
first inoculat
inoculated with virus. After sufficient time to allow for
viral attachment
attachm
to cells, the fluid is removed and replaced
by a gel medium.
me
The gel retards the dispersal of viruses
from infected cells, and as the host cells die, plaques can
be observed. Figure 6.40B shows a plate culture of human
coronavirus infection of colon carcinoma cells.
Animal viruses that do not kill their host cells
require a different kind of assay, based on identification
of a “focus” (plural, foci), a group of cells infected by
the virus. A focus may be identified using a fluorescent
antibody, called a fluorescent-focus assay. Another type
of focus assay can be used to isolate oncogenic viruses,
which transform their host cells into cancer cells. The
cancer cells lose contact inhibition; they grow up in a pile

B.
Blue
plaques

NICK BOWLBY, MICHIGAN STATE UNIVERSITY

A.



White
plaques
(recombinant)

FIGURE 6.39

 Phage plaques on
a lawn of bacteria. A. Phage lambda

plaques on a lawn of Escherichia coli K-12.
B. Plaques of recombinant phage M13 on
E. coli. The original phage expresses betagalactosidase, an enzyme that makes a
blue product (blue plaques). White plaques
are produced by phage particles whose
genome is recombinant (contains a cloned
gene interrupting the gene for betagalactosidase).

CHAPTER 7



GENOMES AND CHROMOSOMES



235

CHAPTER 7

Genomes and Chromosomes

A

7.1 DNA: The Genetic Material

genome is all of the genetic information that
defines an organism. For a bacterial species,
this can include its chromosome, plasmids,
and viruses. Today, information stored in almost any
genome can be revealed and modified through new
technologies that rapidly sequence DNA and manipulate its content. In Chapter 7 we discuss how bacterial genomes replicate, organize, and migrate through
the dividing bacterial cell.

7.2 Genome Organization
7.3 DNA Replication
7.4 Plasmids
7.5 Eukaryotic and Archaeal Chromosomes
7.6 DNA Sequence Analysis

highlight

A N I N T E RV I E W W I T H

Do bacterial plasmids and chromosomes mix? Plasmids are
small DNA elements that replicate separately from the chromosome. But do chromosomes and plasmids intermingle or
remain separated in the cell? Rodrigo Reyes-Lamothe and
colleagues fluorescently tagged E. coli plasmid DNA (green)
and chromosomal DNA (nucleoid, red) with different GFP
proteins and examined their locations. Plasmids consistently
localized in nucleoid-free regions at the cell poles (shown),
indicating that the two forms of DNA do not readily mingle.
How the nucleoid excludes plasmids is unclear.
Source: Reyes-Lamothe et al. 2014. Nucleic Acids Res. 42:1042–1051.

Plasmid

Cell

Intensity

Plasmid
1.0

Nucleoid

N = 10

UNIVERSITY

How has your work on DNA segregation
altered our view of replication?

One noteworthy discovery was when
we found that the DNA disentangling
activity of topoisomerases follows very
soon after the DNA replication fork
moves along the chromosome. Another
revelation came when we discovered
that the preferred localization of plasmids at the cell poles does not overlap with that of the chromosome. This localization makes plasmids a good tool, in
combination with fluorescence microscopy, for dissecting
the timing of DNA replication events.
Are there potential antimicrobial application(s) for your
work?

0.8
0.6

Many components of DNA replication have great potential
as drug targets. DNA replication is an underexploited target
of current antibiotics, despite the fact that bacterial DNA
replication is an essential cellular process whose machinery
is evolutionarily distinct from ours.

0.4
0.2

Nucleoid

RODRIGO REYES-LAMOTHE, MICROBIOLOGIST, MCGILL

COURTESY OF RODRIGO REYES-LAMOTHE

C U R R E N T R E S E A RC H

Tracing the cell locations of
nucleoids (red) and plasmids
(green) in 10 cells

235

COURTESY OF RODRIGO REYES-LAMOTHE



PART 2



GENES AND GENOMES

How does a bacterium organize and replicate its genome?
As shown in the Current Research Highlight, Dr. Rodrigo
Reyes-Lamothe and his collaborator, professor Marcelo
Tolmasky (Fig. 7.1), found that plasmids and chromosomes, by and large, occupy different spaces in the cell.
This segregation makes sense if the organism is to replicate
and make RNA efficiently without entangling components
of its genome. Compartmentalizing bacterial chromosomes
and plasmids is one form of genome organization. Are
there others?
The question of bacterial chromosome organization was
first raised in the mid-twentieth century after one of our
intestinal bacteria became the focus of efforts to understand
genes and genetics. In one remarkable experiment, a cell
of E. coli was lysed, releasing its chromosome for electron
microscopy. What spewed out of this single cell was a strand
of DNA 1,500 times longer than E. coli itself (Fig. 7.2 ).
Scientists wondered how this enormous molecule could fit
into a single cell, and how an enzyme could duplicate that
much DNA (more than 4.6 million base pairs) without the
whole DNA molecule getting tangled up. And how did it
manage to do this in under 20 minutes, the doubling time
of the organism? Over half a century later, those questions
continue to intrigue us.
In this chapter we discuss the structure and organization of prokaryotic genomes, as well as the mechanisms
for their replication. We examine how microbial enzymes
that manipulate DNA were used to develop techniques
such as DNA sequencing and the polymerase chain reaction (PCR). We also introduce the concept of information
flow—namely, how information stored in DNA gets passed
to
new
generations
and becomes protein.
DNA replication copies the information held
in a DNA sequence and
makes a new DNA molecule passed to offspring.
Transcription converts
DNA information into
a “readable” form called
RNA. Translation then
“reads” the information
in RNA to make protein.
Transcription and translation are discussed in
Chapter 8. The remainFIGURE 7.1  Marcelo
ing chapters of Part 2 disTolmasky of McGill University
cuss gene recombination
collaborated with Rodrigo
and transmission (ChapReyes-Lamothe in discovering
ter 9), the regulation of
that plasmids and chromogene expression (Chapsomes occupy separate spaces
ter 10), the specialized
in a bacterial cell.

GOPAL MURTI/VISUALS UNLIMITED

236

FIGURE 7.2

 Osmotically disrupted bacterial cell with
its DNA released. Length of the bacterium is approximately

2 micrometers.

genetic mechanisms of viruses (Chapter 11), and the various molecular techniques and technologies that spawned
the field of synthetic biology (Chapter 12).

7.1

DNA: The Genetic Material

Where do genetic traits come from, and how are they
passed from one generation to the next? The ability of
plants and animals to transfer genetic traits was known
well before we knew that DNA was the carrier of genetic
information. Early researchers understood the Mendelian
model of gene inheritance and how it dictated the passage
of traits from parent to offspring in eukaryotes—a gene
transmission mechanism known as vertical gene transfer.
Bacteria, however, appeared to operate differently, because
in addition to vertical gene transfer, bacteria showed horizontal gene transfer, the movement of genetic information from one cell into another. The study of horizontal
gene transfer in bacteria ultimately led to the discovery of
horizontal transfer throughout animals and plants. Relative to bacteria, however, animals and plants horizontally
transfer DNA on a much slower timescale because of their
longer generation times. Mechanisms of horizontal gene
transfer are discussed in Chapter 9.

CHAPTER 7

Our path to understanding DNA began in 1928 when
Frederick Griffith (1879–1941) discovered that he could
kill mice with live but seemingly harmless (avirulent)
Streptococcus pneumoniae, but only if he coinjected the
mice with dead cells from a virulent strain of the bacteria. Something from the dead bacteria transformed the
innocuous live bacteria into killers. This form of horizontal gene transfer, called transformation, led to the discovery in 1944 that genetic information is embedded in
the base sequence of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) (see
Section 1.6). Another example of transformation is the
toxic shock gene that can be moved horizontally among
strains of Staphylococcus aureus. As a result of these and
many other experiments, we now appreciate that chromosomes are made of contiguous packets of information,
called genes.
Genes are units of information composed of a sequence
of DNA nucleotides of four different types: adenine (A),
guanine (G), thymine (T), and cytosine (C). (For a review
at the level of introductory biology, see eAppendix 1.)
A structural gene is a string of nucleotides that can be
decoded by an enzyme to produce a functional RNA molecule. A structural gene usually produces an RNA molecule
that in turn encodes a protein. A DNA control sequence,
on the other hand, regulates the expression of a structural
gene. DNA control sequences do not encode RNA or protein (so they are not considered genes), but they do regulate
RNA production from an adjacent structural gene. Control sequences include promoters that launch RNA synthesis from a structural gene, and binding sites for regulatory
proteins that can activate or inactivate that promoter.
As noted previously, the entire genetic complement of
DNA in a cell that defines it as an organism is called its
genome. Our primary goal in Chapter 7 is to convey how
genomes are maintained and replicated. Mining the informational content of DNA sequences and genes is described
more fully in Chapters 8 and 10.

Bacterial Genomes

In the early twentieth century, the chromosomes of bacteria, unlike those of eukaryotes, could not be observed by
light microscopy. The reason is that bacteria, unlike eukaryotes, do not undergo mitosis, a process in which chromosomes condense and thicken about a thousandfold, making
them visible with light microscopy. Important clues to bacterial chromosome structure were gleaned, however, from
painstaking genetic studies. In the 1950s it was discovered
that conjugation (see Section 9.1), a horizontal gene transfer mechanism requiring cell-to-cell contact, could transfer large segments of some bacterial chromosomes—not all
at once, as in the established Mendelian model of plants
and animals, but sequentially over a period of time (it takes



GENOMES AND CHROMOSOMES



237

100 minutes to move the entire E. coli chromosome from
one cell to another).
Thus, even though the bacterial chromosome could not
be seen, conjugation allowed genes to be mapped relative
to each other according to time of transfer. For example,
a donor strain that can synthesize the amino acids alanine
and proline can directly transfer the encoding genes to a
recipient cell defective in those genes. The transfer process is nonspecific, so any gene can be transferred in this
way. Completion of transfer also requires recombination,
in which the donor DNA fragment replaces the recipient
DNA fragment. Successful transfer of the genes for amino
acid synthesis enables the formerly defective recipient to
form colonies on minimal media lacking either amino acid.
Because chromosome transfer takes time and starts from a
fixed point, not all genes are transferred simultaneously. It
might take one gene 10 minutes of cell contact to be transferred, while the second gene, farther away from the starting point of DNA transfer, takes an additional 20 minutes.
Because eukaryotic chromosomes are linear, scientists
initially expected that bacterial chromosomes would be linear too. However, the early genetic maps drawn from conjugation experiments just would not fit together in a manner
consistent with a linear model—for the simple reason that
the bacterial chromosome in E. coli, the organism under
study at the time, is circular. We now know that most bacteria and archaea have circular chromosomes. Some species,
however, have linear chromosomes, or even a mix of linear
and circular chromosomes. Examples include the Lyme disease agent Borrelia burgdorferi, and the plant tumor agent
Agrobacterium tumefaciens (Table 7.1).
The size range of genomes across the phylogenetic tree,
from viruses to humans, is enormous. Generally speaking,
the simpler the organism, the smaller its genome. At some
point, as DNA content is trimmed, the organism loses
independence and lives only if it has parasitized another
organism. For examples, see the evolution of mitochondria
and chloroplasts (Section 17.6) and obligate intracellular
pathogens (Chapter 23).

To Summarize








A genome is all of the genetic information that defines
an organism.
Genomes of bacteria and archaea are made up of chromosomes and plasmids consisting of DNA.
Chromosomes of bacteria and archaea can be circular
or linear, as can plasmids.
Functional units of DNA sequences include structural
genes and regulatory sequences.

238



PART 2



GENES AND GENOMES

TABLE 7.1,Genomes of Representative Bacteria and Archaea

Species (strain)

Chromosome(s)*
(kilobase pairs, kb)

Plasmid(s)*
(kb)

Circular and linear

Circular

Total
(kb)

Bacteria
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Tuberculosis
Mycoplasma genitalium
Normal flora, human skin

4,400

4,400

580

580

Burkholderia cepacia
Respiratory infections in
immunocompromised patients

3,870 + 3,217 + 876

Escherichia coli K-12 (W3110)
Model strain for E. coli research

4,600

Anabaena species (PCC 7120)
Cyanobacteria: major photosynthetic producer of
carbon source for aquatic ecosystems

6,370

110 + 190 + 410

7,080

911

21; sizes 9 to 58

>1,250

2,840 + 2,070

214 + 542

5,666

1,660

16 + 58

1,734

3,130 + 288

33 + 33 + 39 + 50 + 155 + 132 + 410

4,270

1,000 kb

500 kb

Borrelia burgdorferi
Lyme disease
Agrobacterium tumefaciens
Tumors in plants; genetic engineering vector

93

8,056

4,600

Archaea
Methanocaldococcus jannaschii
Methanogen from thermal vent
Haloarcula marismortui
Halophile from volcanic vent

*Purple circles and lines indicate relative sizes of genomic elements and whether these are circular or linear. Size bars are provided under each column.

7.2

Genome Organization

Do microbial genomes differ in structure or functional
organization? New techniques for constructing physical
maps of genomes and determining the sequences of whole
genomes have revealed tremendous diversity in the size and
organization of prokaryotic genomes.

Genomes Vary in Size

Bacterial and archaeal chromosomes range in size from
approximately 130 to 14,000 kilobase pairs (kb). For comparison, eukaryotic chromosomes range from 2,900 kb

(Microsporidia) to over 100,000,000 kb (flowering plants).
The human genome is over 3,000,000 kb.

Note:

The designation “kb” can refer to the length of a doublestranded or single-stranded DNA molecule. A bacterial genome
is, by definition, double-stranded. Some viral genomes can be
single-stranded.

One of the smallest cellular genomes sequenced thus
far is that of Mycoplasma genitalium. These pathogens rely
on their host environment for many products but can still
grow outside a host cell. The complete genome of M. genitalium consists of only 580 kb and encodes 480 proteins.

CHAPTER 7

It lacks the genes required for many biosynthetic functions,
including the synthesis of amino acids, the construction of
cell walls, and a functional tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle.
In contrast, free-living bacteria that can grow in soil have
larger genomes and dedicate many genes to the synthesis
or acquisition of amino acids or TCA cycle intermediates.
Even different strains of one species, such as Salmonella
enterica, may vary considerably in gene distribution.
Figure 7.3 illustrates genes of Salmonella enterica serovar
Typhimurium (abbreviated S. Typhimurium) transcribed in
the clockwise direction (outer circle) and the counterclockwise direction (inner circle), which means that they are
transcribed off of opposite strands of DNA. The color coding of different genes indicates presence in S. Typhimurium
versus other Salmonella species and seven additional members of the family Enterobacteriaceae. For example, genes
marked orange are present in all eight species, while those
marked blue are present only in S. Typhimurium.
Another feature that distinguishes bacterial and archaeal
genomes from those of eukaryotes is the amount of so-called
noncoding DNA (DNA that does not encode proteins).
Many, but not all, eukaryotes contain huge amounts of noncoding DNA scattered between genes. In some species (such
as humans), over 90% of the total DNA is noncoding. Some

Genes transcribed
clockwise



GENOMES AND CHROMOSOMES



239

noncoding regions include enhancer sequences needed
to drive transcription of eukaryotic promoters and DNA
expanses that separate enhancers. Enhancer sequences can
function at large distances from the gene they regulate. A
promoter is the DNA sequence immediately in front of,
and sometimes within, a gene needed to activate the gene’s
expression. Most of the noncoding spacers appear to be remnants of genes lost over the course of evolution and pieces
of defunct viral genomes. Noncoding regions, however, may
provide raw material for future evolution.
In contrast to many eukaryotes, bacteria and archaea
tend to have very little noncoding DNA (typically less than
15% of the genome). Archaeal genomes do, however, contain a few genes with internal noncoding DNA sequences
that resemble the introns of eukaryotes.

Functional Units of Genes

In the simplest case, a gene can operate independently of
other genes. The RNA produced from a single gene is said
to be “monocistronic,” which means it codes for one protein. Alternatively, a gene may exist in tandem with other
genes in a unit called an operon (Fig. 7.4A). All genes in
an operon are situated head to tail on the chromosome and

0

4,500,000 bp

500,000 bp
Genes transcribed
counterclockwise

4,000,000 bp

1,000,000 bp
Genes on (+) strand
Genes on (–) strand
GC ratio

3,500,000 bp

1,500,000 bp

3,000,000 bp

2,000,000 bp

Gene distribution key
S. Typhimurium–specific
Salmonella-specific
Present in all eight genomes
Other combinations

2,500,000 bp

FIGURE 7.3  The circular
genome of Salmonella
enterica serovar Typhimurium LT2. The figure illustrates,

by color coding, whether a gene
is specific to Salmonella or is
present in Salmonella and seven
other species in the family
Enterobacteriaceae. The black, inner circle is the GC content of the
LT2 DNA (peaks pointing outward
and inward indicate GC-rich and
AT-rich areas, respectively).

240



PART 2

GENES AND GENOMES



A. Single gene vs. operon
Promoter

are controlled by a single regulatory sequence located in
front of the first gene. The single RNA molecule produced
from the operon contains all the information from all the
genes in that operon and is called “polycistronic.”
On a functional level, a collection of genes and operons at
different positions on the chromosome form a regulon when
they have a unified biochemical purpose (such as amino acid
biosynthesis) and are regulated by the same regulatory protein
(Fig. 7.4B). The various mechanisms regulating expression
of these functional genetic units are discussed in Chapter 10.

Promoter
Gene 1 Gene 2

Gene 3

Polycistronic
RNA

Monocistronic
RNA
Transcription
start site
B. Regulon

Operon

This gene is transcribed to
form the regulatory protein.

Regulatory
protein

Note:

Operon

In bacteria, the names of genes are given as a threeletter abbreviation of the encoded enzyme’s name (for example,
the gene dam encodes deoxyadenosine methylase) or the function of related genes (for example, genes designated proA, proB,
and proC encode enzymes involved in proline biosynthesis). Bacterial gene names are written in Italics with lowercase letters. For
example, the genes involved in catabolizing lactose are the lac
genes. If several genes are involved in the pathway, a fourth letter,
capitalized, is used. Thus, the three genes lacZ, lacY, and lacA are
all associated with lactose catabolism. When speaking of a gene
product, a nonItalic (roman) font is used, and the first letter is
capitalized. Thus, lacZ is the gene and LacZ is the protein product
of that gene.

FIGURE 7.4  Gene
organization. A. DNA

segment containing a single
gene producing a monocistronic
message (which codes for one protein) and an operon of three
genes producing a polycistronic message (from which three different proteins are made). B. Diagram of a circular bacterial genome,
containing genes and operons coordinately controlled by a single
regulatory protein.

B. Chemical structure of RNA
5′ end

A. Chemical structure of DNA
Thymine (T)
H

5••end

O
–

O

H

P O
O

2•-Deoxyribose

CH2

N

N

H
O

N

N

N

–

O

O

N

O

Phosphodiester
bond

N

O

H

H

P O
O

N

N

H
CH2 O

N

H
H

C

O

H
N

N

H

–

O

P O
O

N

CH2

5′

Numbered carbons
of deoxyribose

O

4′

H
O

H

3′ 2′

N
1′

OH H

N

N

H

O

OH H

P O

O

N

N
H

N
O

O
–

O

O H2C

Cytosine (C)

H

Guanine (G)

Cytosine (C)
O

N

O–

O

H

H

N

H

H
CH2 O

H

N

Adenine (A)
H

O

O P

N

N

2′ Hydroxyl
O

–

O H C
2

H

N

H

Ribose

O–

O

H

O

H

N

P O

N

N

N

O

H

N

5′

O

H

H

H

CH2 O

O P

H
O

–

O H 2C

H

P O
O

O

O

H

N

N

O

O–

O

H

P O
O

–

O

H
N

H

N

N

H

N

H

H

–

H2C

O P

O

H
CH2 O

O

H

H

O

O
–

O

H

P O

H 2′ O 3′

H

N

N

H

5′

O

The 2•-deoxy
position that
distinguishes
DNA from RNA

H

H
H

C

Adenine (A) O

3′ end

OH
O

P O

N

O
O

O P
O

5′ end

3′ end

FIGURE 7.5  Structures of DNA and RNA. A. In the cell, DNA bases are added only
to a preexisting 3′ OH of a nucleoside monophosphate, so the 5′ ends in this figure are
drawn as nucleoside monophosphates. (Dotted lines indicate hydrogen bonds between
bases.) B. Cellular RNA molecules, however, begin with a 5′ triphosphate.

N

CH2 O

O–

3′ O
–

N

H

O

H
N

N

H

Guanine (G)

H
OH
O

P O

H

O
CH2

H
O

N
N

OH OH

3′ end

H
O

Uracil (U)

CHAPTER 7

DNA Function Depends on
Its Chemical Structure

DNA is composed of four different nucleotides linked
by a phosphodiester backbone (Fig. 7.5A). Each nucleotide consists of a nucleobase (also called a nitrogenous base) attached through a ring nitrogen to carbon
1 of 2-deoxyribose in the phosphodiester backbone. The
2-deoxy position that distinguishes DNA from RNA
(Fig. 7.5B) is highlighted in the figure. A phosphodiester
bond (also marked in Fig. 7.5A) joins adjacent deoxyribose
molecules in DNA to form the phosphodiester backbone.
Phosphodiester bonds link the 3′ carbon of one ribose to
the 5′ carbon of the next ribose. The two backbones are
antiparallel so that at either end of the DNA molecule, one
DNA strand ends with a 3′ hydroxyl group and the complementary strand ends with a 5′ phosphate. This antiparallel
arrangement is necessary so that complementary bases protruding from the two strands can pair properly via hydrogen bonding. Base pairing is not possible if DNA strands
are modeled in a parallel arrangement.
The nucleobases in DNA are planar heteroaromatic
structures arranged perpendicular to the phosphodiester
backbone and parallel to each other like a stack of coins.
Purines (bicyclic nucleobases: adenine or guanine) pair with
pyrimidines (monocyclic nucleobases: thymine or cytosine). Under physiological conditions of salt (about 0.85%
NaCl) and pH (pH 7.8), the hydrogen bonding of the bases
permits adenine to pair only with thymine (via two hydrogen bonds) and likewise guanine with cytosine (via three
hydrogen bonds). These complementary base interactions
enable the two phosphodiester backbones to wrap around
each other to form the classic double helix, or duplex.
The thousands of H-bonds that form between purines and
pyrimidines along the interior of a DNA duplex (Fig. 7.5)
make the bonding of the two complementary strands of
DNA highly specific, so that a duplex forms only between
complementary strands. Although H-bonds govern the specificity of strand pairing, the thermal stability of the helix is
due predominantly to the stacking of the hydrophobic base
pairs. Stacking of base pairs allows water and ions to interact
with the hydrophilic, negatively charged phosphate backbone
of DNA while avoiding the hydrophobic interior of the helix.
The stacking of DNA bases also appears to permit DNA to
act as a “wire” capable of conducting electrons over long distances. The conduction of electrons along DNA may be sensed
by certain proteins bound to DNA (discussed in Chapter 9).



GENOMES AND CHROMOSOMES

A. Space-filling model



241

B. Surface

Major
groove

Major
groove

Minor
groove

Minor
groove

FIGURE 7.6  Models of DNA. A. Space-filling model of DNA.
B. DNA surface, modeled using nuclear magnetic resonance.
(PDB code: 1K8J)

In the space-filling model of DNA in Figure 7.6A and
the contour map in Figure 7.6B, notice that the DNA
double helix has grooves: a wide major groove and a narrower minor groove. The two grooves are generated by the
angles at which the paired bases meet each other. These
grooves provide DNA-binding proteins access to base
sequences buried in the center of the molecule, so that the
proteins can interact with the bases without the strands
being separated. Figure 7.7 shows an example of an important DNA-binding protein, DtxR of Corynebacterium
Dimer
DNA

Major
groove

Thought Question
Adenine
Guanine

7.1 What do you think happens to two single-stranded DNA

molecules isolated from different genes when they are mixed
together at very high concentrations of salt? Hint: High salt
concentrations favor bonding between hydrophobic groups.

FIGURE 7.7

Thymine
Cytosine

 Protein that recognizes DNA. DtxR repressor
protein dimer binds in the major groove of DNA. (PDB code: 1C0W )

242



PART 2



GENES AND GENOMES

diphtheriae, the cause of diphtheria. The DtxR dimer (pair
of subunits) binds the major groove of DNA at the promoter for the diphtheria toxin gene (dtxA). Toxin expression is repressed when iron concentrations are high, which
signals to the bacteria that they are in an environment outside a human host. Gene regulation is discussed further in
Chapter 10.
At high temperatures (50°C–90°C), the hydrogen
bonds in DNA break and the duplex falls apart, or denatures, into two single strands. The temperature required
to denature a DNA molecule depends on the GC/AT ratio
of a sequence. More energy is required to break the three
H-bonds of a GC base pair than the two H-bonds of an
AT base pair. Thus, DNA with a high GC content requires
a higher denaturing temperature than does similar-sized
DNA with a lower GC content. The black center ring in
Figure 7.3 illustrates how the GC content of bases can
change around a single chromosome.
When DNA has been heated to the point of strand separation, lowering the temperature permits the two single
strands to find each other and reanneal into a stable double helix. The kinetics of DNA renaturation is much slower
than that of denaturation, because renaturation is a random, hit-or-miss process of complementary sequences finding each other. This melting/reannealing property of DNA
is exploited in a number of molecular techniques (see the
discussion of the polymerase chain reaction in Section 7.6).
Note, however, that bacteria and archaea growing at
extreme pH or temperature protect their DNA from denaturation through the use of remarkable DNA-binding proteins such as the archaeal histone proteins Hmf and Htz.
The role of DNA-binding proteins in microbial survival is
the subject of considerable research.

Thought Question

7.2 How do the kinetics of denaturation and renaturation
depend on DNA concentration?

RNA Differs Slightly from DNA

Why do cells make both RNA and DNA? As we learned in
Chapter 3, DNA and RNA have different missions. The cell
uses DNA to stably archive the information needed to make
a functional cell. The growing cell continually accesses this
information by making temporary copies of its genes in the
form of RNA (ribonucleic acid) molecules that direct the
synthesis of proteins. The cell also makes small RNA molecules that adjust information flow by modulating DNA
gene expression. To keep their roles separate, DNA and
RNA must have slightly different structures.

DNA in a cell is usually double-stranded, whereas RNA
is usually single-stranded. DNA and RNA are chemically similar, except that in RNA the sugar ribose replaces
deoxyribose and the pyrimidine base uracil replaces thymine (see Fig. 7.5B). Functionally, these two differences
prevent enzymes meant to work on DNA, such as DNA
polymerases, from acting on RNA. They also prevent RNA
nucleases (RNases) from degrading DNA. However, uracil
can still base-pair with adenine, which means that hybrid
RNA-DNA double-stranded molecules can form (hybridize) when base sequences are complementary. In fact, this
hybridization is a necessary step in the decoding of genes
to make proteins.
Although RNA molecules are commonly thought of as
single-stranded, all RNA molecules in nature have RNARNA double-stranded regions called “hairpins.” Hairpin
structures form when complementary nucleotide sequences
within the primary RNA sequence bend back and hybridize. These double-stranded hairpins have a variety of biological functions.

Bacterial Chromosomes Are
Compacted into a Nucleoid

The chromosome of E. coli has over 4.6 million bases in
one strand, or over 9 million, counting both strands. This
is a huge molecule. At the normal pH of the cell (7.8), all
the phosphates in the backbone (all 9 million of them) are
unprotonated and negatively charged, so this one molecule contributes greatly to the overall negative charge of
the cytoplasm.
Figure 7.2 shows DNA spewing out of a damaged bacterial cell. Laid out, the chromosome is 1,500 times longer than the cell. It is obvious from this photomicrograph
that an intact, healthy cell must compact a huge bundle of
DNA into a very small volume. DNA is the second-largest molecule in the cell (only peptidoglycan is larger) and
comprises a large portion of a bacterial cell’s dry mass,
about 3%–4%. Although packaging 3% of a cell’s dry weight
may not seem like a challenge, realize that DNA is further
confined only to ribosome-free areas of the cell, so the
chromosome-packing density reaches about 15 mg/ml. In
a test tube, DNA at 15 mg/ml is almost a gel, so how can
anything move inside a cell? And how does all this DNA
keep from getting hopelessly tangled?
As introduced in Chapter 3, cells pack their DNA into
a manageable form that still allows ready access to DNAbinding proteins. Although bacteria lack a nuclear membrane, they pack their DNA into a series of protein-bound
domains collectively called the nucleoid (see Section 3.4).
Unlike the compact nucleus of eukaryotes, the bacterial
nucleoid is distributed throughout the cytoplasm.

CHAPTER 7
Histone-like
anchoring proteins



GENOMES AND CHROMOSOMES



243

DNA within
supercoil

remained supercoiled because they
were constrained at their bases
by anchoring proteins, such as
HU and H-NS (histone-like
proteins), that prevent rotation (for nucleoid organizaSupercoiled
tion, see Fig. 3.26).
domain
How does DNA achieve
the supercoiled state? The
bacterial
cell
produces
enzymes that can twist DNA
into supercoils and other
Supercoiling
Nick made in
relaxed in
enzymes that relieve supersingle strand
nicked strand
coils. A single twist introduced into a small (300-bp)
FIGURE 7.8  Bacterial nucleoid. A nucleoid showing domain loops after gentle release from cells.
circular
DNA
molecule
The single-strand nick unwinds (relaxes) only one loop.
forms a single supercoil as
shown in Figure 7.9 . To
introduce the DNA twist, a

DNA Supercoiling Compacts
the Chromosome

A nucleoid gently released from E. coli appears as 30–100
tightly wound loops (Fig. 7.8 ). The boundaries of each
loop are defined by anchoring proteins called histone-like
proteins for their similarity to histones, the DNA-binding
proteins of eukaryotes. The double helix within each
domain is itself helical, or supercoiled. The easiest way to
envision supercoiling is to picture a coiled telephone cord.
After much use, a phone cord twists, or supercoils, upon
itself. Supercoiled phone cords are quite compact, taking
up less space than a relaxed cord. Circular DNA works
the same way—a property used by the cell to pack its
chromosome.
Note that DNA cannot form supercoils unless its ends
are tethered. In a circular chromosome, the DNA ends are
tethered to each other. Introducing an extra twist by breaking one or both strands, twisting one end, and then resealing the strands means that the increased, or decreased,
torsional (twisting) stress is trapped in the final circular
molecule. It cannot then spontaneously unwind.
Remarkably, the nucleoid with its 30–100 loops (or
“domains”) can maintain different loops at different superhelical densities. The independence of supercoiled domains
was demonstrated by introducing one single-strand
nick in the phosphodiester backbone of one domain (see
Fig. 7.8). You can do this by adding very small amounts
of a nuclease (an enzyme that cleaves a nucleic acid). The
ends of the broken strand, driven by the energy inherent
in the supercoil, rotate about the unbroken complementary strand of the duplex and relax the supercoil. A single
nick in a genome, however, removes supercoils from only
one domain. How is this possible if the chromosome is one
circular molecule? The unaffected chromosomal domains

Break
1
Pass a section of
DNA through the
break; then reseal.

2

Below
break

FIGURE 7.9

Above
break
3

 Supercoiling of 300-bp circular DNA. A supercoil can be introduced into a double-stranded, circular DNA molecule
by (1) cleaving both strands at one site in the molecule, (2) passing an
intact part of the molecule between ends of the cut site, and
(3) reconnecting the free ends.

244



PART 2



GENES AND GENOMES

supercoiling enzyme makes a double-strand break at one
point in the circle, passes another part of the DNA through
the break, and reseals it. The result is the same as if one end
of the broken circle were twisted one full turn.
To put this in context, most DNA in nature is righthanded. Right-handed, helical DNA turns clockwise when
you look down the length of the double strand. Now think
of a right-handed helical phone cord. Twist the cord so
as to decrease the number of helix twists (underwinding
the cord). As you keep underwinding, the torsional stress
of removing clockwise helical twists is relieved when the
phone cord (or DNA) flips around itself (supercoils) in a
clockwise rotation. Because the DNA is underwound, the
compensatory supercoil is called a negative supercoil. Overwinding a clockwise helix (like DNA) introduces additional
clockwise helical twists; the stress of which is relieved by
the DNA supercoiling in a counterclockwise direction.
Because the DNA helix is overwound, the compensatory
supercoil is called a positive supercoil.
The nucleoids of bacteria and most archaea, as well as
the nuclear DNA of eukaryotes, are kept negatively supercoiled. Because the DNA is underwound, the two strands
of negatively supercoiled DNA are easier to separate than
those of positively supercoiled DNA. This is important for
transcription enzymes, such as RNA polymerase, that must
separate strands of DNA to make RNA.
Note, however, that some archaeal species living in
acid at high temperature have nucleoids that are positively
supercoiled to keep DNA double-stranded in these inhospitable environments (discussed next). Positively supercoiled

DNA is harder to denature, because it takes excess energy
to separate overwound DNA.

Topoisomerases Supercoil DNA

Supercoiling changes the topology of DNA. Topology is
a description of how spatial features of an object are connected to each other. Thus, enzymes that change DNA
supercoiling are called topoisomerases. To maintain
proper DNA supercoiling levels, a cell must delicately balance the activities of two types of topoisomerases. Type I
topoisomerases are typically single proteins that cleave only
one strand of a double helix, while type II enzymes have
multiple subunits that cleave both strands of a DNA molecule. Type I enzymes relieve or unwind supercoils. As
, topoisomerase I cleaves one
shown in Figure 7.10
strand of a negatively supercoiled double helix and holds on
to both ends of the break. The release of intrinsic energy
allows the enzyme to pass the intact strand through the
break and re-ligate the strand, which reintroduces a helical turn. The molecule is released with one less negative
supercoil.
The action of DNA gyrase is more involved
(Fig. 7.11 ). DNA gyrase is an example of a type II topoisomerase whose function is to introduce negative supercoils
in DNA (see Fig. 7.11A). The active gyrase complex is a
tetramer composed of two GyrA and two GyrB proteins.
The gyrase B subunits first grab a section of the double
helix. Then GyrA, in an ATP-dependent process catalyzed by GyrB, introduces a double-strand break, passes a

Topoisomerase I
cleaves one strand of a
double helix, holds on to
both ends, and . . .

The helix winds in this
region, resulting in one
less negative supercoil.

Topoisomerase I

1

. . . passes the other,
intact strand through the
break and re-ligates the
strand.
1

2

2

3
3
4
5

4
3 Helical turns

Circular double-stranded
DNA with 5 negative supercoils

4 Helical
turns
4 Negative
supercoils

FIGURE 7.10

 Mechanism of
action for type I topoisomerases (topo I of E. coli).

Topoisomerase I relaxes a negatively
supercoiled DNA molecule by introducing a single-strand nick.

CHAPTER 7

A.



GENOMES AND CHROMOSOMES



245

B.
dsDNA

DNA duplex cleaved by gyrase

GyrB
GyrA
GyrB

ATP

ATP

ADP
ADP

GyrA introduces
double-strand break in
this section (cylinder) and
holds the two ends apart
while remaining covalently
attached to the DNA.

GyrA ATPase passes the
intact double-stranded
section through the
double-strand break.

GyrA re-joins the
cleaved DNA and opens
at the other end to allow
the strand that has
passed through to exit.
Negative
supercoil

different part of the double helix through the break, and
reseals the break. The other end of GyrA then opens to
release the DNA, now with one more negative supercoil.
Figure 7.11B shows a 3D representation of DNA gyrase in
the midst of generating a supercoil.
Enzymes that make or manage bacterial DNA, RNA,
and proteins are common targets for antibiotics. For
instance, the quinolone antibiotics specifically target bacterial type II topoisomerases. They do not affect eukaryotic topoisomerases. A modern quinolone, ciprofloxacin,
was the treatment of choice for anthrax pneumonia during the 2001 anthrax attacks. The progenitors of this
drug family, nalidixic and oxolinic acids, were used to
map gyrA and gyrB, the first drug resistance genes identified in E. coli. The modern successors of these drugs, the

GyrA
DNA duplex after
passing through break
in the duplex above

COURTESY OF JAMES BERGER

GyrB grabs one section
of double-stranded DNA
(represented by cylinder).

FIGURE 7.11

 Mechanism of action for type II
topoisomerases. A. Mode of action of DNA gyrase from

E. coli. B. Three-dimensional representation of DNA gyrase. The
gyrase complex grips a broken DNA duplex (shown in green) and
has transported a second duplex (the multicolored rosette) through
the break.

fluoroquinolones, are among the most widely used antimicrobials in the world. These drugs do not block topoisomerase action but stabilize the complex in which DNA gyrase
is covalently attached to DNA (see Fig. 7.11). The stuck
complex forms a physical barrier in front of the DNA replication complex, and the bacterial cell dies.
Extreme thermophiles (hyperthermophilic archaea) possess an unusual gyrase called reverse DNA gyrase. In contrast to the DNA gyrase from mesophiles, reverse gyrase
introduces positive supercoils into the chromosome. It is
proposed that tightening the coil helps protect the chromosome against thermal denaturation. Because the DNA
has extra turns, it takes more energy (heat) to separate
the strands.

Thought Questions

7.3 DNA gyrase is essential to cell viability. Why, then, are
nalidixic acid–resistant cells that contain mutations in gyrA
still viable?
7.4 Bacterial cells contain many enzymes that can degrade

linear DNA. How, then, do linear chromosomes in organisms
like Borrelia burgdorferi (the causative agent in Lyme disease)
avoid degradation?

246



PART 2



GENES AND GENOMES

involves over 20 proteins coming together in a complex
machine. Operation of the replication complex is all the
more remarkable, considering that some bacteria, such as
thermophilic Bacillus species that live in hot springs, can
double their population in less than 15 minutes.
The molecular details of bacterial DNA replication are
important to understand because they provide targets for
new antibiotics and tools for biotechnology, such as the
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) (see Section 7.6). In addition, the bacterial proteins of DNA repair have homologs
in the human genome, defects in which produce inherited
human diseases, such as xeroderma pigmentosum, that predispose the carrier to certain cancers.

To Summarize












Noncoding DNA can constitute a large amount of a
eukaryotic genome, while prokaryotes have very little
noncoding DNA.
DNA is composed of two antiparallel chains of purine
and pyrimidine nucleotides in which phosphate links the
5′ carbon of one nucleotide with the 3′ carbon of the
next in the chain. The result is a double helix containing
a deep major groove and a more shallow minor groove.
Hydrogen bonding and interactions between the
stacked bases hold together complementary strands
of DNA.
Supercoiling by topoisomerases compacts DNA into an
organized nucleoid.

Overview of Bacterial DNA Replication

To replicate a molecule containing millions of base pairs
poses formidable challenges. How does replication begin
and end? How is accuracy checked and maintained?

Bacteria, eukaryotes, and most archaea possess negatively supercoiled DNA. Archaea living in extreme
environments have positively supercoiled genomes.

Semiconservative replication. Replication

of cellular
DNA is semiconservative, meaning that each daughter
cell receives one parental strand and one newly synthesized
strand (Fig. 7.12). At the replication fork, the advancing
DNA synthesis machine separates the parental strands while
extending the new, growing strands. The semiconservative
mechanism provides a means for each daughter duplex to be
checked for accuracy against its parental strand.
Enzymes that synthesize DNA or RNA can connect
nucleotides only in a 5′-to-3′ direction. That is, every newly
made strand begins with a 5′ triphosphate and ends with
a 3′ hydroxyl group (see Fig. 7.5). A polymerase (a chainlengthening enzyme complex) fastens the 5′ alpha-phosphate of an incoming nucleoside triphosphate to the 3′
hydroxyl end of the growing chain, thus forming a phosphodiester bond. (The alpha-phosphate is the phosphate
closest to the sugar.) This 5′-to-3′ enzymatic constraint
produces an interesting mechanistic puzzle: If polymerases
can synthesize DNA only in a 5′-to-3′ direction and the

Type I topoisomerases cleave one strand of a DNA molecule and relieve supercoiling; type II topoisomerases
cleave both strands of DNA and use ATP to introduce
supercoils.

7.3

DNA Replication

How do bacteria replicate their DNA quickly and minimize
errors? Quick and accurate replication of DNA can help
a microorganism grow and compete with other species.
Replication efficiency is one reason why bacterial pathogens such as Salmonella can cause disease so quickly after
ingestion. In this respect, bacteria differ from multicellular organisms, which need to regulate cell division carefully
within their tissues because unregulated growth within
tissues leads to cancer. The process of bacterial replication

Origin

FIGURE 7.12



Semiconservative

replication. A replication bubble with

two replication forks. Replication is called
“semiconservative” because one parental
strand is conserved and inherited by each
daughter cell genome. It is called “bidirectional” because it begins at a fixed origin
and progresses in opposite directions.

Parental strand
5′

5′

3′

3′

3′
New daughter strands
5′

Replication fork

Replication fork
Origin

3′
5′

CHAPTER 7

two phosphodiester backbones of the double helix are antiparallel, then how are both strands of a moving replication fork synthesized simultaneously′ One strand presents
no problem, because it is synthesized in a 5′-to-3′ direction
toward the fork, but synthesizing the other new strand in a
5′-to-3′ direction would seem to dictate that it move away
from the fork (Fig. 7.13). How is this possible?



GENOMES AND CHROMOSOMES



247

Origin, oriC

1. Replication
begins at origin.

Terminus, ter

Note:

The term “nucleoside triphosphate” (nucleobase-ribose
condensed with three phosphoryl groups) is also commonly written “nucleotide triphosphate.”

Thought Question

7.5 Suppose you can label DNA in a bacterium by growing
cells in medium containing either 14N nitrogen or the heavier
isotope, 15N; you can isolate pure DNA from the organism; and
you can subject DNA to centrifugation in a cesium chloride
solution, a solution that forms a density gradient when subjected to centrifugal force, thereby separating the light (14N)
and heavy (15N) forms of DNA to different locations in the test
tube. Given these capabilities, how might you prove that DNA
replication is semiconservative?

The process of DNA replication is divided into three
phases: (1) initiation, which is the melting (unwinding) of
the helix and the loading of the DNA polymerase enzyme
complex; (2) elongation, which is the sequential addition
of deoxyribonucleotides to a growing DNA chain, followed by proofreading; and finally (3) termination, in
which the DNA duplex is completely duplicated, the negative supercoils are restored, and key sequences of new
DNA are methylated.
Replication from a single origin. Replication in bacteria
begins at a single defi ned DNA sequence called the origin (oriC). Following initiation, a circular bacterial chromosome replicates bidirectionally (in both directions away
from the origin; see Fig. 7.13, step 1) until it terminates
at defi ned termination (ter) sites located on the opposite
side of the molecule. Once the process has begun, the cell
is committed to completing a full round of DNA synthesis. As a result, the decision of when to start copying the
genome is critical. If it starts too soon, the cell accumulates unneeded chromosome copies; if it starts too late, the
dividing cell’s septum “guillotines” the chromosome, killing both daughter cells. Consequently, elaborate fail-safe
mechanisms link the initiation of DNA replication with cell
mass, generation time, and cellular health, making the timing of initiation remarkably precise.

Note:

Some single-celled microbes have chromosomes with
more than one origin. The archaeon Sulfolobus acidocaldarius, for
instance, has a single chromosome with three replication origins.

2. Replication bubble
forms. Replication
forks progress in
opposite directions.

3. One strand at each
fork is synthesized
continuously 5′ to 3′.

Replication
bubble

5′
3′

Fork
movement 3′
5′

4. Second strand at each
fork is synthesized
discontinuously in Okazaki
fragments 5′ to 3′.

Okazaki
fragment
3′

5′
Fork
5′ movement 3′

Terminus

5. Replication
ends at terminus.
3′

5′

Terminus

FIGURE 7.13

Comparing direction of fork movement with
direction of DNA synthesis.


248



PART 2



GENES AND GENOMES

Initiation of replication
A

3′
13-mer

5′

9-mer

DnaA-ATP
5′

1. DnaA-ATP proteins bind to the
repeated 9-mer sequences within oriC.

3′
3′
5′

2. Binding of DnaA leads to strand
separation at the 13-mer repeats.

5′

A A
A A

3′

DNA helicase
loader (DnaC)

3′

3. DNA helicase (DnaB) and DNA helicase loader
(DnaC) associate with the DnaA-bound origin.

5′

5′

A A
DNA helicase
(DnaB)

A A

3′
5′

3′

A A

5′

A A

3′

4. DNA helicase loaders open the DNA helicase protein
ring and place the ring around the single-stranded (ss)
DNA at the origin (13-mer region). Loading of the DNA
helicase leads to release of the helicase loader.

DNA primase
(DnaG)
RNA primer
3′

5. DNA helicases recruit DNA primase (orange) to
make RNA primers (blue). Top-strand primer starts
rightward replication; bottom-strand primer starts
leftward replication. These primers initiate “continuous”
or leading-strand DNA synthesis at each fork.

A

5′
3′

3′

5′

A

5′

A A

3′

Sliding
clamp

6. A clamp loader carrying two DNA polymerase III
enzymes loads a sliding clamp onto each leading-strand
DNA at an RNA primer. Meanwhile, the Helicase-primase
moves laterally at each fork to unwind the DNA and
synthesize lagging strand primers.

DNA polymerase III
Clamp
loader

3′

New primer

5′

5′

5′

3′

3′
5′

3′
New RNA primer

Sliding
clamp

Leading
strand

7. DNA polymerase binds to the clamp.
Leading-strand synthesis begins and
continues to the end of the template. At each
lagging strand, a sliding clamp is then loaded.

5′

3′

5′

Clamp loader
opens clamps

3′

3′

5′
3′

Reloaded with new
sliding clamps

5′
Leading
strand

FIGURE 7.14



Initiation of DNA replication.

CHAPTER 7
Fundamentals of DNA replication. The basic process of

chromosome replication is outlined in Figure 7.13. After
initiation of replication, a replication bubble forms at the
origin. The bubble contains two replication forks that
move in opposite directions around the chromosome
(Fig. 7.13, step 2). DNA polymerases synthesize DNA in
a 5′-to-3′ direction. At each fork, therefore, one new DNA
strand can be synthesized continuously until the terminus
region (step 3). However, because the two DNA strands
are antiparallel and the DNA polymerases synthesize only
5′ to 3′, the other daughter strand has to be synthesized
discontinuously, in stages—seemingly backward relative to
the moving fork (step 4). The fragments of DNA formed on
this discontinuously synthesized strand are called Okazaki
fragments, after the Japanese scientists, Reiji and Tsuneko
Okazaki, who discovered them. As we will discuss later, the
Okazaki fragments are progressively stitched together to
make a continuous, unbroken strand. Ultimately, the two
replicating forks meet at the terminal sequence (step 5), and
the two daughter chromosomes separate.
Overall, copying the entire chromosome in E. coli takes
about 40 minutes. Chromosome-partitioning processes
then move each chromosome to different ends of the cell
so that a cell wall can form at midcell (the cell “equator”).
Once the cell wall is complete (the amount of time varies
but is generally about 20 minutes), the two daughter cells,
with their new chromosomes, can separate. So you might
imagine the whole process from the start of replication to
cell separation would take about 60 minutes for E. coli. But
when nutrients are plentiful, E. coli can divide in 20 minutes. How is this possible? As we saw in Chapter 3, the
answer is that in fast-growing cells, a partially replicated
chromosome can begin new rounds of replication even
before the first round is complete.
Now let’s examine each step in molecular detail to
answer some important questions about this mechanism.



GENOMES AND CHROMOSOMES



249

to prevent ill-timed initiations (before the cell has grown
enough to divide again).
How does SeqA know to bind just after the origin has
replicated? The key is DNA methylation. E. coli uses the
enzyme deoxyadenosine methylase (Dam) to attach a methyl
group to the N-6 position of adenine in the sequence GATC
(in Fig. 7.5A, see the N of the NH 2 group attached to the
six-membered ring). GATC sequences are scattered along
the chromosome on both strands. Just after the origin has
replicated, there is a short lag before the newly synthesized
strand is methylated by Dam methylase. As a result, the origin is temporarily hemimethylated—a situation in which
only one of the two complementary strands is methylated.
Because SeqA has a high affinity for hemimethylated origins, this inhibitor will bind most tightly immediately after
the origin has been replicated. Thus bound, SeqA will prevent another initiation event. Eventually, the Dam methylase
will methylate the new strand and decrease SeqA binding.
The replication initiator protein, DnaA. Timing of initia-

tion is determined by the concentration of the replication
initiator protein DnaA complexed with ATP (DnaA-ATP).
DnaA-ATP recognizes specific 9-bp repeats at oriC. As the
cell grows, the level of active DnaA-ATP rises until it is sufficient to bind to these repeats (Fig. 7.14, step 1). Binding of DnaA to the origin facilitates melting of DNA and
initiates the assembly of a membrane-attached replication
hyperstructure (the replisome), a complex of numerous
proteins that come together and bind at oriC.
After it is replicated, the origin cannot trigger another
round of replication for two reasons: inhibition by SeqA
and decreasing levels of unbound DnaA-ATP. Another
round of replication can begin only after (1) the origin
becomes fully methylated, (2) SeqA dissociates, and (3) the
DnaA-ATP concentration rises.
What happens to new replication origins after replication
begins? Figure 7.15 reveals that, even though the origin

What determines when replication begins? Initiation is
controlled by DNA methylation, and by the binding of
a specific initiator protein to the origin sequence. Further molecular events load the elaborate DNA polymerase
complex and generate the first RNA primer for the new
DNA strand. Figure 7.14
presents an overview of the
initiation process.

1

2

DNA methylation controls timing. The E. coli origin of

replication (oriC) is a 245-base-pair sequence. Initiation
of replication at oriC is activated by one protein, DnaA,
and inhibited by another, SeqA. Immediately after a cell
has divided, the level of active DnaA (DnaA bound to
ATP) is low, and the inhibitor protein SeqA binds to oriC

Single oriC

Replicated oriC

FIGURE 7.15

ARTHUR KORNBERG/U.S. NATIONAL LIBRARY OF MEDICINE

Initiating Replication

Movement of newly replicated origins. The
oriC loci on chromosomes were visualized through a GFP protein
that binds only at oriC.


250



PART 2



GENES AND GENOMES

Initiation requires RNA polymerases. An unexpected
feature of DNA replication is that its initiation actually
requires two RNA polymerases. The fi rst is the housekeeping RNA polymerase used to make most of the RNA in the
cell (discussed in Chapter 8). The second is the DNA primase (discussed shortly).
The housekeeping RNA polymerase transcribes DNA
at oriC, which helps separate the two DNA strands
(Fig. 7.14, step 2; this RNA polymerase is not shown).
Strand separation at oriC allows a special DNA helicase
(DnaB), in association with a DNA helicase loader (DnaC),
to bind the two replication forks formed during initiation
(step 3). DnaC facilitates proper placement of DNA helicase
at the fork, and then it disengages and leaves.
The DnaB helicase uses energy from ATP hydrolysis to unwind the DNA helix before DNA moves into the
DNA polymerase replicating complex. The ringlike DnaB
is assembled around one DNA strand at each replication
fork. After loading DnaB at the origin, DnaC is released
(Fig. 7.14, step 4). As the DNA unwinds, small singlestranded DNA-binding proteins (SSBs, seen in Fig. 7.17)
coat the exposed single-stranded DNA, protecting it from
nucleases patrolling the cell and preventing re-formation
of double-stranded DNA. The origin is almost ready to
receive DNA polymerase.
DNA-dependent DNA polymerases possess the unique
ability to “read” the nucleotide sequence of a DNA template
and synthesize a complementary DNA strand. The discovery of this activity earned Arthur Kornberg (1918–2007)
(Fig. 7.16) the 1959 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine. However, as remarkable as these enzymes are, no DNA
polymerase can start synthesizing DNA unless there is a preexisting DNA or RNA fragment to extend—that is, a primer
fragment. The primer fragment possesses a 3′ OH end that
receives incoming deoxyribonucleotides. Consequently,
once the helicase DnaB is bound to DNA, the next step is to
make RNA primers at each fork (Fig. 7.14, step 5). In contrast to DNA polymerases, RNA polymerases can synthesize RNA without a primer. The RNA polymerase required
for DNA replication is called DNA primase (DnaG). Primase synthesizes short (10–12 nucleotides) RNA primers at
the origin that can launch DNA replication. One primase is
loaded at each of the two replication forks.
Why do DNA polymerases require RNA primers? RNA
primers probably remain from when all life was RNA
based—an exciting model of molecular evolution, discussed in Chapter 17.

COURTESY OF STANFORD UNIVERS ITY

starts in the center of the cell, the newly replicated origins
(green fluorescence) move toward opposite cell poles. Moving origins toward the cell poles is part of the partitioning
mechanism that gets chromosomes out of harm’s way before
the division septum forms at midcell (described below).

FIGURE 7.16  Arthur Kornberg and Sylvy Kornberg, circa
1960. A biochemist in her own right, Sylvy Kornberg contributed in
the effort to purify DNA polymerase I.

A sliding clamp tethers DNA polymerase to DNA. At this

point, the DNA is almost ready for DNA polymerase. But
fi rst a sliding clamp protein (the beta subunit of DNA
polymerase III) must be loaded to keep the DNA polymerase affi xed to the DNA (Fig. 7.14, step 6). Without
this clamp, DNA polymerase would frequently “fall off”
the DNA molecule (see eTopic 7.1). A multisubunit complex
(called the clamp-loading complex) places the beta clamp,
along with an attached pair of DNA polymerase molecules,
onto DNA. DNA polymerase (specifically DNA Pol III,
discussed later) then binds to the 3′ OH terminus of the
primer RNA molecule and begins to synthesize new DNA
(step 7). The molecular structure of the beta clamp loaded
onto DNA is shown in eTopic 7.1.

Elongation of Replicating DNA

Escherichia coli contains five different DNA polymerase
proteins, designated Pol I through Pol V. All DNA polymerases catalyze the synthesis of DNA in the 5′-to-3′ direction. However, only Pol III and Pol I participate directly
in chromosome replication. The other polymerases conduct
operations to rescue stalled replication forks and repair
DNA damage.
DNA polymerase III. The main replication polymerase,

Pol III, is a complex, multicomponent enzyme. Pol III was
another discovery by Arthur Kornberg. The DNA synthesis
activity of Pol III is held in the alpha subunit of the complex, while other subunits are used for improving fidelity
(accuracy of replication) and processivity (a measure of how
long the polymerase remains attached to, and replicates, a

CHAPTER 7

template). The Pol III epsilon subunit (DnaQ), for example, contains a proofreading activity that corrects mistakes
and improves fidelity.
Proofreading activities within DNA polymerases scan
for mispaired bases that have been mistakenly added to a
growing chain. A mispaired base is more mobile than the
correct base in a DNA molecule because a mispaired base
does not properly hydrogen-bond to the template base. This
motion halts DNA elongation by Pol III because the base is
not properly positioned at the enzyme’s active site. Stalling
of Pol III activity triggers an intrinsic 3′-to-5′ exonuclease
activity in the epsilon subunit. Exonucleases degrade DNA
starting from either the 5′ end or the 3′ end, depending on
the enzyme. The exonuclease activity of Pol III cleaves the
phosphodiester bond, releasing the improperly paired base
from the growing chain. Once the wayward base has been
excised, Pol III can resume elongation.
Both DNA strands are elongated simultaneously. After

initiation, each replication fork contains one elongating
5′-to-3′ strand, called the “leading strand” (look back
at Fig. 7.14, step 7). But how is the opposite strand at
each fork replicated? There are no known DNA polymerases capable of synthesizing DNA in the 3′-to-5′ direction, which would seem to be needed if both strands are
to be synthesized simultaneously. DNA synthesis of one
strand continuing all the way back to the origin is not a
solution, because it would leave the unreplicated strand
at each fork exposed to possible degradation for too long
and would double the time needed to complete DNA
replication.
The cell has solved this dilemma by coordinating the
activity of two DNA Pol III enzymes in one complex—
one for each strand. The two associated Pol III complexes, together with DNA primase and helicase, form
the replisome. As the dsDNA unwinds at the fork, the
problem strand loops out and primase (DnaG) synthesizes a primer. The second Pol III enzyme binds to the
primed section of the loop and synthesizes DNA in the
5′-to-3′ direction (imagine the lower template strand in
Figure 7.17 threading from left to right, through the
polymerase ring). All the while, the second polymerase
moves with the first polymerase (on the leading strand)
toward the fork (Fig. 7.17, step 1). Recent evidence indicates that the two E. coli replisomes move along DNA
toward opposite poles of the cell, but generally stay within
the middle third of the cell. They eventually meet again at
the terminator located at midcell.
Note that simultaneous extension of the two strands at
a single fork requires that synthesis of the looped strand
must lag behind synthesis of the leading strand and that
new RNA primers must be synthesized by DNA primase (DnaG) every 1,000 bases or so. Thus, the lagging



GENOMES AND CHROMOSOMES



251

strand is synthesized discontinuously, in pieces called Okazaki fragments, while the leading strand can be synthesized continuously. As the leading strand moves forward,
advancing the fork, there remains a long stretch of lagging
strand complementary to the already replicated leading
strand. This lagging strand is single-stranded but protected by single-stranded DNA-binding proteins (SSBs)
(Fig. 7.17, step 2). After about 1,000 bases, DNA primase reenters and synthesizes a new RNA primer in anticipation of lagging-strand DNA synthesis (step 3). At some
point, the lagging-strand polymerase bumps into the 5′
end of the previously synthesized fragment. This interaction causes DNA polymerase to disengage from that strand
(step 4), and the clamp loader loads a new clamp near the
new RNA primer (step 5). The DNA polymerase binds to
that clamp and begins synthesizing another Okazaki fragment (step 6). This process repeats every 1,000 bases or so
around the chromosome.
The model just presented assumes that the replisome
contains two DNA polymerase III molecules. However,
the replisome actually consists of three polymerases—one
on the leading strand and two on the lagging strand. The
second polymerase on the lagging strand comes into play
only when a large gap of unreplicated DNA remains on the
lagging strand. For simplicity, the third polymerase is not
included in the model shown in Figure 7.17.
DNA polymerase I. Discontinuous DNA synthesis results in

a daughter strand containing long stretches of DNA punctuated by tiny patches of RNA primers. This RNA must
be replaced with DNA to maintain chromosome integrity.
To remove the RNA, cells typically use the 5′-to-3′ exonuclease activity of Pol I or an RNase enzyme specific for
RNA-DNA hybrid molecules (called RNase H). A DNA
Pol I enzyme then synthesizes a DNA patch using the 3′
OH end of the preexisting DNA fragment as a priming site
(Fig. 7.18). When DNA Pol I reaches the next fragment,
the enzyme removes the 5′ nucleotide and resynthesizes
it. This process of replicating DNA increases accuracy and
decreases mutations.
Once DNA Pol I stops synthesizing, it cannot join the
3′ OH of the last added nucleotide with the 5′ phosphate
of the abutting fragment. The resulting nick in the phosphodiester backbone is repaired by DNA ligase, which in
E. coli and many other bacteria uses energy gained by cleaving nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) to form the
phosphodiester bond (see Fig. 7.18). NAD is not used in
its usual way, as a reductant that oxidizes substrates. Energy
inherent in the diphosphate bond of NAD is captured upon
cleavage by DNA ligase and used to re-join the 3′ OH and
5′ phosphate ends present at the nick. DNA ligase from
eukaryotes and some other microbes use ATP rather than
NAD in this capacity.

252



PART 2



GENES AND GENOMES

Elongation of DNA synthesis
1. The leading-strand DNA Pol III enzyme
replicates the leading strand. SSBs cover and
protect the unreplicated single strand. The DNA
helicase remains on the lagging strand, unwinding
the dsDNA moving into the replisome complex.

3′
Sliding
clamp

5′

Leading-strand
DNA polymerase
3′ OH

Sliding
clamp

2. Lagging-strand DNA polymerase synthesizes
the lagging strand, which loops out after passing
through the polymerase.

Clamp
loader

5′
DNA helicase

SSB bound
to DNA

Lagging-strand
DNA polymerase

5′

Actual strand movement
threading through the
replisome

5′
3′ OH

3′

3′

5′

Okazaki fragments

3′
5′
3′ OH
3. After DNA helicase has moved
approximately 1,000 bases, another
RNA primer is synthesized on each
lagging strand.

3′
5′
RNA primer

3′
5′

5′
Lagging-strand polymerase 3′ OH
completing previous Okazaki
fragment

DNA
primase
5′

3′
5′
3′ OH
4. When the lagging-strand polymerase bumps
into the 5′ end of a previously synthesized
fragment, the DNA polymerase is released
and the clamp is disengaged.

3′
5′
DNA primase
is released

3′
5′

5′

3′
5′

FIGURE 7.17  The DNA polymerase dimer acting at a replication fork. The leading and lagging strands are synthesized simultaneously in the 5′-to-3′ direction. For clarity, the beta clamp on the lagging strand is shown on the opposite side of Pol III as compared to its
position on the leading strand.

CHAPTER 7

Thought Question

5′



GENOMES AND CHROMOSOMES

Lagging strand OH
3′

7.6 How fast does E. coli DNA polymerase synthesize DNA

5′

DNA replication generates supercoils. As template DNA

Pol I or RNase H cleaves
RNA at any point along the
hybrid RNA-DNA section.

RNase H

OH
3′

5′

253

RNA primer

Parental template strand

(in nucleotides per second) if the genome is 4.6 million base
pairs, replication is bidirectional, and the chromosome completes a round of replication in 40 minutes?



5′

is threaded through the replisome, the helicase continually pulls apart the two strands of the DNA helix. As a
result, the DNA ahead of the fork twists, introducing positive supercoils. (Try this yourself: Twist two pieces of string
together, staple one end of the duplex to a piece of cardboard, and then pull the two strands apart from the free
end. Notice the supercoiling that takes place beyond, or
downstream of, the moving fork.) The increasing torsional
stress in the chromosome could stop replication by making strand separation more and more difficult. What prevents the buildup of torsional stress is the DNA gyrase
(see Fig. 7.11) that is located ahead of the fork, removing
the positive supercoils as they form.

DNA

5′

DNA Pol I fills the gap
using 3′ OH end of DNA
fragment.

Pol I

5′
O–

DNA ligase

O P

HO

O–

O

NAD
AMP + NMN

5′
5′
O–
O

P
O

Terminating Replication and
Segregating Sister Chromosomes

O

DNA ligase repairs the
phosphodiester nick.

5′
5′

FIGURE 7.18

Bidirectional replication of a circular bacterial chromosome results in the two replication forks trying to replicate
through the same DNA sequences 180° from the origin—
that is, halfway around the chromosome. What tells the
polymerases to stop? The E. coli chromosome has as many
as 10 terminator sequences (ter) that polymerases enter



Removing the RNA primer. The 3′-to-5′

exonuclease activity of Pol I or RNase H cleaves the RNA primer
(blue). In either case, DNA polymerase I uses the preexisting 3′ OH
end of the DNA fragment to fill the gap. Finally, DNA ligase repairs
the phosphodiester nick using energy derived from the cleavage
of NAD. AMP = adenosine monophosphate; NMN = nicotinamide
monophosphate.

3′

3′
5′

5′
3′ OH

3′ OH

3′

5′

5′

5′

3′

5′

5′

5′

3′ 5′

5. A new clamp is assembled on
the newly primed lagging strand.
The clamp on the leading strand
does not need replacing.

3′ 5′

6. The DNA polymerase binds to
that clamp and begins synthesizing
another Okazaki fragment.

254



PART 2

A.



GENES AND GENOMES

Origin

Counterclockwise
fork

Clockwise
fork

Arrows indicate
replication fork
movement.

terJ
terG
terF
terB terC

terE
terD
terA
Counterclockwise
fork trap

Clockwise
fork trap

Different ter loci
trap clockwise and
counterclockwise
forks.

Thought Question

7.7 Reexamine Figure 7.15. If you GFP-tagged a protein

bound to the ter region, where would you expect fluorescence
to appear in the cell with two origins?

B.

Replication forms a
linked catenane of
sister chromosomes.

Completed replication

XerCD passes linked
chromosomes
through each other,
forming a catenane.
XerC and
XerD

Resolution

FIGURE 7.19

called Tus (terminus utilization substance) binds to these
sequences. Tus stops DnaB helicase activity and, thus,
polymerization. Multiple terminator sites ensure that the
polymerase complex does not escape and continue replicating DNA. Which terminator site is used depends in part
on whether replication of one fork has lagged behind replication of the other.



Terminating replication of the chromosome.

A. Terminator regions for DNA replication on the E. coli chromosome. B. Resolution of DNA replication catenanes by XerC and XerD.

but rarely, if ever, leave (Fig. 7.19A). One set of terminators deals solely with the clockwise-replicating polymerase,
while the other set halts DNA polymerases replicating counterclockwise relative to the origin. A protein

During and immediately after replication, the cell is
faced with what could be called “knotty” problems. The
first develops as soon as replication begins. Replicated
DNA molecules occasionally form knots between homologous genes on sister chromosomes, holding them together.
These knots must be removed before sister chromosomes
can segregate to opposite cell poles. Resolving these knots
requires the enzyme topoisomerase IV, a type II topoisomerase similar to DNA gyrase. Topo IV activity is stimulated by SeqA, the protein that binds to newly replicated,
hemimethylated DNA. Recall that SeqA also prevents
reinitiation at newly replicated origins. This one protein,
therefore, prevents the start of a premature round of replication and removes topological constraints to chromosome
segregation.
The second “knotty” problem is encountered when a
chromosome finishes replicating. Because of the topology of the chromosome, the two daughter molecules will
appear as a catenane, a pair of linked rings. The rings must
be unlinked so that sister chromosomes can segregate at
termination (Fig. 7.19B). The bacterial cell uses proteins
called XerC and XerD to unlink these rings. XerCD recognizes a specific site (called dif ) on both DNA molecules and
catalyzes a series of cutting and re-joining steps that essentially pass one molecule through the other. Once the two
daughter chromosomes have resolved and move toward the
poles, the cell can begin to divide, forming the cell septum.
A mutant bacterium defective in XerC or D will have difficulty dividing (Fig. 7.20).
Once replicated, how do sister chromosomes move to
opposite poles of a bacterial cell? In some species, such as
Bacillus subtilis, a mechanical segregation system consisting of the proteins ParA and ParB and the DNA-binding site parS pulls the chromosomes toward different ends
of the cell. E. coli, however, does not possess a parABS
system for segregating sister chromosomes. It seems that
the process of replication itself, which takes place mostly

Segregation
defect

Normal

Normal

2 µm

© 2006, AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR MICROBIOLOGY. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.

CHAPTER 7











J. Bacteriol. 188:6016–6019.





in the middle third of the cell (see Fig. 3.29), propels E.
coli chromosomes toward opposite cell poles. The terminator region remains in the center of the cell until
after it is replicated. The replicating chromosome, then,
takes on the appearance of a butterfly with its wings
outstretched toward either cell pole. This configuration
places the genome in a vulnerable position. A bacterial cell
must avoid making a cell division septum too early or
risk slicing through its still-replicating chromosomes.
How bacteria prevent this disaster is discussed in Special
Topic 7.1.

Thought Questions

7.8 Individual cells in a population of E. coli typically initi-

ate replication at different times (asynchronous replication).
However, depriving the population of a required amino acid
can synchronize reproduction of the population. Ongoing
rounds of DNA synthesis finish, but new rounds do not begin.
Replication stops until the amino acid is once again added to
the medium—an action that triggers simultaneous initiation
in all cells. Why does this synchronization of reproduction
happen?

7.9 The antibiotic rifampin inhibits transcription by RNA
polymerase, but not by primase (DnaG). What happens to DNA
synthesis if rifampin is added to a synchronous culture?

GENOMES AND CHROMOSOMES



255

To Summarize

FIGURE 7.20  Effect of a xerD mutation on Caulobacter
cell division. Caulobacter replicates by producing a motile cell at

one end of a nonmotile, fixed, stalked cell. The photomicrograph
shows cells of a xerD mutant. The middle cell is elongated with
multiple constrictions because of the xerD defect in chromosomal
segregation. Even though Topo IV is present in the xerD mutant,
both mechanisms are needed to ensure that linked replicating chromosomes always clear the division plane. Source: R. B. Jensen. 2006.





Replication is semiconservative, with newly synthesized strands lengthening in a 5′-to-3′ direction. Replication consists of initiation, elongation, and termination
steps.
Replication is initiated from a fixed DNA origin
attached to the cell membrane. Initiation depends on
the mass and size of the growing cell. It is controlled by
the accumulation of initiator and repressor proteins and
by methylation at the origin.
Elongation requires that primase (DnaG) must lay
down an RNA primer, DNA polymerase III must act
as a dimer at each replication fork, and a sliding clamp
must keep DNA Pol III attached to the template DNA
molecule.
The 3′-to-5′ proofreading activity of Pol III corrects
accidental errors during polymerization.
DNA ligase joins Okazaki fragments in the lagging
strand.
Two replisomes, each containing a pair of DNA
Pol III complexes, move along the DNA in E. coli.
Termination involves stopping replication forks halfway
around the chromosome at ter sites that inhibit helicase
(DnaB) activity.
Ringed catenanes formed at the completion of replication are separated by the proteins XerC and XerD.

7.4

Plasmids

Two kinds of extragenomic DNA molecules can interact
with bacterial genomes: horizontally transferred plasmids
and the genomes of bacteriophages (viruses that infect
bacterial cells). Plasmid-encoded functions can contribute to the physiology of the cell (for example, antibiotic
resistance). In some cases, the plasmid or phage DNA
will integrate into the bacterial genome (see Section 9.2).
Eukaryotic genomes and the genomes of eukaryotespecific plasmids and viruses also share proteins and
undergo chromosomal interactions, such as insertions of
viral DNA into the host chromosome. Viruses of eukaryotes and their applications in genetic engineering are discussed in greater detail in Chapters 11 and 12. In this
section we discuss aspects of plasmid replication. Discussion of bacteriophage replication can be found in Chapter 6 and eTopic 7.2.

256



PART 2



GENES AND GENOMES

SPECIAL TOPIC 7.1& & Nucleoid Occlusion Factors and the Septal “Guillotine”
During bacterial cell division, it is crucial that sister chromosomes dodge the septum forming at midcell. Segregation proteins, such as topoisomerase IV (ParC) in Escherichia, work
to untangle replicated sister chromosomes so that they can
move away from midcell toward the safety of opposite cell
poles. But because replication and segregation take time, it
is equally important for a cell to prevent septal formation as
long as replicating chromosomes occupy midcell. If cell division starts too early, the growing septum could slice through
(“guillotine”) a replicating chromosome, killing the cell. Bacteria such as E. coli and Bacillus subtilis use nucleoid exclusion
proteins to prevent septal guillotining of chromosomes. The
protein in E. coli is called SlmA.
How does SlmA work? Recent evidence by Shishen Du
and Joe Lutkenhaus at the University of Kansas Medical Center sheds new light on the mechanism. Recall from Chapter
3 that before a septum can form at midcell, a protein called
FtsZ must polymerize to form a ring around the circumference of the membrane. However, SlmA can bind to chromosomal DNA and prevent FtsZ polymerization and, thus,
septum formation. Figure 1 shows in vitro evidence for this
inhibition. FtsZ in solution will form long, rod-like polymers,
but not in the presence of SlmA molecules bound to SlmA

FtsZ

SlmA

oriC
SBS

ter

SlmA blocks FtsZ ring
formation. No septum

Replication

oriC

oriC
Replication
fork

ter
A. FtsZ

B. FtsZ + SlmA + SBS

FtsZ filament

FIGURE 1  Nucleoid exclusion protein SlmA prevents
FtsZ polymerization. A. In vitro polymerization of FtsZ.
B. When SlmA and SBS sequences are present, FtsZ fails to
polymerize in vitro.

Plasmids Replicate Autonomously

Plasmids are much smaller than chromosomes (Fig. 7.21)
and are found in archaea, bacteria, and eukaryotic
microbes. Plasmids are usually circular, and circular

©2014 DU, LUTKEN HAUS. OPEN ACCESS LICENSE UNDER THE
CREATIVE COMMONS ATTRIBUTION LICENSE.

Chromosome
segregation

FtsZ ring forms.

oriC

oriC

SBS

ter

ter

Cell division

FIGURE 2



Model for SlmA function.

plasmids, like circular chromosomes, are typically negatively supercoiled. Replication of many of these extrachromosomal elements is not tied to chromosome replication.
Each plasmid contains its own origin sequence for DNA

CHAPTER 7



GENOMES AND CHROMOSOMES



257

DNA-binding sites (SBS). In the chroA. parCts
B. parCts slmA–
mosome, SBS sequences cluster
mostly near the origin of replication.
Consequently, the nucleoid exclusion
protein SlmA prevents septum formation by binding to SBS sequences
near the origin and will also bind to
part of FtsZ, as long as the nucleoid
remains near midcell (Fig. 2).
Part of the evidence for this
model is shown in Figure 3. Du and
Lutkenhaus examined cells whose
C. parCts ftsZ-K190V
D.
nucleoids were stuck near midcell
because of a parC mutation and
estimated the frequency of septum formation sites. Comparisons
were made between cells expressing native SlmA (Fig. 3A), cells lacking SlmA (Fig. 3B), and cells that
express native SlmA but have an
altered FtsZ that will polymerize
even when bound to SlmA. Wildtype SlmA+ cells rarely formed inappropriate septa over their nucleoids
FIGURE 3  Formation of inappropriate septa in cells with stalled nucleoids.
(Fig. 3A), while slmA mutants freA–C. A series of temperature-sensitive parC mutants (parCts) were shifted from 30°C,
quently formed inappropriate septa
a growth temperature at which ParCts will work, to 42°C for one hour, a temperature at
(Fig. 3B). Cells with the mutant form
which ParCts will not help sister nucleoids move toward cell poles. Nucleoids were stained
of FtsZ that was resistant to SlmA
with the fluorescent dye DAPI (white), and constrictions representing the beginning of
also exhibited higher numbers of
septum formation were observed. DAPI was added 20 minutes before imaging. Red arrows
indicate apparent constrictions. D. Joe Lutkenhaus led research into how SlmA works.
inappropriate septa (Fig. 3C). These
Source: A–C: S. Du and J. Lutkenhaus. 2014. PloS Genetics 10:e1004460. D: Provided by J. Lutkenhaus. Courtesy
data support the proposed model of
of University of Kansas Medical Center.
SlmA in preventing septal formation.
So how does a septum ever form?
RESEARCH QUESTION
Because SlmA binds to the SBS sequences near the origin
Design an experiment in which fluorescently tagged proteins
of replication, SlmA will be stripped from FtsZ as the siscould be used in vivo to confirm SlmA-FtsZ interaction.
ter origins and chromosomes segregate toward opposite
cell poles following replication. With the nucleoids nestled
Du, Shishen, and Joe Lutkenhaus. 2014. SlmA antagonism
at either end of the dividing cell and SlmA removed from
of FtsZ assembly employs a two-pronged mechanism like
FtsZ, septum formation can safely proceed and the cell
MinCD. PLoS Genetics 10:e1004460.
can divide.

replication, but only a few of the genes needed for replication. Thus, even when the timing of plasmid replication is not linked to that of the chromosome, many of
the proteins used for plasmid replication are actually host

enzymes. Which host proteins are used depends on the
plasmid.
Plasmids can replicate in two different ways. Bidirectional replication starts at a single origin and moves in

258



PART 2



GENES AND GENOMES

A.
©SCIENCE VU/H. POTTER & D. PRESSLER/VISUALS UNLIMITED

Plasmid

A

–

+

1. Replication begins at fixed origin.
ori

C

B

2. Nick is made by
RepA dimer at plusstrand origin. RepA
covalently binds to
5′ end of nick.
A

3′

C

B

Rep dimer

B.
3. 3′ end of nicked
strand is extended
by DNA polymerase III.
amp

tet
A
pBR322
4,362 bp

B

–

+

C

+

–
C

New strand
(continuous)

4. ssDNA is
displaced.

ori

FIGURE 7.21

B

A

C


5. Synthesis of
new plus strand
is completed by
DNA Pol III.

Plasmid map. A. Note the huge difference in size

between a circular plasmid DNA molecule (arrow) and chromosomal
DNA after both are gently released from a cell (approx. 1 µm).
B. Map of plasmid pBR322. This plasmid contains an origin of
replication (ori) and genes encoding resistance to ampicillin (amp)
and tetracycline (tet).

+

–

A

B

C

C

B
A

+

7. Single-strand
origins are used by
host RNA polymerase,
DNA Pol III, Pol I, and
DNA ligase to
synthesize
complementary
minus strand.

6. RepA releases
circularized old
plus strand.

two directions simultaneously. Rolling-circle replication
(Fig. 7.22
) is unidirectional. In rolling-circle replication, a replication initiator (RepA, encoded by a plasmid gene) binds to the origin of replication and nicks one
strand. RepA holds on to one end (5′ PO 4) of the nicked
strand, while the other end (3′ OH) serves as a primer for
host DNA polymerase to replicate the intact, complementary strand. The RepA initiator protein recruits a helicase
that unwinds DNA, which becomes coated by singlestranded DNA-binding proteins. As replication proceeds, the nicked strand progressively peels off without
replicating, until the strand is completely displaced. Then
the two ends of the displaced but nicked single strand
are re-joined by the RepA protein and released. The single-stranded circular molecule is protected by host single-stranded DNA-binding proteins until host enzymes
replicate a complementary strand and regenerate a doublestranded molecule. Although most known plasmids use

+
–
B

+

A

A
C

FIGURE 7.22

B



C

Plasmid replication: rolling-circle model.

only one of the two replication strategies (bidirectional or
unidirectional), a few can use either one, depending on
the circumstance of the cell.

Plasmid “Tricks” Ensure Inheritance

If plasmids replicate autonomously, can cells easily lose
their plasmids? When a plasmid-containing host cell
divides, is it just chance that determines whether both

CHAPTER 7

A.

Nucleation of new
ParM molecules forms
filaments on plasmid.

B.

Plasmids diffuse
around the cell.



GENOMES AND CHROMOSOMES

C.



259

Filaments connect
two plasmids.

ParR

Plasmid
ParM-ADP

ParM- ATP

J. MØLLER-JENSEN ET AL. 2002.
EMBO J. 21:3119–3127.

E.

ParM filament

D.

2 µm

Plasmid hitting cell pole
triggers filament detachment
and depolymerization.

Stable filaments polymerize
to drive plasmids toward
opposite poles.

FIGURE 7.23

 Molecular model of plasmid segregation. The two images at far right show a cell with a parM mutant plasmid unable
to make a ParM filament, and a cell with a parM+ plasmid making a ParM actin-like filament (green) to partition daughter plasmids (equivalent
to panel D). ParM filament was seen by combined phase-contrast and immunofluorescence microscopy using rabbit anti-ParM antibodies
and fluorescent Alexa 488–conjugated goat antirabbit IgG antibodies. Source: Adapted from Christopher S. Campbell and R. Dyche Mullins. 2007. J. Cell Biol.

179:1059–1066, fig. 4.

daughter cells inherit the plasmid? In some instances, the
answer is yes (see the Current Research Highlight). Some
plasmids make many copies of themselves before the bacterial cell divides. These are called high-copy-number plasmids and can attain 50–700 copies per cell, depending on
the plasmid. As a result, there is a high probability that
both daughter cells will, by random chance, contain at
least one plasmid.
Not all plasmids are high-copy-number, however.
Low-copy-number plasmids limit how many copies they
make to avoid draining the cell of energy. Cells forced to
waste energy making many plasmid copies could be at a
growth disadvantage when competing with plasmid-less
cells in a natural environment. Low-copy-number plasmids evolved clever partitioning systems that ensure both
daughter cells will contain copies of the plasmid. Figure 7.23 illustrates a model for how one type of partitioning works for plasmid R1, a Salmonella plasmid that
imparts multidrug antibiotic resistance to host bacteria. The process employs three known plasmid-encoded
genes: parC, parM, and parR. The parC DNA sequence

is analogous to the centromere of eukaryotic chromosomes. The DNA-binding protein ParR binds to the
parC sequence and forms a ParR-parC plasmid complex.
ParM protein is an actin-like molecule that forms long
filaments as it hydrolyzes ATP. The ParM filaments are
dynamically unstable, constantly elongating and shortening. However, each end of a ParM actin-like filament
can bind to a ParR-parC plasmid complex. When both
ends of a ParM filament contact ParR-parC plasmid complexes, the filament stabilizes and elongates until the two
plasmids hit the opposite poles of the cell. The plasmid
is thus dislodged from the filament, and the filament
quickly dissociates.
Some plasmids ensure their inheritance by carrying
genes whose functions benefit the host bacterium under
certain conditions. For instance, bacterial plasmids can
carry genes that confer antibiotic resistance (discussed in
Figure 7.21B and Chapter 27). As long as the antibiotic
is present in the environment, any cell that loses the plasmid will be killed or stop growing. Antibiotic resistance
plasmids benefit bacteria, but they are a major problem

260



PART 2



GENES AND GENOMES

for modern hospitals, where plasmids carrying multiple
drug resistance genes are transmitted from harmless bacteria into pathogens. On the other hand, plasmids (such as
pBR322) containing drug resistance genes are the workhorses of genetic technology and have benefited society
tremendously.
Other kinds of host survival genes carried by plasmids
include genes providing resistance to toxic metals, genes
encoding toxins that aid pathogenesis, and genes encoding
proteins that enable symbiosis. These are discussed in later
chapters. Most of the genes involved in the nitrogen-fixing
symbiosis of Rhizobium, for example, are plasmid-borne.
Far from being freeloaders, plasmids often contribute significantly to the physiology of an organism.
Some plasmids, however, use what could be called
“strong-arm measures” to ensure their maintenance. These
plasmids come equipped with self-preservation genes,
called “addiction modules,” that force the host cell to keep
the plasmid or die (eTopic 7.3).

Plasmids Are Transmitted between Cells

Plasmids have played a pivotal role in evolution because
of how easily they can be passed back and forth between
bacterial species. This is particularly evident today in the
spread of antibiotic resistance, whose genetic basis is often
a plasmid-encoded gene.
Some plasmids are self-transferable via conjugation,
a process that requires cell-to-cell contact to move the
plasmid from a donor cell to a recipient (as discussed in
Section 9.1). Other plasmids are incapable of conjugation
(nontransmissible). A third group can be transferred only
if a self-transferable plasmid resides in the same cell. In this
case, the conjugation mechanism produced by one plasmid will act on the other plasmid. Any plasmid released
from dead cells can also be taken up intact by some bacteria in a process called transformation (see Section 9.1).
Finally, plasmids can be transmitted in nature by accidentally being packaged into bacteriophage head coats—in
other words, by bacteriophage transduction (also covered
in Section 9.1).

To Summarize






Plasmids are autonomously replicating circular or linear DNA molecules that are part of a cell’s genome.
Plasmids replicate by rolling-circle and/or bidirectional
mechanisms.
Plasmids can be transferred between cells.

7.5

Eukaryotic and
Archaeal Chromosomes

The chromosomes of eukaryotic microbes such as protists
and algae have much in common with those of prokaryotes.
Both consist of double-stranded DNA, for example, and
both usually replicate bidirectionally. Nevertheless, important differences exist as well, particularly in genome structure. Eukaryotic chromosomes are linear and contained
within a nucleus, and their replication involves mitosis
(reviewed in eAppendix 2). Archaeal chromosomes, similar to bacterial chromosomes, are circular and lack a nuclear
membrane, but archaeal proteins involved in transcription
and replication appear more eukaryotic than bacterial.

Eukaryotic Genomes Are
Large and Linear

Overall, the genomes of eukaryotic nuclei are larger than
those of bacteria, sometimes by several orders of magnitude. For example, Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Mycoplasma pneumoniae genomes are 12,052 kb and 800 kb,
respectively. Eukaryotes typically have duplicate copies of
multiple chromosomes (diploid number ranges between
10 and 100). All eukaryotic chromosomes are linear,
whereas many, if not most, bacterial chromosomes are
circular. Eukaryotic chromosomes use mitosis to replicate and segregate to daughter cells (see Appendix 1).
Each eukaryotic chromosome has numerous origins of
replication that collectively generate hundreds of replication bubbles, although not all of them “fire” during each
replication cycle. Termination zones essential to bacterial
chromosomes are not found in eukaryotes.
The ends of eukaryotic chromosomes, called telomeres,
have a special problem replicating. Because their chromosomes are linear, eukaryotes cannot replicate their 3′ ends
using DNA-dependent DNA polymerase. The result is that
the 5′ ends of a chromosome (the result of lagging-strand
synthesis) are always shorter than 3′ ends. Left like this,
chromosomes would become progressively shorter and
genetic information would be lost. The solution to this
problem is an enzyme complex called telomerase. Telomerase is actually a reverse transcriptase that reads RNA as
a template to synthesize DNA. Telomerase uses an intrinsic RNA (an RNA that is part of the enzyme) as a template
to add numerous DNA repeat sequences to the 3′ ends of
chromosomes. Extension of the 3′ end by telomerase will
permit synthesis of the RNA primer necessary to replicate
the 5′ end of the chromosome. The process prevents the
loss of genetic information during division.

CHAPTER 7

Telomerase may have evolved from the ancient progenitor
cells that contained RNA rather than DNA genomes (see
Section 17.2). The reverse transcriptase may also be the
evolutionary source of retroviruses (see eTopic 6.1).

Note:

Bacteria with linear chromosomes do not have telomerases. How do they replicate their 3′ ends? Some cap the ends of
their chromosomes with covalently bound terminal proteins that
prime DNA replication (Streptomyces). Others form covalently
closed hairpin ends (essentially making one long, circular, singlestranded molecule). The ends appear to recombine after being replicated (Borrelia).

Unlike prokaryotic cells, eukaryotic cells pack their
DNA within the confines of a nucleus where a series of proteins called histones compact the DNA. Histones are rich
in arginine and lysine, so they are positively charged, basic
proteins that easily bind to the negatively charged DNA.
The DNA becomes wrapped around the histones to form
units called nucleosomes. Histones also play a regulatory
role through methylation and acetylation. Bacteria, too,
have DNA-packaging proteins, but they are more diverse
and less essential for function (see Sections 3.4 and 7.2).
The detailed structures of the genomes of eukaryotes
and prokaryotes reveal surprising differences (Fig. 7.24).
The genome of the bacterium E. coli is packed with genes
(green in the figure) encoding proteins or RNA molecules. These genes are separated by very little unused
or noncoding DNA (purple), and by only an occasional
mobile element, such as an insertion sequence, that can
move from one DNA molecule to another. Most prokaryotic genes are organized in coordinately regulated,
multiple-gene operons. In contrast, 98% of the human
genome consists of noncoding sequences (sequences that
do not encode proteins). Noncoding sequences include



GENOMES AND CHROMOSOMES



261

sequences that regulate protein-coding genes; genes
that encode untranslated, small regulatory RNAs; and
the fossil genomes of ancient viruses. Coding genes are
separated by large stretches of noncoding sequences and
usually are not clustered together in operons. Moreover, coding genes in the human genome are interrupted by introns (DNA within a gene that is not part
of the coding sequence for a protein, shown as yellow
in Fig. 7.24) and ancient gene duplications that have
decayed into nonfunctional, vestigial pseudogenes. Bacteria also have pseudogenes, but they account for much
less of the genome than in eukaryotes. The more rapid
replication of bacteria causes pseudogenes to be lost more
quickly.

Note:

Pseudogenes differ from noncoding DNA in that at least
part of a pseudogene’s sequence is similar to that of a gene with a
known function. Also note that some pseudogenes express mRNA,
but the proteins produced have no obvious function.

By themselves, promoters of eukaryotic genes have very
low activity and require enhancer DNA sequences to drive
transcriptional activity. Enhancer sequences act at long distances from promoters, and scientists suspect that once
enhancers became important, it was necessary to place
enough DNA between them to reduce the activation of
other, unrelated but adjacent promoters.

Archaeal Genomes Combine Features
of Bacteria and Eukaryotes

All characterized archaea have a single circular chromosome
and polygenic operons; and, like bacteria, their reproduction is predominantly asexual. Archaea are true prokaryotes

A. A genome section of the bacterium Escherichia coli. Sections include coding nenes (green), noncoding sequences (purple), and mobile elements
such as insertion sequences (IS).
thrA

thrB
thrC

dnaK

0

10

IS186

IS1

20

fixA

carB
30

40

50 kb

B. Noncoding DNA sequences (purple) comprise 98% of the human genome; protein-coding genes in eukaryotes are interrupted by introns (yellow).
Trypsinogen gene

0

FIGURE 7.24

10



20

Genome structure in a prokaryote and a eukaryote.

30

40 kb

Gene
Intron
Genome-wide repeat
(small DNA sequence
repeated several times
throughout the genome)

262



PART 2



GENES AND GENOMES

because their cells lack a nuclear membrane, but the structures of the DNA-packing proteins, RNA polymerase,
and ribosomal components more closely resemble those
of eukaryotes. Figure 7.25 compares the core RNA polymerase (RNAP) subunits of the archaeon Sulfolobus to
those of the eukaryotic RNA polymerase II (RNAPII).
The archaeal TATA-binding protein (TBP, green) and
transcription factor B (TFB, pink) also show homology
to eukaryotic counterparts that help position and activate
RNAPII at some eukaryotic promoters. One consequence
of eukaryotic-like transcription and translation in archaea
is that archaea are resistant to antibacterial antibiotics that
target those processes.
Oddly, these organisms have two different types of
DNA polymerase: one similar to those of eukaryotes and
the other unique to archaea. The archaeal origin of the
replication sequence also shows greater similarity to those
of eukaryotes. Finally, it should be noted that archaeal
genomes encode certain unique components, such as
the metabolic pathway of methanogenesis. (For more on
archaea, see Chapter 19.)
What experimental data allow us to make such comparisons? Overwhelmingly, we rely on new data from the
growing number of microbial genomes sequenced (over
30,000 as of 2015). Comparison of genomes has revolutionized our understanding of evolutionary relationships
among microbes.
We will now examine the tools of DNA sequence analysis that have made these studies possible. The most important of these tools—restriction mapping, DNA sequencing,
and amplification by the polymerase chain reaction—actually harness the molecular apparatus used by bacteria to
replicate or protect their own chromosomes.

To Summarize










Eukaryotic chromosomes are always linear, doublestranded DNA molecules that replicate by mitosis.
A reverse transcriptase called telomerase is needed to
finish replicating the ends of a eukaryotic chromosome.
Histones (eukaryotic DNA-packing proteins) play a critical role in forming chromosomes.
Introns and pseudogenes are noncoding DNA
sequences that make up a large portion of eukaryotic
chromosomes.
Archaeal chromosomes resemble those of bacteria in
size and shape, but archaeal DNA polymerases are more
closely related to eukaryotic enzymes.

7.6

DNA Sequence Analysis

How do we study a genome? We have just described the
core concepts of DNA structure, packaging, and replication. This knowledge is crucial to understanding genomics
and the fundamentals of genomic analysis. But what about
the basic techniques used to manipulate DNA? These
include isolating genomic DNA from cells, snipping out
DNA fragments with surgical precision, splicing them into
plasmid vehicles, and reading their nucleotide sequences.
These are the techniques that drive the genomic revolution.

DNA Isolation and Purification

The chemical uniformity of DNA means that simple and
reliable purification methods can be used to isolate it.
A variety of techniques are used to extract DNA from
bacterial cells. The cells may be lysed
II
polymerase
polymerase
RNA
RNA
using lysozyme to degrade the peptiB. Eukaryotic
A. Archaeal
doglycan of the cell wall, followed by
TFIIF
TATA-binding
treatment with detergents to dissolve
protein (TBP)
TFIID
the cell membranes. Lysozyme is an
enzyme that cleaves the bond linking
TBP
residues of peptidoglycan. Once the
RNAPII
RNAP
TFIIA
cell contents are released, most proteins are removed by being precipitated
TFIIB
TFIIE
Core
in a high-salt solution. The precipitated
polymerase
TFB
TFIIH
proteins are then removed by centrifuDNA
gation, and the cleared lysate containFIGURE 7.25  RNA polymerases from Archaea and
ing DNA is passed through a column
Eukarya exhibit homology. The core RNA polymerase (RNAP)
containing a silica resin that specifically binds DNA. The
subunits of the archaeon Sulfolobus (A) show homology to those of
remaining proteins are washed out of the column because
the eukaryotic RNA polymerase II (RNAPII). (B). The TATA-binding
they do not stick to the resin, and the DNA is eluted
protein (TBP, green) and transcription factor B (TFB, pink) of
with water. The DNA is then concentrated via alcohol
Sulfolobus also show homology to eukaryotic counterparts.

CHAPTER 7

A.
5′
AluI

3′
A G C T
T C G A

3′

HaeIII

GENOMES AND CHROMOSOMES



263

a weak buffer. At this point, the extracted DNA can be
examined with a variety of analytical tools.
There are other methods for isolating plasmid DNA,
such as equilibrium density gradient centrifugation. (See
eTopic 7.4 for a discussion of equilibrium density gradient centrifugation and its use in the classic Meselson-Stahl
experiment.)

Haemophilus aegyptius
5′

5′

3′
G G A T C C
C C T A G G

Bacillus amyloliquefaciens

Restriction Endonucleases and
the Birth of Recombinant DNA

What seemed to be an esoteric line of research, exploring
how bacteria cleave the “foreign” DNA of invading plasmids and viruses, ultimately led to a tool that revolution5′
3′
A A G C T T
ized biology. One of the ways bacteria rid themselves of
Hind III
Haemophilus influenzae RD
T T C G A A
foreign DNA is through proteins called restriction endo3′
5′
nucleases that cleave unfamiliar DNA molecules at specific
sequences called restriction sites (usually 4–8 bp long).
5′
3′
Different species of bacteria use restriction endonucleases
G A A T T C
EcoRI
Escherichia coli RY13
C T T A A G
that recognize different DNA sequences. A few examples of
3′
5′
restriction enzymes and target sequences are shown in Figure 7.26A. The most useful restriction endonucleases for
Clones
B.
molecular biology recognize restriction sites that are
Size
Size
(–) pole
M
1
2
3
4
5
6
M
four to six bases in length. Notice that the sequence
Samples are
8
of each of these restriction sites is a palindrome in
loaded here.
which the top and bottom strands read the same in
4
the 5′-to-3′ direction. A palindromic DNA restricFragments
3
move toward
tion site enables a restriction endonuclease to attack
(+) pole.
both strands of a duplex using the same substrate
recognition site.
2
Restriction endonucleases cleave the phosphodiester backbones of opposite strands at locations either near
1
or within the center of the restriction site. The cut may
produce blunt ends or staggered ends. In staggered ends,
Size
(+) pole
(kb)
the top strand is cut at one end of the site, and the bottom strand is cut at the other end (Fig. 7.26A). Staggered
FIGURE 7.26  Bacterial DNA restriction endonucleases. A.
ends are also called “cohesive ends” because the protruding
Target sequences of sample enzymes. The names of these enzymes
strand at one end can base-pair with a complementary proreflect the genus and species of the source organism. B. Agarose-gel
truding strand from any DNA fragment cut with the same
size analysis of EcoRI-restricted DNA fragments. Smaller fragments
move toward the bottom faster than large fragments. DNA bands
restriction endonuclease, regardless of the source organare viewed using chemical stains that bind DNA and fluoresce under
ism. The ability of cohesive ends from different organisms
UV light.
to base-pair initially made recombinant DNA technology
possible.
But how do bacteria making these scissor-like DNA
enzymes cut foreign DNA and not destroy their own? They
protect their chromosome with a methylating enzyme (a
precipitation (ethanol or isopropanol). DNA may be premodification enzyme) that places methyl groups on both
cipitated from aqueous solution by the addition of ethanol
strands of restriction sites recognized by a specific restricand salt because ethanol removes water associated with
tion endonuclease. A restriction endonuclease cannot cut a
DNA’s phosphoryl groups (negatively charged), which
+
site if either one of the strands is methylated. Thus, newly
then bind the Na ions from the salt. The DNA, now neureplicated double-stranded molecules are protected, since
tralized, precipitates out of the polar water-ethanol soluone strand, the template, remains methylated at all times.
tion. The precipitated DNA is then dissolved in water or
3′

COURTESY OF MARLIGEN BIOSCIENCES, INC.

AluI and HaeIII
produce blunt ends.

3′
G G C C
C C G G

3′

BamHI

Arthrobacter luteus
5′

5′

Enyzme from:



5′

BamHI, HindIII,
and EcoRI produce
“sticky” ends.



PART 2



GENES AND GENOMES
B.

STEVE NORTHRUP/TIME LIFE PICTURES/GETTY IMAGES

Foreign DNA, such as phage A.
DNA, that originates from a cell
with one type of restriction modification system will not be protected upon entering another cell
with a different restriction modification system. The foreign DNA,
even though it is methylated, will
not be protected, because it will
not be methylated in the right
places. As a result, foreign DNA is
more likely to be destroyed than to
undergo protective methylation.
Agarose gels can be used to
analyze DNA fragments gener- C.
Plasmid vector
ated by restriction endonuclease
Cleavage
digestion (agarose-gel electrophosite
resis is explained in eAppendix 3).
Each lane of the gel shown in Figure 7.26B represents a different
population of DNA molecules cut
Cleavage sites 1
Cleavage
with the same restriction endoby EcoRI
nuclease. Because DNA is negaendonuclease
tively charged, all DNA molecules
A
travel to the positive pole during
A
T
G
AA T TC
T
T
electrophoresis. Pore sizes in the
A
T
A
agarose are such that they allow
CT T AA
G
small molecules to speed through
the gel, while larger molecules
Annealing
take longer to move. Thus, DNA
A
A
fragments in this gel separate on
T
TT
T
A
the basis of size—the smaller the
A
fragment, the farther it travels
Chimeric plasmid
T
with single-strand
down the lane. The DNA fragA AT
nicks
ments are of different sizes, so
A
A
TT
they travel different distances in the gel. The sum of the
DNA ligase
sizes of the fragments in each lane yields the size of the
original, intact, uncut molecule.
A

STEVE NORTHRUP/TIME LIFE PICTURES/GETTY IMAGES

264

Thought Question

7.10 Figure 7.26B illustrates how agarose gels separate DNA
molecules. If you ran a highly supercoiled plasmid in one lane
of the gel and the same plasmid with one phosphodiester
bond cut in another lane, where would the two molecules end
up relative to each other in this type of gel?

Cloning. How did scientists ever conceive of cloning a

gene from one organism into the DNA of an unrelated
organism? The beginning of the recombinant DNA revolution can be traced to 1972. Scientists knew that many
restriction endonucleases generate cohesive ends and that
some plasmids contain a single site for certain restriction

TT
A
A
T
A AT
TT

A
A

Plasmid chimera

A
T
T

Foreign DNA

2

3

Cleavage by EcoR I
endonuclease

G

AA T TC

CT T AA

1. Plasmid and foreign
DNA are cut with a
restriction endonuclease
(EcoRI) to produce
identical cohesive ends.

G
CT T AA

AA T TC
G

2. Cut vector and
foreign DNA fragments
are mixed. Cohesive
ends anneal.

3. DNA ligase seals
the nicks.

FIGURE 7.27

 Formation of recombinant DNA molecules. Stanley Cohen (A) of

Stanford University and Herbert Boyer (B) of
UC San Francisco, two of the founders of recombinant DNA technology. C. Cloning a gene.

endonucleases. However, the significance of these facts
went unrecognized until Stanley Cohen (Fig. 7.27A),
Herb Boyer (Fig. 7.27B), and Stanley Falkow were relaxing together after a scientific meeting in 1972. They
suddenly realized that a piece of DNA cut from one organism’s chromosome could be grafted to a plasmid cut with

CHAPTER 7

the same restriction endonuclease (Fig. 7.27C). They
also knew that DNA ligase (see Fig. 7.18) would seal the
fragment to the plasmid and form a new artificial DNA
molecule. They hypothesized that the recombinant plasmid could be introduced into E. coli and replicated. Three
months later, the strategy, called cloning, worked. This
seminal work was published by Boyer and Cohen along
with students Annie Chang and Robert Helling. Over the
next decade, the technique became known as “gene cloning,” an immensely powerful technology that thrust biology into the genomic era.
For many years, scientists used the restriction endonuclease strategy discovered by Boyer, Cohen, Chang, and
Helling to randomly generate genome libraries containing all the genes in an organism’s chromosome. Today,
new approaches can more efficiently probe the microbial genome. A microbe’s entire genome can now be
sequenced within a few days—a process that once took
years. Once obtained, the sequence can be analyzed using
bioinformatics, a computer-assisted process that predicts
the beginnings and ends of genes, determines the amino
acid sequences of gene-encoded proteins, and forecasts
probable functions for those proteins (Chapter 8 describes
bioinformatics in more detail). Interesting genes can then
be amplified using PCR (described later) and cloned into
plasmids using restriction endonucleases. The cloned gene
can be reintroduced into mutant or wild-type organisms
using various techniques and the effects on physiology or
pathogenicity determined.

Thought Question

7.11 Given that E. coli possesses restriction endonucleases
that cleave DNA from other species, how is it possible to clone
a gene from one organism to another without the cloned gene
sequence being degraded?

Segment
to amplify

FIGURE 7.28



265

Imagine having the ability to amplify one copy of a gene
into millions more within one or two hours. The technique,
called the polymerase chain reaction (PCR), has revolutionized biological research, medicine, and forensic analysis.
The PCR technique, outlined in Figure 7.28, requires the
design of specific oligonucleotide primers (usually between
20 and 30 bp) that anneal to known DNA sequences flanking the DNA you want to amplify. A thermostable DNA
polymerase uses these primers to replicate the target DNA.
Heat-stable DNA polymerases are used because the PCR
reaction mixture must undergo repeated cycles of heating to
95°C (to separate DNA strands so that they are available for
primer annealing), cooling to 55°C (to allow primer annealing), and heating to 72°C (the optimum reaction temperature for the polymerase). The polymerase Taq, from the
thermophile Thermus aquaticus, was originally used for this
purpose, but polymerases from other thermophiles are also
used. Because PCR reactions require 25–30 heating and
cooling cycles, a machine called a thermocycler is used to
reproducibly and rapidly deliver these cycles. It is important
to realize that PCR technology emerged from studies of a
seemingly obscure class of microorganisms: extremophiles.
This basic PCR technique has been modified to serve
many purposes. Primers can be engineered to contain specific restriction sites that simplify subsequent cloning, as
described already. If the primers used for PCR are highly
specific for a gene that is present in only one microorganism, PCR can be used to detect the presence of that organism in a complex environment, such as the presence of the
pathogen E. coli O157:H7 in hamburger. Multiplex PCR,
involving several primer sets, can be used to detect multiple
pathogens in a single reaction (see eAppendix 3).
PCR has also profoundly changed our judicial system by
making it possible to amplify the tiniest amounts of DNA

72°C, Taq polymerase

Primers

1. 95°C,
30 seconds:
Denaturation
separates strands.

GENOMES AND CHROMOSOMES

PCR Amplifies Specific Genes
from Complex Genomes

2. 55°C,
30 seconds:
Primers annealed.

5'
3'



30 Cycles

3. 72°C,
60 seconds:
Taq polymerase
replicates sequence.

95°C, denaturation
55°C, anneal primers
95°C, denaturation;
55°C, annealing of primers;
72°C, extension by Taq polymerase

 The polymerase chain reaction. The cyclic PCR reaction makes a large number of copies of a small piece of DNA.
Potentially 1030 copies of a fragment can be made from a single DNA molecule.

266



PART 2



GENES AND GENOMES

S

O

O

Base

Deoxyribonucleotides retain the
3′ OH needed for DNA
synthesis.

DNA Sequencing

Even with the development of gene
cloning, our transition into the
O
O
O
HO H
genomic age would not have been
5
O
O– P O P O P O
Base
possible without the ability to rap1
Dideoxyribonucleotides lack the 2′ OH
4
O–
O–
O–
and the 3′ OH groups and cannot
idly sequence entire genomes. PreDideoxyribose
make a phosphodiester bond with
3
2
vious sequencing methods used
incoming dNTP nucleotides.
H
H
an ingeniously simple strategy but
were not rapid. The dideoxy chain
FIGURE 7.29  Dideoxyribonucleotide. Review Figure 7.5 to see how missing the 3′ OH
termination method developed by
group would terminate DNA synthesis. dNTP = deoxyribonucleoside triphosphate, or deoxyriboFred Sanger in the 1970s relied
nucleotide.
on the fact that the 3′ hydroxyl
group on 2′-deoxyribonucleotides
contaminating a crime scene. The technique provides con(shown
in
Fig.
7.5A)
is
absolutely required for a DNA
clusive evidence in court cases where no other evidence
chain
to
grow.
Thus,
incorporation
of a 2′,3′-dideoxyriboexists. Increasingly, individual human genomes are being
nucleotide (also known as dideoxynucleotide; Fig. 7.29)
sequenced as a standard medical test—with profound ethiinto a growing chain prevents further elongation, because
cal and societal implications. The hopes and fears raised by
without the 3′ OH, extension of the phosphodiester backthe invention of PCR-based genome sequencing inspired
bone is impossible.
the science fiction film Gattaca, directed by Andrew Niccol
Details of the Sanger dideoxy sequencing method are
in 1997, depicting an imaginary future in which everyone’s
provided
in eAppendix 3. But briefly, the method begins
destiny is determined by his or her DNA sequence. The
by
cloning
a gene to be sequenced into a plasmid vecfilm imagined that knowledge of DNA sequence could
tor.
Next,
a
short (20- to 30-bp) oligonucleotide DNA
impact which jobs are available to someone, whether insurprimer molecule is designed to anneal at a site immediance coverage can be withheld, and even whether two
ately adjacent to the insert you want to sequence. The
individuals can marry. Today, the Genetic Information
mixture is heated to 95°C to separate the DNA strands,
Nondiscrimination Act passed by the U.S. Congress in
and then cooled, which allows the primer to bind. DNA
2008 protects individuals from “genetic discrimination”
polymerase can then use the 3′ OH end of this primer
based on their DNA. In a more compassionate application,
to synthesize DNA from the cloned-insert template. A
human sequence information is beginning to be used to
small amount of dideoxyribonucleoside triphosphate
predict which drugs will best treat individual patients—for
(ddNTP—for example, dideoxy ATP) is included in the
example, patients with specific types of tumors.
DNA synthesis reaction, which already contains all four
normal deoxyribonucleoside triphosphates (dNTPs), also
Thought Question
called deoxyribonucleotides. Because normal 2′-deoxy7.12 PCR is a powerful technique, but a sample can be easily
adenosine is present at high concentration, chain elongacontaminated and the wrong DNA amplified—perhaps sending
tion usually proceeds normally. However, the sequencing
an innocent person to jail. What might you do to minimize this
reaction contains just enough dideoxy ATP to make
possibility?
DNA polymerase occasionally substitute the dead-end
Deoxyribose

Cluster generation

1. Chromosomal DNA is
sheared by sonication,
fragments of 100–
300 bp are isolated.

2. Different
adapters are
ligated to each end.

3. Separate
strands
randomly bind
to solid surface.

4. Fragment ends
anneal to nearby
oligos, which
serve as primers
to amplify the
fragment.

5. Double-stranded bridges
are denatured to single
strands that remain attached
to the surface. Free ends
anneal with other surfacebound oligos, and
amplification is repeated.

6. 1,000 identical copies
(a cluster) of each
template are made in
close proximity (1 µm).
Each cluster is made
from a different fragment
of DNA.

Complementary
primers

FIGURE 7.30



DNA sequencing; sequencing by synthesis. Steps 1–6: Generation of clusters by bridge amplification. Steps 7–10:

Sequencing by synthesis using reversible fluorescent termination.

CHAPTER 7

base for the natural one, at which point the chain stops
growing. The result is a population of DNA strands of
varying length, each one truncated at a different adenine
position. How the tagged fragments are used to determine sequence is described in eAppendix 3. The Sanger
method has been replaced by even more rapid techniques,
all of which include an element of the Sanger chain
termination approach.

Next-Generation Sequencing

The old way of sequencing genomes was to randomly clone
DNA fragments into plasmid or phage vectors and then
separately sequence each fragment. It took months, if not
years, to sequence an entire genome. Today, new sequencing technologies, called “next-generation sequencing,”
have combined the power of robotics, computers, and fluidics such that an entire bacterial genome can be sequenced
within days.
One of these techniques, pyrosequencing, is described
in eTopic 7.5. The most used technique today is called
sequencing by synthesis (a technology developed by Solexa,
a company now part of Illumina, Inc.); the Illumina process is outlined in Figure 7.30. Basically, the genome to
be sequenced is sonically fragmented into 100- to 300-bp
segments, and different linker oligonucleotides are ligated
to each end (Fig. 7.30, steps 1 and 2). Small fragments
are used because the technique can sequence only 100–
300 bp from any one fragment. Strands of each fragment
are then separated and the mixture added to an optical
flow cell. The fragments, millions of them, are randomly
fixed to the solid surface (step 3). Each individual fragment sticks to a different area of the cell. The glass surface
also has a dense lawn of oligonucleotides fixed at their 5′
ends to the glass surface. These oligonucleotides are complementary to the fragment linker ends but do not hybridize to them at this point.



GENOMES AND CHROMOSOMES



267

Next, each single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) fragment is
converted into a tight cluster of identical fragments through
a series of so-called bridge amplifications (Fig. 7.30, steps
4 and 5). Ends of each fragment anneal to nearby matched
oligos (fixed to the glass surface), which then serve as primers to amplify the fragments further. Multiple amplifications result in millions of different ssDNA fragment clusters
dotting each lane of each slide (step 6).
All clusters are simultaneously sequenced in a repetitive series of single-step, reversible chain termination reactions that attach fluorescently labeled nucleotides one at a
time to the clusters (Fig. 7.30, steps 7 and 8). Because each
individual cluster is a tuft of identical DNA molecules, all
of the molecules in that cluster will have the same tagged
base added and will fluoresce the same color. Note that the
sequence of either strand can be determined by adding one
or the other primer. After a base is added, a snapshot captures the colors, which reveal the bases added to each cluster (step 9). Next, the fluorescent marker (fluor) is removed
from the growing chain, which also reverses chain termination, and the slide is again flooded with tagged bases (step
10). Snapshots taken after each sequencing round sequentially capture the fluorescent colors of each cluster as each
base is added.
The old Sanger dideoxy method could sequence 1,000
bp per template but required considerable time, effort,
and space to do so. In contrast, each flow-cell lane in the
sequencing-by-synthesis technique produces 10–120 million DNA fragments, thus generating up to 600 gigabases (Gb) of DNA sequence per run (1 Gb = 1 billion
bases). Each read is short (about 100 bases per template),
but because millions of templates are read, the massively
parallel sequencing yields hundreds of millions of bases.
Computer programs then find the overlaps among the
millions of sequence results and assemble them into the
sequence of the entire chromosome. With this technology, you can have your own genome sequenced for less
than $1,000.

Sequencing byy synthesis
7. A single primer
rimer
type is annealed
aled to
free linkers att the
he 3
3′
end of the
e clu
clustered
lu
usste
stered
ered
ssDNA fragments.
agm
m ntts.
me

8. Sequen
Sequencing is done in
repetitive o
one-step cycles.
Fluorescently
tagged nucleotides

9. Unincorporated nucleotides
are removed. Image is captured.
Each cluster is seen as a
different
diffe
differe
ere
ent do
dot.
ot. Different
e co
colo
colors
os
represent
repr
eprrres
esen
s ntt d
dif
different
fferentt nu
ffe
nucleotides.
ucleot
u
ucle
cle
leotttid
tides.
id
des.

10. Fluor and terminator are removed, and the flow
cell is again flooded with the sequencing reactants
that will add the next base in the sequence. As
before,
be
o the color is captured by laser snapshot.

DEPARTMENT OF GENOMIC SCIENCES/
UNIVERSITY OF WASHINGTON

3′ end
Polymerase

Single
Sin
Si
gle
l cl
cluster
lust
uster
terr

Add DNA polymerase + four nucleotides, each with a different
colored fluorophore and a reversible terminator. Polymerase adds
one nucleotide, which will be the same for all members of the cluster.

Sequence snapshot



PART 2



GENES AND GENOMES

How the information from sequences is mined is discussed further in Chapter 8. Many important discoveries
have resulted from this technology. A particularly intriguing discovery was finding that the entire genome of the bacterium Wolbachia (which infects 20% of the world’s insect
population) is embedded within the genome of Drosophila,
the common fruit fly. The evolutionary implications of this
discovery are under intense investigation.

Microbiomes and Metagenomics

Microorganisms in nature do not generally exist as pure
cultures. They grow instead as complex consortia containing numerous species (microbiomes), most of which have
never been grown in a laboratory. With newer and everfaster DNA sequencing methodologies and PCR techniques, we can now “peer” deeper into the natural world.
Like the explorers of old, scientists are finding new species never before seen and are beginning to understand the
intricate ways bacterial species interact to form what could
be called biological support groups.
Metagenomics, a term coined in 1998 by microbiologist Jo Handelsman (Yale University), is the use of modern genomic techniques to study microbial communities
directly in their natural environments, bypassing the need
for isolating and cultivating individual species in the laboratory. The field began with the culture-independent retrieval
of 16S rRNA genes from the environment by amplifying
DNA directly from environmental samples using PCR protocols. Since genes encoding 16S rRNA from small ribosomal subunits (also called small-subunit rRNA) are highly
conserved, it is possible to determine whether a given
sequence of 16S rRNA represented a new species and to
which known species it was most closely related. Since then,
metagenomics has revolutionized microbiology by shifting
the focus even further away from cultivatable organisms
toward the estimated 99% of microbial species that cannot be cultivated. Since 2003, hundreds of metagenomic
projects have been carried out or are ongoing. Examples
of the metagenomic analysis of ecosystems are presented in
Chapter 21.
Identifying membership of a microbiome can be very
informative but says little about the genetic and metabolic potential of the community. Randomly sequencing
DNA from a microbiome, however, will identify most, if
not all, of the genes present in all the organisms that the
consortium comprises. All of these genes make up what
is known as the metagenome—that is, the combined
yet unsorted genomic potential of all the organisms in
the sample. Thus, metagenomics not only identifies the
principal partners of a microbial consortium, but also
reveals many of their metabolic capabilities. Communities of microorganisms can actually form new metabolic

350
300
Number of cells

268

250
200
150

Without antibiotics
With antibiotics

100
50
0

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20

Days

FIGURE 7.31  Effect of microbiota on the growth of the
ciliate Euplotes focardii at 4°C. Protozoans were either untreated or treated with streptomycin and penicillin G. Antibiotic treatment lasted for 15 days after which the protozoans were transferred
to antibiotic-free media. All organisms were fed the green alga
Dunaliella tertiolecta. Source: Pucciarelli, et al. 2015. Microbial Consortium

Associated with the Antarctic Marine Ciliate Euplotes focardii: An Investigation from
Genomic Sequences. Microbial Ecology 70:484-497, fig 6B.

pathways in which a useless by-product of one member can be used by another member in a reaction whose
product can benefit a third member.
Metagenomic analysis has also been used to explore
how a microbiome might expand the ecological niche
of some eukaryotic microbes. One intriguing study
recently identified the bacterial microbiome of the Antarctic marine protozoan Euplotes focardii, a strictly psychrophilic ciliate isolated from Terra Nova Bay. This
organism will not survive above 10°C. Sandra Pucciarelli and colleagues from the University of Camerino,
Italy, discovered that E. focardii “cured” of their bacterial microbiota by antibiotics had difficulty growing at
4°C (Fig. 7.31). Using Illumina DNA sequencing, the
scientists analyzed the 16S rR NA sequences present in
E. focardii DNA extracts. The data revealed that most
bacterial species were either from Gammaproteobacteria, Alphaproteobacteria, or Bacteroidetes. When
protein-encoding sequences were examined, many were
homologous to ice-binding or antifreeze proteins found
in other cold-adapted bacterial species (Section 5.2).
The researchers conclude that one or more members
of the bacterial consortium have an important role in
facilitating growth of this Antarctic protozoan at low
temperatures.
The science of metagenomics has even progressed to a
point where the genome of a single cell can be sequenced—a
process called single-cell genomics (SCG). SCG requires special protocols, equipment, and reagents to isolate a single cell
from an environment and, without ever growing it, extract

CHAPTER 7



GENOMES AND CHROMOSOMES



269

human twins to determine
whether any part of the microp < 0.001
biome might be heritable. They
28
used PCR to amplify 16S rR NA
26
sequences from human fecal
24
samples and sequenced the products. The 16S rR NA sequences
22
were matched to a public data20
base to identify bacterial species.
18
They found that Christensenella
No added
Live
minuta, a recently discovered
Christensenella Christensenella
firmicute, was the most highly
heritable among identical twins.
Even more striking was that
FIGURE 7.32  Heritable member of the human microbiome. A. Ruth Ley led a team
this microbe was found more
that used metagenomics to discover that the abundance of some members of the intestinal
microbiome are influenced by host genetics. B. One such organism, Christensenella minuta, also
often in lean than in obese subinfluenced weight gain and adiposity when orally “transplanted” into mouse intestines. The graph
jects, and it prevented weight
shows that adiposity 21 days after a fecal transplant was significantly lower in germ-free mice
gain when transplanted into
transplanted with C. minuta–containing fecal preparations (blue) than with preparations lacking
germ-free mice (Fig. 7.32B).
this organism (orange). Source: Goodrich et al. 2014. Cell 159:789–799, fig. 7B.
Knowing the identities of these
microbes and their collective metabolic potential will
undoubtedly lead to new advances in the treatment and
and amplify its DNA. Once amplified, the genomic DNA is
prevention of human diseases. More on metagenomics
readily sequenced using the next-generation sequencing tools
and microbial ecology is found in Section 21.1.
described earlier. SCG can identify the “microbial dark matter” of undiscovered taxa in a microbiome, and then tell us
which genes in a metagenome belong to which organism.
To Summarize
Using SCG, Tonja Woyke at the U.S. Department of Energy’s Joint Genome Institute and her colleagues sequenced
 Restriction endonucleases used for DNA analysis
single cells from 20 major uncultured archaeal and bactecleave DNA at specific recognition sequences, which are
rial lineages. They discovered 20,000 new hypothetical prousually 4–6 bp in length and produce either a blunt or a
tein families, found genes encoding bacterial sigma factors
staggered cut.
in archaea, revealed an archaeal purine synthesis pathway in
bacteria, and identified several new candidate phyla of Bacte Agarose-gel electrophoresis will separate DNA molria and Archaea. Single-cell genomic studies promise to yield
ecules on the basis of their size.
many more surprises.
 Restriction endonuclease–digested DNA molecules
The power of metagenomics has also been directed
were first cloned into plasmids in the early 1970s.
toward solving the human microbiome. One hundred trillion
 The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) will amplify
microbes (up to 10 microbial cells for every one nucleated
one or two copies of a specific gene a millionfold.
human cell) live in the human body, but we did not know the
identity of most of them, because we could not grow them
 The most commonly used DNA sequencing techin the laboratory. How we interact with these organisms and
nique (the Sanger technique) uses dideoxyribonucleothey with us is a major question in modern microbiology—
tides—nucleotides that lack both the 2′ OH and 3′ OH
one that has led to the formation of the Human Microbiome
groups—to terminate chain elongation.
Project, which is examining gut, skin, and oral microbiomes.
 Entire genomes are sequenced by fragmenting chromoWe already know that the composition of intestinal microsomal DNA, amplifying the fragments in clusters, and
biota can influence blood chemistry and may contribute to
sequencing each cluster. Overlapping DNA sequences
irritable bowel syndrome (inflammation of the gastrointestifrom different clusters are matched by computer analysis
nal tract), but microbiota are also suspected of influencing an
until the entire genome is reconstructed.
individual’s susceptibility to diabetes and obesity.
 Metagenomics uses rapid DNA sequencing and other
One recent paper reveals that human genes can inf lugenomic techniques to study consortia of microbes
ence the makeup of our microbiome. Ruth E. Ley
directly in their natural environment.
(Cornell University; Fig. 7.32A) and collaborators cataloged the intestinal microbiomes of identical and fraternal
Total adiposity (%)

B.

ROBERT BARKER/CORNELL UNIVERSITY

A.

CHAPTER 8



TRANSCRIPTION, TRANSLATION, AND BIOINFORMATICS



273

CHAPTER 8

Transcription, Translation, and Bioinformatics

T

8.1 RNA Polymerases and Sigma Factors

he cell accesses the vast store of data in its
genome using tiny molecular machines. One
machine (RNA polymerase) reads the DNA template to make RNA (transcription). Another machine
(the ribosome) decodes the RNA to assemble a protein (translation). Once made, each polypeptide must
fold properly and somehow find its correct cellular or
extracellular location. Proteins that have outlived their
usefulness must be destroyed and their amino acids
recycled. In Chapter 8 we explain how the cell makes
proteins and guides their fate. What emerges is a picture of remarkable biomolecular integration, controlled
to maintain balanced growth and ensure survival.

8.2 Transcription of DNA to RNA
8.3 Translation of RNA to Protein
8.4 Protein Modification, Folding, and Degradation
8.5 Secretion: Protein Traffic Control
8.6 Bioinformatics: Mining the Genomes

highlight

A N I N T E RV I E W W I T H

Molecular coupling. Transcription by RNA polymerase
(RNAP), and translation by ribosomes make protein. Bacteria couple these processes so that ribosomes can make
protein even while RNAP is transcribing the RNA. For some
genes coupling requires a protein to link the ribosome to a
transcribing RNAP. RfaH, for instance, simultaneously binds
RNAP and ribosomal protein S10. Irina Artsimovitch and Paul
RÖsch found that once RfaH binds to RNA polymerase, a
major domain of RfaH dramatically refolds to expose an S10
binding site. RfaH then couples the ribosome to RNAP and
prevents premature termination of transcription.

IRINA ARTSIMOVITCH, MICROBIOLOGIST, THE OHIO STATE
UNIVERSITY

How have your structural biology studies altered our view of transcription
and protein folding?

Source: Tomar et al. 2013. Nucleic Acids Res. 41:10077–10085.

RfaH before binding DNA

Transcription includes a series of
transient intermediates that serve as
targets for regulation. Structural analysis allows us to visualize these elusive
states. We showed that factor RfaH
bound to a transcribing RNA polymerase undergoes a dramatic structural
change in which an entire domain refolds
from an alpha helix into a beta barrel. This
finding overturns the “one sequence–one
fold” paradigm for proteins and suggests the
existence of other “transformer” proteins.
DR. SUSHIL TOMAR

C U R R E N T R E S E A RC H

RfaH after binding target DNA

α Helix
I146
β Sheet

What future applications do you see for
your team’s discovery?

I146

N terminus
binds to RNAP.
C terminus binds
to ribosome small
subunit protein S10.

Dramatic alpha-to-beta refolding of prion
proteins underlies pathological processes
that cause some neurodegenerative diseases. The RfaH model of fold conversion
could help guide the development of therapies for these devastating diseases.
273

DR. SUSHIL TOMAR

PART 2



GENES AND GENOMES

Today we know a great deal about transcription and translation. The Current Research Highlight, for instance,
illustrates how Irina Artsimovitch, Paul Rösch, and Monali NandyMazumdar (Fig. 8.1) exposed a mechanism by
which these processes are coupled in bacteria. But how
did the journey begin? By 1960 we knew that the DNA
in a cell holds the genetic code, but the code itself and
how the code produces protein remained mysterious.
RNA was a suspected, but unproven, intermediate until
Marshall Nirenberg and his postdoctoral student Heinrich Matthaei at the National Institutes of Health (Fig.
8.2A) designed a cell-free system (a cell lysate of E. coli)
to test the RNA hypothesis. They used RNA molecules,
synthesized by Maxine Singer (Fig. 8.2B), that contained
simple, known, repeated sequences, such as poly-A (consisting only of adenylic acid), poly-U (polyuridylic acid),
poly-AAU, and poly-ACAC. These RNA molecules were
tested to see whether the repetitive sequence might direct
incorporation of a specific amino acid into a protein. Each
synthetic polynucleotide was tested in the presence of a
radiolabeled amino acid. If the radioactive amino acid was
incorporated into a polypeptide, the polypeptide would
also be radioactive. On the morning of May 27, 1960, the
results of experiment 27Q showed that the poly-U RNA
specified the assembly of radioactive polyphenylalanine.
It was the first break in the genetic code. For his work,
Nirenberg, along with Har Gobind Khorana (who developed methods for making synthetic nucleic acids) and
Robert Holley (who solved the structure of yeast transfer RNA), won the 1968 Nobel Prize in Physiology or
Medicine.
In Chapter 8 we explore the way microbes, primarily
bacteria, interpret the information held within a nucleotide sequence of DNA and convert that information into a
string of amino acids—a protein. From there we look
at what the cell does
with those proteins
once they are made.
For instance, specific
proteins are moved
into the periplasm,
while other proteins
must be inserted into
membranes. We also
show how damaged
proteins are selectively degraded. We
conclude with bioinformatics,
now
FIGURE 8.1  Monali Nandyan essential tool of
Mazumdar. NandyMazumdar worked
microbiology.
Biowith Irina Artsimovitch and Paul Rösch
informatic
computer
to elucidate how bacteria use RfaH to
couple transcription and translation.
programs can compare

B.
A.

NIH



COURTESY OF NATIONAL LIBRARY OF MEDICINE/
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF HEALTH

274

FIGURE 8.2  Many scientists have contributed to our
understanding of the genetic code. A. Heinrich Matthaei

(left) and Marshall Nirenberg (right) were the first to crack the
genetic code. An early hand-drawn model of what would eventually be known as translation is behind them. B. Maxine Singer, a key
contributor to the genetic code experiments, also helped develop
guidelines for recombinant DNA research.

a new gene sequence with hundreds of thousands of known
genes. These comparisons help predict for any given
microbe what genes it has, what proteins it makes, and even
what food it consumes. Patterns in DNA sequences across
species also allow us to pose new questions about microbial
life, disease, and evolution.

8.1

RNA Polymerases
and Sigma Factors

To survive and reproduce, every cell needs to access information encoded within DNA. How does this happen?
Chromosomal DNA is large and cumbersome, so the first
step in the process is to make multiple copies of the information in snippets of RNA that can move around the cell
and, like disposable photocopies, can be destroyed once the
encoded protein is no longer needed. This copying of DNA
to RNA is called transcription.

CHAPTER 8



TRANSCRIPTION, TRANSLATION, AND BIOINFORMATICS

RNA Polymerase Transcribes
DNA to RNA

An enzyme complex called RNA polymerase, also known
as DNA-dependent RNA polymerase, carries out transcription, making RNA copies (called transcripts) of a
DNA template. The DNA template strand specifies the
base sequence of the new complementary strand of RNA.
RNA polymerase in bacteria consists of a core polymerase and a sigma factor. Core polymerase contains the
proteins required to elongate an RNA chain. Sigma factor
is a protein needed only for initiation of RNA synthesis,
not for its elongation. Together, core polymerase plus sigma
factor are called the holoenzyme.
A single core RNA polymerase is a complex of four different subunits: two alpha (α) subunits, one beta (β) subunit,
and one beta-prime (β′) subunit (Fig. 8.3). A fifth subunit,
omega (ω), is shown in the figure but is not required for
transcription. The beta-prime subunit houses the Mg2+-containing catalytic site for RNA synthesis, as well as sites for
the rNTP (ribonucleoside triphosphate, or ribonucleotide)
substrates, the DNA substrates, and the RNA products. The
3D structure of RNA polymerase shows that DNA fits into a
cleft formed by the beta and beta-prime subunits (Fig. 8.3).
The alpha subunit assembles the other two subunits (β and
β′) into a functional complex. It also communicates through
physical “touch” with various regulatory proteins that can
bind DNA. These protein-protein interactions inform RNA
polymerase what to do after binding DNA.

σ3

σ2

275

The composition of RNA polymerase and the sequences
of its subunits are well conserved among the Bacteria. However, differences in function are notable when examining this
enzyme from organisms living in extreme environments.
Pseudomonas syringae strain Lz4W, for example, is a Gram
negative, Antarctic soil species that grows at 0°C. RNA polymerase from E. coli does not function at that temperature.
M. K. Ray and colleagues from the Centre for Cellular and
Molecular Biology in India extracted RNA polymerase from
P. syringae and found that it did function in vitro at 0°C. The
optimum temperature was 37°C but the enzyme retained
10%–15% activity at 0°C, enough so it could live and grow.
Sigma factors. Where does a gene begin and end? The helical structure of a DNA sequence appears largely homogeneous, making it hard to distinguish one area from another.
In fact, core RNA polymerase randomly binds and transcribes DNA, “blind” to where a gene starts. Some random
transcript generation may be useful (see Chapter 17), but
totally random transcription initiation would be extremely
wasteful. Consequently, there must be a mechanism to tell
RNA polymerase where a real gene starts.
Sigma (σ) factors are the proteins that guide RNA polymerase to the beginnings of genes (Fig. 8.3). Similar to how a
visually impaired person uses touch to identify the beginning
of a sentence written in braille, sigma factors use “touch” to
identify the beginning of a gene. A sigma factor first binds to
RNA polymerase through the beta and beta-prime subunits

Outline of sigma
“footprint” on RNA
polymerase

σ1
σ4



β

β
DNA
channel

αI

110°

β′
αII

ω
DNA
exit

αII

β′
ω

5 nm

FIGURE 8.3 Subunit structure of RNA polymerase. Two views of RNA polymerase. The channel for the DNA template is shown by
the yellow line. Subunits (αI, αII, β, β′, and ω) are color-coded dark green, medium green, light green, cyan, and gold, respectively. The function
of the omega (ω) subunit is currently unclear. Recent evidence suggests it may have a role in sigma factor competition for core polymerase.
Sigma factor (red), which recognizes promoters on DNA, is shown separate from core polymerase in the left-hand panel. Different functional
areas of sigma are labeled sigma 1 through sigma 4 (σ1–σ4). Sigma factor interacts with the alpha (α), beta (β), and beta-prime (β′) subunits.
The molecule on the left is rotated 110° to give the image on the right. To view stereo images of RNA polymerase, locate code 1L9Z in the
RCSB Protein Data Bank on the Internet. Source: Robert D. Finn et al. 2000. EMBO J. 19:6833–6844.


276



PART 2



GENES AND GENOMES

A. Strong E. coli promoters

–35
–10
+1
T G T C A T A A T C G A C T T G T A A A C C A A A T T G A A A A G A T T • T A GG T T T A C A A G T C • • • • T A C A C C G A A T
G T T C T C G A T C A A A T T GG C T G A A A GG C G G T A A T T T A G C T A T A A A T T G • • • • • • A T C A C C G T C G A A A
C T A A T T T A T T C C A T G T C A C A C T T T T C G C A T C T T T G T • T A T G C T A T GG T T A T T T C A T A C C A T A A G
A GG C A C C C G A GG C T T T A C A C T T T A T G C T T C C GGG T C G T A T G T T G T G T • • • • • • GG A A T T G T G A G C
T C G C C C T G T T C C G C A G C T A A A A C G C A C G A C C A T G • • C G T A T A C T T A T • • • • • • A GGG T T G C T G G T
GG T G A C G T T A T C GG T G A C T T G A G C C G T C G T C G T G • • G T A T G C T C A A A ... • • • • • GG T C A GG A A T C
C C GG A A G A A A A C C G T G A C A T T T T A A C A C G T T T G • • • • T T A C A A GG T A A A GG C • • • G A C G C C G C C C
A GCG T T T A C A G T T T T CGC A A GC T CG T A A A A GC A • • • • G T A C A G T GC A C • • • • • • CG T A A G A A A A T

bioB
cyoA
galE
lacP
rpoD
rpsL
trp
zwf

FIGURE 8.4

 –10 and –35 sequences
of E. coli promoters. A. Alignment of

B. Consensus sequences of σ70 promoters
–35 region
–10 region
17 ± 1 bp
TATAAT
T T GACA T
C. Sequence of lacP
acP promoter
–35 region
–10 region
T A T G T T Normal sequence
T T T ACAC
A

AA

Mutations

Down

Up

Effects on transcription

A
D.

Sigma factor

Promoter recognized

Promoter consensus sequence
–35 region

RpoD σ70

Most genes

T T GACA T
T C T C N CCC T T G A A

RpoH σ

Heat shock–induced genes

RpoF σ28

Genes for motility and
chemotaxis

RpoS σ38

Stationary-phase and stress
response genes

32

RpoN σ

54

Genes for nitrogen metabolism
and other functions

CTAAA
T T GACA
–24 region
C T GGN A

(see the dotted black outline in Fig. 8.3). The bound sigma
factor helps the core enzyme detect a specific DNA sequence,
called the promoter, marking the beginning of a gene. A single bacterial species can make several different sigma factors.
Each sigma factor helps core RNA polymerase find the start
of a different subset of genes. However, a single core polymerase complex can bind only one sigma factor at a time.
Hundreds of sigma factor genes have been sequenced from
numerous species of bacteria and archaea. Although they all
encode somewhat different amino acid sequences, there are
enough sequence and structural similarities to make them
recognizable as sigma factors.
Promoters. Every cell has a “housekeeping” sigma factor that keeps essential genes and pathways operating. In
the case of E. coli and other rod-shaped, Gram-negative
bacteria, that factor is sigma-70, so named because it is a
70-kilodalton (kDa) protein (its gene designation is rpoD).
Genes recognized by sigma-70 all contain similar promoter sequences that consist of two parts. The DNA base

–10 region
TATAAT
CCCC A T N T A
CCG A T A T
T C T A T AC T T
–12 region
T T GC A

sigma-70 (σ70)-dependent promoters from
different genes. Dots were added to help visualize alignments: biotin synthesis (bioB); cytochrome o (cyoA); galactose utilization (galE);
lactose utilization (lacP); RNA polymerase
(rpoD); small-subunit ribosome protein (rpsL);
tryptophan synthesis (trp); glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase (zwf, zwischenferment).
Yellow indicates conserved nucleotides; brown
denotes transcript start sites (+1). B. The alignment in (A) generates a consensus sequence
of σ70-dependent promoters (red-screened
letters indicate nucleotide positions where
different promoters show a high degree of
variability). “N” indicates that any of the four
standard nucleotides can occupy the position. C. Mutations in the lacP promoter that
affect promoter strength (lac genes encode
proteins that are used to metabolize the
carbohydrate lactose). Some mutations can
cause decreased transcription (called “down
mutations”), while others cause increased
transcription (“up mutations”). D. Some E. coli
promoter sequences recognized by different
sigma factors.

corresponding to the start of the RNA transcript is called
nucleotide +1 (+1 nt). Relative to this landmark, promoter
sequences are characteristically centered at –10 and –35 nt
before the start of transcription (see Fig. 8.4). Other sigma
factors typically recognize different consensus sequences at
one or both of these positions (or at nearby locations in
some cases), or they shape the overall polymerase complex
to bind the promoter.
The DNA promoter sequence recognized by a given
sigma factor can be determined by comparing known
promoter sequences of different genes whose expression
requires the same sigma. Similarities among these different promoter DNA sequences define a consensus sequence
likely recognized by the sigma factor (Fig. 8.4A and B).
A consensus sequence consists of the most likely base (or
bases) at each position of the predicted promoter. Although
promoters are double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) sequences,
convention is to present the promoter as the single-stranded
DNA (ssDNA) sequence of the sense strand (nontemplate
strand), which has the same sequence as the RNA product.

CHAPTER 8



TRANSCRIPTION, TRANSLATION, AND BIOINFORMATICS

B.

A.



277

Upstream DNA

readjust its physiology, sometimes
very quickly. Large readjustments
β′
can be made when a single sigma
–10 region
σ
–11A
factor coordinately (simultaneously)
σ
activates a required set of genes.
β′
Upstream
Gene sets controlled by different
–7T
sigma factors include those dealing
Downstream
–6G
with nitrogen metabolism, flagelβ
α
Transcription
lar synthesis, heat stress, starvation,
bubble
sporulation, and many other physiDirection
ological responses.
of RNA
+2G
How does a sigma factor conpolymerase
α
Downstream DNA
movement
trol gene expression? In response
to a given environment, microbes
FIGURE 8.5  RNA polymerase holoenzyme bound to a promoter. A. The initial open
will increase synthesis or decrease
complex forms when holoenzyme binds to a promoter. DNA –10 and –35 contacts with sigma
destruction
of the appropriate sigma
factor are shown. Nontemplate strand is color-coded magenta; template strand, green. B. Blowup
factor
(described
in Chapter 10).
of (A), with the beta subunit removed to view the transcription bubble. Some bases in the nontemplate strand are flipped outward (yellow) to interact with sigma factor or the beta subunit
The resulting high concentration of
after the transcription bubble is formed. The base at position +1 is the first base transcribed.
the specialty sigma factor will dislodge other sigma factors from core
polymerase. In this way, the cell redirects RNA polymerase
Some positions in a consensus sequence are highly conto the promoters of genes best suited for growth or survival
served, meaning that the same base is found in that posiin the new environment.
tion in every promoter. Other, less conserved positions can
be occupied by different bases. Few promoters actually
have the most common base at every position. Even highly
Thought Questions
efficient promoters usually differ from the consensus at one
or two positions.
8.1 If each sigma factor recognizes a different pro–35 region

moter, how does the cell manage to transcribe genes that
respond to multiple stresses, each involving a different
sigma factor?

Sigma factor recognition of promoters. How do sigma fac-

tors, or any other DNA-binding proteins for that matter, recognize specific DNA sequences when the DNA is a double
helix? The phosphodiester backbone is quite uniform, and
the interior of paired bases appears inaccessible. However,
proteins can still recognize DNA sequences because the
alpha-helical parts of proteins that bind DNA recognize (via
noncovalent bonding) side groups that protrude from the
bases into the major and minor grooves of DNA (see Fig.
7.6). Portions of sigma-70 from E. coli wrap around DNA,
allowing certain parts of the protein to fit into DNA grooves.
Figure 8.5A shows the holoenzyme RNA polymerase
complex positioned at a promoter and the points (–10
and –35 nt) where sigma factor contacts DNA. Sigma factors generally contain four highly conserved amino acid
sequences, called regions (see Fig. 8.3, σ1–σ4). Part of
region 2 of the sigma-70 family recognizes –10 sequences,
whereas region 4 recognizes the –35 sites. Part of region
1 helps separate the DNA strands to make a transcription
“bubble” in preparation for RNA synthesis (Fig. 8.5B).
Sigma factor control of complex physiological responses.

A single cell will wander into and out of many stressful environments. Each time this happens, the cell must

8.2 Imagine two different sigma factors with different
promoter recognition sequences. What would happen to the
overall gene expression profile in the cell if one sigma factor
were artificially overexpressed? Could there be a detrimental
effect on growth?
8.3 Why might some genes contain multiple promoters, each
one specific for a different sigma factor?

To Summarize






RNA polymerase holoenzyme, consisting of core RNA
polymerase and a sigma factor, initiates transcription of a
DNA template strand.
Sigma factors help core RNA polymerase locate consensus promoter sequences near the beginning of a gene.
The sequences identified and bound by E. coli sigma-70
are located at –10 and –35 bp upstream of the transcription start site.
Dynamic changes in gene expression follow changes
in the relative levels of different sigma factors.

278



PART 2

8.2

GENES AND GENOMES



Transcription of
DNA to RNA

1. RNA polymerase holoenzyme
scans DNA for promoter sequences.
RNA polymerase
holoenzyme

Like DNA replication, transcription of DNA to RNA
occurs in three stages:
1. Initiation, in which RNA polymerase binds to the
beginning of the gene, melts open the DNA helix, and
catalyzes placement of the first RNA nucleotide.
2. Elongation, the sequential addition of ribonucleotides
to the 3′ OH end of a growing RNA chain.
3. Termination, whereby sequences at the end of the
gene trigger release of the polymerase and the completed RNA molecule.
The newly released RNA polymerase can then engage
another sigma factor to seek a new promoter.

Transcription Initiation

RNA polymerase constantly scans DNA for promoter
sequences (Fig. 8.6, step 1). It binds DNA loosely and
comes off repeatedly. Once bound to the promoter, RNA
polymerase holoenzyme forms a loosely bound, closed
complex with DNA, which remains annealed and double-stranded—that is, unmelted (step 2). To successfully
transcribe a gene, this closed complex must become an
open complex through the unwinding of one helical turn,
which causes DNA to become unpaired in this area (step 3)
(see also Fig. 8.5B). After promoter unwinding, RNA
polymerase in the open complex becomes tightly bound to
DNA. Region 1 of the sigma factor is important for DNA
unwinding, as is a rudder complex in the beta-prime subunit that separates the two strands.
The open-complex form of RNA polymerase begins transcription. The first ribonucleoside triphosphate (rNTP) of the
new RNA chain is usually a purine (A or G). The purine basepairs to the position designated +1 on the DNA template,
which marks the start of the gene. As the enzyme complex
moves along the template, subsequent rNTPs diffuse through
a channel in the polymerase and into position at the DNA
template. After the first base is in place, each subsequent
rNTP transfers a ribonucleoside monophosphate (rNMP) to
the growing chain while releasing a pyrophosphate (PPi):
O
RNA 3′
chain

OH

+

–

O

O

O
O

P
–

O
O

P
–

O

P

nucleoside

3′

OH

–

O

O

3′
5′

α
α

“Scanning”

β′
β

5′

σ
–35

2. Binding to the
promoter sequence
forms the closed
complex.

α
α

3′
5′

–10
Promoter

β′

5′

Closed
3′ complex

–10

rNTPs (ribonucleotides)

3. RNA polymerase
unwinds DNA and
begins transcribing RNA
from ribonucleoside
triphosphates (rNTPs).
5′

If present, the antibiotic
rifamycin will bind to
this form of polymerase
and prevent formation
of the subsequent
open complex.

β

σ

–35

3′

P Pi

mRNA

α β

Core enzyme

3′

5′

Open
3′ complex

5′
Transcription bubble

α

β′

σ

4. Sigma factor
leaves the complex.

FIGURE 8.6  The initiation of transcription. Sigma factor
helps RNA polymerase find promoters but is discarded after the first
few RNA bases are polymerized. (Omega is not shown.)

The “energy released” (actually the free energy change)
following cleavage of the rNTP triphosphate groups is used
to form the phosphodiester link to the growing polynucleotide chain. (Free energy change, ΔG, is presented in
Chapter 13.)
As seen in Figure 8.5B, the beta-prime subunit forms
part of the pocket, or cleft, in which the DNA template
is read. Another part of the beta-prime cleft is involved
in hydrolyzing rNTPs. Deep at the base of the cleft is the
active site of polymerization, defined by three evolutionarily conserved aspartate residues that chelate (bond with)
two magnesium ions (Mg 2+). As we saw for DNA polymerases, these metal ions play a key role in catalyzing the
polymerization reaction.

rNTP
O

O
RNA 3′
chain

O

P
O–

O

nucleoside

3′

OH

+

–

O P

O
O

O–

P
O–

PPi

O–

Transcription Elongation

A transcribing complex retains the sigma factor until
about nine bases have been joined, and then it dissociates

CHAPTER 8



TRANSCRIPTION, TRANSLATION, AND BIOINFORMATICS

(Fig. 8.6, step 4). The newly liberated sigma factor can
then recycle onto an unbound core RNA polymerase to
direct another round of promoter binding. Meanwhile,
the original RNA polymerase continues to move along the
template, synthesizing RNA at approximately 45 bases per
second. As the DNA helix unwinds, a 17-bp transcription
bubble forms and moves with the polymerase complex.
DNA unwinding produces positive DNA supercoils ahead
of the advancing bubble. The supercoils are removed by
DNA topoisomerase enzymes (see Section 7.2).

Transcription Termination

How does RNA polymerase know when to stop? Again,
the secret is in the sequence. All bacterial genes use one of
two known transcription termination signals, called either
Rho-dependent or Rho-independent. Rho-dependent termination relies on a protein called Rho and an ill-defined
sequence at the 3′ end of the gene that appears to be a
strong pause site. Pause sites are areas of DNA that slow or
stall the movement of RNA polymerase. Some pause sites
occur within the gene’s open reading frame (ORF), the
part of a gene that actually encodes a protein, to allow time
for the ribosome to catch up to a transcribing RNA polymerase (discussed in Section 8.3). A protein called NusG
binds to RNA polymerase to prevent premature termination at internal pause sites. The transcription termination
pause site, however, is located after the ORF, beyond the
translation stop codon. A stop codon (described later) is a

Hairpin loop

5′

NusA
mRNA

A
U C
A
A
U
G
A
G
CG
G
C
CG
CG
GC
CG

GC-rich
area

3′
Poly-U site

DNA

B. Rho-independent termination

Translational stop

5′

5′
RNA polymerase
Pause site

Rho binds to
C-rich regions.
RNA

Translational stop

5′

U
UA
UU A
UUU AA
A
AA

RNA
polymerase

GC-rich terminator
stem loop
Translational
stop

5′

279

three-base sequence in mRNA that stops ribosome movement. If transcription stopped before the ribosome reached
the translation stop codon, an incomplete protein would
be made.
Rho factor binds to an exposed region of RNA after
the ORF at C-rich sequences that lack obvious secondary
structure. This is the transcription terminator pause site.
Rho monomers assemble as a hexamer around the RNA
(Fig. 8.7A). Then, like a person pulling a raft to shore by a
rope tied to a tree, Rho pulls itself to the paused RNA polymerase by threading downstream RNA through the ring
via an intrinsic ATPase activity. Once Rho touches the polymerase, an RNA-DNA helicase activity built into Rho appears
to unwind the RNA-DNA heteroduplex, which releases the
completed RNA molecule and frees the RNA polymerase.
The second type of termination event, called Rhoindependent termination, or intrinsic termination, occurs in
the absence of Rho. Rho-independent termination requires
a GC-rich region of RNA roughly 20 bp upstream from
the 3′ terminus, as well as four to eight consecutive uridine
residues at the terminus (Fig. 8.7B). The GC-rich sequence

3′

A. Rho-dependent termination



Movement of
polymerase
Contact between hairpin,
NusA protein (orange),
and RNA polymerase
causes termination.

5′
RNA is threaded
through Rho
hexamer, pulling
Rho toward RNA
polymerase.
5′

FIGURE 8.7

Contact between Rho
and RNA polymerase
causes termination.


The termination of transcription. A. Rho-dependent termination requires Rho factor but not NusA. B. Rho-independent

termination requires NusA but not Rho.

280



PART 2



GENES AND GENOMES

A.
HO
H 3C
CH3COO
H 3C
H3CO

CH3

CH3

C.

CH3

OH

O

OH OH

CH3

His406
C_ C

CH3
NH

N

R2

O
O

Amino acid Position in
beta subunit
residue

O

N¡2

O

Rifamycin B R1  CH2COO ; R2  H
R1  H; R2  CH

N

N

N

CH3

C

B.

C

C
Asp396

O10

C
+

O

Ob

Arg409
C_ C
C

R1
–

Rifampin

C_

O

NH

O1

N

O2

C

C_
Oa
Ser411

O9

O8
N

C
C_

C

Phe394

N¡2
Rifamycin

C
O
C
Gln393
C

DAVID SCHARF PHOTO

C_

FIGURE 8.8

0.5 +m

contains complementary bases and forms an RNA stem, or
stem loop, a structure that contacts RNA polymerase. Contact halts nucleotide addition, causing RNA polymerase to
pause. A protein called NusA stimulates transcription pause
at these sites. While the polymerase is paused, the DNARNA duplex is weakened because the poly-U/poly-A base
pairs at the 3′ terminus contain only two hydrogen bonds
per pair, so they are easier to melt. Melting the hybrid molecule releases the transcript and halts transcription. The
pause in polymerase movement, and thus transcription, is
important to prevent the formation of tighter base-pairing
downstream of the UA region.

Antibiotics Revealed RNA
Synthesis Machines



Structure and mode of action of rifamycin.

A. Structure of rifamycin. The R groups indicated are added to alter
the structure and pharmacology of the basic structure. B. Electron
micrograph of Amycolatopsis. C. Contact points between rifamycin
and residues in the beta subunit of RNA polymerase.

To be useful in medicine, all antibiotics must meet two
fundamental criteria: They must kill or retard the growth
of a pathogen, and they must not harm the host. Antibiotics used against bacteria, for instance, must selectively
attack features of bacterial targets not shared with eukaryotes. Many antibiotics possess highly specific modes of
action, binding to and altering the activity of one specific
“machine” of one type of cell.

One example is the antibiotic rifamycin B (Fig. 8.8A),
produced by the actinomycete Amycolatopsis mediterranei
(Fig. 8.8B). Rifamycin B selectively targets bacterial RNA
polymerase and binds to the polymerase’s beta subunit near
the Mg 2+ active site, thus blocking the RNA exit channel
(Fig. 8.8C). RNA polymerase can carry out two or three
polymerization steps, but then it stops because the nascent
RNA cannot exit. Rifamycin does not prevent RNA polymerase from binding to promoters, and because an mRNA
molecule already passing through the exit channel masks
the rifamycin-binding site, the drug cannot bind to RNA
polymerases already transcribing DNA. The semisynthetic
derivative of this drug, rifampin, is used for treating tuberculosis and leprosy and is given to contacts (family members or roommates) of individuals with bacterial meningitis
caused by Neisseria meningitidis.
Actinomycin D (Fig. 8.9A) is another antibiotic produced by an actinomycete. Its phenoxazone ring is a planar structure that “squeezes,” or intercalates, between GC
base pairs within DNA. The side chains then extend in
opposite directions along the minor groove (Fig. 8.9B).
Because it mimics a DNA base, actinomycin D blocks the
elongation phase of transcription; but because it binds any
DNA, it is not selective for bacteria. It can be used to treat

CHAPTER 8

A.



TRANSCRIPTION, TRANSLATION, AND BIOINFORMATICS



281

B.
Side chains were synthesized
by addition of amino acids.
DNA

H3C
HC
H3C

O

O

C

C
Methyl-val HC

CH
N

CH3

C

O

N

CH2
Sarcosine

N
C

O

O

CH2 CH

H2C

CH2
H3C
HC
H3C

C

N
O

D-Val

C

O

CH

Thr

CH2
CH3
CH
CH3

C
HC

CH

HN

CH3

C

Phenoxazone
ring
system

Actinomycin D
ring

CH2

HC

O

O

CH2

HN

CH3 NH
O

CH3

HC

NH
C

CH

O

CH

N

O
Pro

N
C

Side chains
extend along
minor groove.

C

O

CH2
H3C

CH3
CH
CH
CH3 3

C

O

N

NH2

O

O

CH3

Ring system
intercalates
between
bases.

CH3
Actinomycin D

FIGURE 8.9

Structure and mode of action of actinomycin D. This antibiotic inserts its ring structure (A) between parallel DNA
bases and wraps its side chains along the minor groove (B). (PDB code for B: 1DSC)


human cancers because cancer cells replicate rapidly, but
it has severe side effects because it inhibits DNA synthesis
in normal cells too. (Antibiotics are discussed further in
Chapter 27.)
How did scientists determine the details of RNA and
protein synthesis? First, purified RNA polymerase and ribosomes were used to demonstrate transcription and translation in cell-free systems (in test tubes). Then, protein
subunits of RNA polymerase extracted from antibioticresistant and sensitive strains of E. coli were mixed together
to reconstruct chimeric molecules. To determine which
RNA polymerase subunit was targeted by the antibiotic
rifamycin, for instance, RNA polymerases from rifamycinsensitive and rifamycin-resistant strains were purified from
cell extracts. The component parts of the polymerases were
separated and a chimeric RNA polymerase was reassembled
(like a 3D jigsaw puzzle) by mixing subunits from antibioticsensitive and antibiotic-resistant polymerases. The reconstituted polymerase preparation was tested to see whether it

could make RNA in the presence of rifamycin. Resistance
will happen only when the subunit conveying resistance has
been added—in this case, the beta subunit. Investigators
used this information in subsequent in vitro assays and X-ray
crystallography to learn more about the enzymatic mechanism of the beta subunit.

Different Classes of RNA
Have Different Functions

It is important to note that not all RNA molecules are
translated to protein. There are several classes of RNA,
each designed for a different purpose (Table 8.1). The class
of RNA molecules that encode proteins is called messenger RNA (mRNA). Molecules of mRNA average 1,000–
1,500 bases in length but can be much longer or shorter,
depending on the size of the protein they encode. Another
class of RNA, called ribosomal RNA (rRNA), forms
the scaffolding on which ribosomes are built. As will be

282



PART 2



GENES AND GENOMES

TABLE 8.1,Classes of RNA in E. coli-a
Number
of types

Average size

Approximate
half-life

Unusual
bases

Encodes
protein

Thousands

1,500 nt

3–5 minutes

No

rRNA
(ribosomal RNA)

Synthesizes protein as
part of ribosome

3

5S, 120 nt;
16S, 1,542 nt;
23S, 2,905 nt

Hours

Yes

tRNA
(transfer RNA)

Shuttles amino acids

41 (86 genes)

80 nt

Hours

Yes

sRNAb
(small RNAs, or
regulatory RNAs)

Controls transcription,
translation, or RNA
stability

20–30

<100 nt

Variable

No

tmRNA
(properties of transfer and
messenger RNA)

Frees ribosomes stuck
on damaged mRNA

Roughly one per
species

300–400 nt

3–5 minutes

No

Catalytic RNA

Carries out enzymatic
reactions (e.g., RNase P)

?

Varies

3–5 minutes

No

RNA class

Function

mRNA
(messenger RNA)

a

Six major classes of RNA exist in all bacteria. They differ in their function, quantity, average sizes, and half-lives, and whether they contain modified bases.

b

Small RNAs include antisense RNA and micro-RNA.

discussed later, rRNA also forms the catalytic center of the
ribosome. Transfer RNA (tRNA) molecules ferry amino
acids to the ribosome. A unique property of rRNA and
tRNA is the presence of unusual modified bases not found
in other types of RNA.
The fourth important class of RNA is called small RNA
(sRNA). Molecules of sRNA do not encode proteins but
are used to regulate the stability or translation of specific
mRNAs into proteins (for example, RNA thermometers are
discussed in Chapter 10). As will be discussed later in more
detail, all mRNA molecules contain untranslated leader
sequences that precede the actual coding region. Complementary sequences within some of these RNA leader
regions snap back on themselves to form double-stranded
stems and stem loop structures that can obstruct ribosome
access and limit translation. Regulatory sRNAs can basepair with these regions in mRNA and either disrupt or stabilize intrastrand stem structures.
The final two classes of RNA are tmRNA, which has
properties of both tRNA and mRNA (discussed later), and
catalytic RNA. Catalytic RNA molecules, also referred to
as ribozymes, are usually found associated with proteins
in which the enzymatic (catalytic) activity actually resides
in the RNA portion of the complex rather than in the protein. All of these functional RNAs may represent remnants
of the ancient “RNA world,” where the earliest ancestral
cells were built of RNA parts whose functions were later
assumed by proteins. The RNA-world model is discussed
in Chapter 17.

RNA Stability

Once released from RNA polymerase, most prokaryotic
mRNA transcripts are doomed to a short existence owing
to their degradation by intracellular RNases. Why would a
cell tolerate this seemingly wasteful practice? Remember,
bacteria face extremely rapid changes in their environment,
including changes in temperature, salinity, or nutrients,
to name a few. To survive, cells must be prepared to react
quickly and halt synthesis of superfluous or even detrimental proteins. An effective way to do this is to rapidly destroy
the mRNAs that encode those proteins. Unfortunately,
rapid mRNA degradation makes it necessary to continually
transcribe those genes as long as their products are needed.
RNA stability is measured in terms of half-life, which is the
length of time the cell needs to degrade half the molecules of
a given mRNA species. The average half-life for mRNA is
1–3 minutes but can be as little as 15 seconds. Other RNAs
can be fairly stable, with half-lives of 10–20 minutes or longer. However, the stabilities of the different kinds of RNAs
differ drastically. The mRNAs are usually unstable compared
to rRNAs and tRNAs, which contain modified bases less
susceptible to RNase digestion. These more stable RNA molecules have half-lives on the order of hours.
The major RNA-degrading machine of E. coli, the degradosome, is a four-protein complex including an RNase, an
RNA helicase, and two metabolic enzymes. The degradosome
complex is organized in a helical cytoskeletal structure associated with the cell membrane. These findings suggest that
the RNA degradosome is compartmentalized within the cell.

CHAPTER 8



TRANSCRIPTION, TRANSLATION, AND BIOINFORMATICS

Compartmentalization may regulate RNA degradation by
limiting access of the RNase to cytoplasmic RNA.










283

catalytic activity (catalytic RNA), or function as a combination of tRNA and mRNA (tmRNA).


To Summarize




Half-lives of RNA species vary within the cell.

8.3

Initial binding of RNA polymerase to promoter DNA
forms the closed complex.
The DNA strands separate (melt) and form a “bubble” of DNA around the polymerase called the open
complex.

Translation of RNA
to Protein

Once a gene has been copied into mRNA, the next stage
is translation, the decoding of the RNA message to synthesize protein. An mRNA molecule can be thought of as
a sentence in which triplets of nucleotides, called codons,
represent individual words, or amino acids (Fig. 8.10).
Ribosomes are the machines that read the language of
mRNA and convert, or translate, it into protein. Translation
involves numerous steps, the first of which is the search by
ribosomes for the beginning of an mRNA protein-coding
region. Because the code consists of triplet codons, a ribosome must start translating at precisely the right base (in the
right frame), or the product will be gibberish. Before we discuss how the ribosome finds the right reading frame, let’s
review the code itself and the major players in translation.

Antibiotics that inhibit bacterial transcription
include rifamycin B (which binds to RNA polymerase
to inhibit transcription initiation) and actinomycin D
(which binds DNA to nonselectively inhibit transcription elongation).
Rho-dependent and Rho-independent mechanisms
mediate transcription termination.
Messenger RNA (mRNA) molecules encode proteins.
Noncoding RNAs include ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs),
transfer RNAs (tRNAs), and small RNAs. Small
RNAs can regulate gene expression (sRNA), have

2nd Base
U

U

C

1st Base

A

G

FIGURE 8.10

C

A

G

Single-letter
abbreviations
for amino acids

RNA
codon
UUU

Amino RNA
acid
codon
Phe
UCU

Amino RNA
acid
codon
Ser
UAU

Amino RNA
acid
codon
Tyr
UGU

Amino
acid
Cys
U

UUC

Phe

UCC

Ser

UAC

Tyr

UGC

Cys

C

UUA

Leu

UCA

Ser

UA A

Stop

UGA

Stop

A

UUG

Leu

UCG

Ser

UAG

Stop

UGG

Trp

G

CUU

Leu

CCU

Pro

CAU

His

CGU

Arg

U

Gln (Q)

CUC

Leu

CCC

Pro

CAC

His

CGC

Arg

C

Glu (E)

CUA

Leu

CCA

Pro

CA A

Gln

CGA

Arg

A

CUG

Leu

CCG

Pro

CAG

Gln

CGG

Arg

G

AUU

Ile

ACU

Thr

A AU

Asn

AGU

Ser

U

AUC

Ile

ACC

Thr

A AC

Asn

AGC

Ser

C

AUA

Ile

ACA

Thr

A A A

Lys

AGA

Arg

A

AUG

Met

ACG

Thr

A AG

Lys

A GG

Arg

G

Pro (P)

GUU

Val

GCU

Ala

GAU

Asp

GGU

Gly

U

Ser (S)

GUC

Val

GCC

Ala

GAC

Asp

GGC

Gly

C

GUA

Val

GCA

Ala

GA A

Glu

GG A

Gly

A

Tyr (Y)

GUG

Val

GCG

Ala

GAG

Glu

GGG

Gly

G

Val (V)

Ala (A)
Arg (R)
Asn (N)
Asp (D)
Cys (C)

Gly (G)
His (H)
3rd Base

Ile (I)
Leu (L)
Lys (K)
Met (M)
Phe (F)

Thr (T)
Trp (W)

The genetic code. Codons within a single box encode the same amino acid. Color-highlighted amino acids are encoded by
codons in two boxes. Stop codons are highlighted red. Often, single-letter abbreviations for amino acids are used to convey protein sequences
(see legend above).


284



PART 2



GENES AND GENOMES

The Genetic Code and tRNA Molecules

When learning a new language, we need a dictionary
that converts words from one language into the other.
In the case of gene expression, how do we convert from
the 4-base language of RNA to the protein language of
20 amino acids? Through painstaking effort, Marshall
Nirenberg, Har Gobind Khorana, and colleagues cracked
the molecular code and found that each codon (a triplet of
nucleotides) represents an individual amino acid. Remarkably, and with few exceptions, the code operates universally across species. (Exceptions include UGA, which is
normally read as a stop codon but encodes tryptophan in
vertebrate mitochondria, Saccharomyces, and mycoplasmas; and CUG, which encodes serine instead of leucine in
Candida albicans.) In the code presented in Figure 8.10,
we can see that most amino acids have multiple codon
synonyms. Glycine (Gly), for example, is translated from
four different codons, and leucine (Leu) from six, but
methionine (Met) and tryptophan (Trp) each have only
one codon. Because more than one codon can encode
the same amino acid, the code is said to be degenerate
or redundant. Notice that in almost every case, synonymous codons differ only in the last base. How the cell
handles this degeneracy (redundancy) in the code will be
explained later.

Only 61 out of a possible 64 codons specify amino acids.
Four of these act as codons that can mark the beginning
of the protein “sentence.” In order of preference, they are
AUG (90%), GUG (8.9%), UUG (1%), and CUG (0.1%).
Because of its inefficiency in starting translation, the use of
a rare start codon, such as CUG, limits the translation of
any ORF in which it is found. Although these start codons
are used to begin all proteins, they are not restricted to that
role; they also encode amino acids found in the middle of
coding sequences. Consequently, there must be something
else about mRNA that signifies whether an AUG codon, for
example, marks the start of a protein or resides internally,
where it codes for an amino acid (as will be discussed shortly).
The remaining three triplets (UAA, UAG, and UGA)
are equally important, for they tell the ribosome when to
stop reading a gene sentence. Called stop codons, they
trigger a series of events (to be described later) that dismantle ribosomes from mRNA and release a completed protein.

Note:

There are actually 21 or 22 amino acids found in the
proteins of some microbes. The extra amino acids, however, are
modifications of one of the basic 20. Selenocysteine, for instance,
is synthesized by modifying a serine bound to a tRNA molecule.
The selenocysteinyl tRNA recognizes UGA, normally a stop codon.
There is no pool of free selenocysteine in the cell.

A.
5′ GCGG A U U U AGC U C AGD DGGG AG AGCMCC AG C UGA A Y A U C UGG AGMU C C UGUG T ΨCG A U CC A C A A U U CGC A CC A 3′
B.

3′
Acceptor end
A
C
G
C
5′
A
G C
C G
G C
G C
A U
U A
DHU loop
A GACAC C UA
UU
G
A
C UGUG
DGA C U C G
T ΨC
D
C
G
U
GG A G A G C
M
M
AG
TΨC loop
C G
C G
A U
G C
A U

C.

Acceptor end

(Other loops are folded)

C
A
U
Y
GA A
Anticodon loop
Anticodon loop

FIGURE 8.11

 Transfer RNA. A. Primary sequence. The letters D, M, Y, T, and Ψ stand for modified bases found in tRNA. B. Cloverleaf
structure. DHU (or D) is dihydrouracil, which occurs only in this loop; TΨC consists of thymine, pseudouracil, and cytosine bases that occur
as a triplet in this loop. The DHU and TΨC loops are named for the modified nucleotides that are characteristically found there. C. Threedimensional structures. The anticodon loop binds to the codon, while the acceptor end binds to the amino acid. (PDB code: 1GIX)

CHAPTER 8



TRANSCRIPTION, TRANSLATION, AND BIOINFORMATICS

Amino acid
Acceptor end

H3N +
H

C

CCA

R
O

C
O

3′
tRNA
icon

Attachment site
(to ribose)

A
C
C

5′

U

AUC C
G
G
CΨ T

AGD
D
G
G

TΨC loop

DHU loop

A
U

Anticodon
loop

C
Y

UAC
AUG

Anticodon
Codon
3′

5′

FIGURE 8.12

Codon-anticodon pairing. The tRNA anticodon
consists of three nucleotides at the base of the anticodon loop.
The anticodon hydrogen-bonds with the mRNA codon in an antiparallel fashion. This tRNA is “charged” with an amino acid covalently
attached to the 3′ end.


Thought Question

8.4 How might the redundancy of the genetic code be used

to establish evolutionary relationships between different
species? Hints: 1. Genomes of different species have different
overall GC content. 2. Within a given genome one can find segments of DNA sequence with a GC content distinctly different
from that found in the rest of the genome.

O
HN
O

N
H

S

H
H
H
H

HN
O

N
H

Dihydrouracil
(D)

4-Thiouracil
(S4U)

O

O

HN
O

CH3

O

N

Ribose
Ribothymidine
(rT)

FIGURE 8.13

HN

Ribose

N
H

Pseudouridine
(!)


NH2

N

O

N

3-Methylcytosine
(m3C)
HN CH3
N

N
N

N
H

N 6-Methyladenine
(m6A)

O
CH3

N

HN

N

N
H

N

5-Methylcytosine
(m5C)

Inosine
(I)

O

N
H

285

The decoder (or adapter) molecules that convert the language of RNA (codons) to the language of proteins (amino
acids) are the tRNAs. Their job is to travel through the
cell and return to the ribosome with amino acids in tow.
Approximately 80 bases in length, a tRNA laid flat looks
like a clover leaf with three loops (Fig. 8.11A and B). In
nature, however, the molecule folds into the “boomeranglike” 3D structure shown in Figure 8.11C. The very bottom, or middle, loop of all tRNA molecules (as depicted in
Fig. 8.11B and C) harbors an anticodon triplet that basepairs with codons in mRNA (Fig. 8.12). As a result, this
loop is called the anticodon loop. Notice that codon and
anticodon pairings are aligned in an antiparallel manner.
Most tRNA molecules begin with a 5′ G, and all end with
a 3′ CCA, to which an amino acid attaches (see Figs. 8.11
and 8.12). Because the 3′ end of the tRNA accepts the
amino acid, it is called the acceptor end.
Transfer RNA molecules contain a large number of
unusual, modified bases, which accounts for the strange
letter codes seen in Figure 8.11A (D, M, Y, T, and Ψ).
Structures of some of the odd bases are shown in Figure 8.13. Wybutosine (yW), for example, has three rings
instead of the two found in a normal purine. How do these
unusual bases end up in tRNA? During transcription of
the tRNA genes, normal, unmodified bases are incorporated into the transcript. Some of these are modified later
by specific enzymes to make inosine and other odd bases.
The remarkable stability of tRNA molecules is explained,
in part, by these unusual bases, because they are poor substrates for RNases.
In the cloverleaf structure of tRNA, two of the loops
are named after modifications that are invariantly present
in those loops. One is called the TΨC loop because this
loop in every tRNA has the nucleotide triplet consisting
of thymidine, pseudouridine (Ψ), and cytidine. The other

NH2

H 3C



CH2
N

N
N

CH

C

COOCH3

HC

COOCH3

H2C

Ribose

HN

HN

O

H2C
H 3C

CH3
CH3

N
H

N 6-Isopentenyladenine
(i6A)

Modified bases present in tRNA and rRNA molecules. Modifications are highlighted in green.

N

N
N

N

N

CH3 Ribose
Wybutosine
(yW)

286



PART 2



GENES AND GENOMES

loop always contains dihydrouridine and is called the
DHU loop (see Figs. 8.11 and 8.12). These loops are recognized by the enzymes that match tRNA to the proper
amino acid.
As noted previously, the genetic code is redundant in
that many amino acids have codon synonyms. Redundancy is found primarily in the third position of the
codon (for example, UUU and UUC both encode phenylalanine). A single tR NA can recognize both codons
because of “wobble” in the first position of the anticodon, which corresponds to the third position of the
codon (remember, as with DNA, base-pairing between
R NA strands is antiparallel). The wobble is due in part
to the curvature of the anticodon loop and to the use of
an unusual base (inosine) at this position in some tR NA

molecules. The wobble structure allows one anticodon
to pair with several codons differing only in the third
position.

Aminoacyl-tRNA Synthetases
Attach Amino Acids to tRNA

When a tRNA anticodon (for instance, GCG) pairs with
its complementary codon (CGC in this case), the ribosome has no way of checking that the tRNA is attached
(that is, charged) to the “correct” amino acid (here, arginine). Consequently, each tRNA must be charged with
the proper amino acid before it encounters the ribosome. How are amino acids correctly matched to tRNA
molecules and affixed to their 3′ ends? The charging of
tRNAs is carried out by a set of enzymes called aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases. Each cell has generally 20 of
these “match and attach” proteins—one for each amino
R O
acid. Some bacteria, however, have only 18, choosing
H C C OH
instead to modify already-charged glutamyl-tRNA and
NH3+
aspartyl-tRNA by adding an amine to make glutamine
Amino acid
and asparagine derivatives. Each aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase recognizes all of the tRNA molecules that transport the same amino acid.
O
O
O
–
Every
aminoacyl-tRNA
synthetase
O P O P O P O Adenosine
enzyme
has
a
specific
binding
site
for its
–
–
–
O
O
O
cognate
(matched)
amino
acid.
Each
1. Formation of
ATP
aminoacyl-AMP
enzyme also has a site that recognizes
activates amino acid.
O
O
the target tRNA and an active site
–
O P O P O–
that joins the carboxyl group of the
–
–
amino acid to the 3′ OH (class II
O
O
Amino acid
synthetases) or 2′ OH (class I
AMP
synthetases) of the tRNA by
R O
O
forming an ester (Fig. 8.14).
Adenine
P
P
Cyt
O CH2 O
Cyt
H C C O P O Adenosine
The tRNA synthetase disenO–
H2N
3′ 2′
2. Ribose hydroxyl at
gages after the amino acid
3′ end of tRNA
Aminoacyl-AMP
has been attached to the
HO
OH
displaces AMP to
form charged tRNA.
tRNA. Amino acids iniClass I synthetases
O
tially attached to the 2′
–
O P O Adenosine
OH are then moved to the
3′ OH position.
O– AMP
Each aminoacyl-tRNA
3. Charged tRNA bears
Adenine
Cyt
Cyt
O CH2 O
P
P
an amino acid joined by
synthetase must recognize
an ester linkage. Class I
3′ 2′
its own tRNA but not bind to
synthetases form amino
Class
II
acid ester at 2′ OH;
any other tRNA. Specificity is
O
HO
synthetases
class II synthetases, at
based on recognizing unique feaform ester
O C
Ester
3′ OH.
here.
+
tures of the tRNA anticodon loop,
R C NH3
the TΨC loop, and the DHU loop.
FIGURE 8.14  Charging of tRNA molecules by aminoH
Thus,
each tRNA has its own set of interacyl-tRNA synthetases. At the end of this process, each amino
action
sites
that
match only the proper aminoacylacid is attached to the 3′ end of CCA on a specific tRNA molecule.
tRNA synthetase.
Curved arrows indicate nucleophilic attack by electrons.

CHAPTER 8
A. Small subunit (30S)

B. Large subunit (50S)



TRANSCRIPTION, TRANSLATION, AND BIOINFORMATICS

C. Ribosome (70S)

+

FIGURE 8.15

 Bacterial ribosome structure. As this schematic illustrates, note that a section of the 30S subunit (A) fits into
the valley of the 50S subunit (B) when forming the 70S ribosome (C).

The Ribosome, a Translation Machine

The decoding process of the ribosome may be compared
to a language translation machine that converts one language into another. The ribosome can be viewed as translating the language of the mRNA code into the amino acid
sequences of proteins that conduct the activities of the cell.
Ribosomes are composed of two complex subunits, each of
which includes rRNA and protein components. In prokaryotes, the subunits are named 30S and 50S for their “size”
in Svedberg units. A Svedberg unit reflects the rate at
which a molecule sediments under the centrifugal force of
a centrifuge (discussed in eAppendix 3). Within the living
cell, the two subunits exist separately but come together on
mRNA to form the translating 70S ribosome (Fig. 8.15).
(Note that Svedberg units are not directly additive, because
they represent a rate of sedimentation, not a mass.)



The smaller, 30S subunit (900,000 Da) contains 21 ribosomal proteins (named S1–S21; S = “small”) assembled
around one 16S rRNA molecule. The 50S subunit (1.6 million Da) consists of 31 proteins [designated L1–L34 (three
numbers were not used); L = “large”] formed around two
rRNA molecules (5S and 23S). Figure 8.16 presents the
3D spatial arrangement of rRNA and protein in the 50S
subunit. Note that the majority of the ribosome is RNA.
How does such a complex molecular machine get
built? As discussed in greater detail in eTopic 8.1, assembly begins with the transcription of ribosomal RNA genes
(DNA), sometimes referred to as rDNA. The 16S, 23S,
and 5S rRNAs are initially transcribed as one RNA molecule and posttranscriptionally processed into separate
rRNA molecules. During rRNA transcription, ribosomal
proteins begin to assemble within the secondary rRNA
structures. Thus, the ribosome is built by precise, timed
molecular RNA-RNA, RNA-protein, and protein-protein
interactions.

Thought Question

8.5 The synthesis of ribosomal RNAs and ribosomal proteins
represents a major energy drain on the cell. How might the cell
regulate the synthesis of these molecules when the growth
rate slows because amino acids are limiting? Hint: Predict
what happens to any translating ribosome when an amino acid
is limiting. Look up RelA protein on the Internet.

Catalytic
center

Ribosomal
protein

rRNA

FIGURE 8.16

RNA-protein interfaces in the large (50S) ribosome subunit. rRNA is blue; proteins are gold. (PDB code: 1GIY)
Blowup: Partial secondary structure of 23S rRNA, which includes the peptidyltransferase catalytic site. Note the many double-stranded
hairpin structures that fold into domains (Roman numerals). Nucleotides are numbered in black; stem structures, in blue.


287

288



PART 2



GENES AND GENOMES

Peptide

H

+

O
O

Peptide
N

H

tRNA
(P site)

aa
tRNA
(A site)

OH

+

tRNA
(P site)

O

H
aa

N

tRNA
(A site)

Peptide bond formation
Polypeptide
50S

tRNA P site
tRNA A site

tRNA E site

30S
mRNA

mRNA
5′

3′

FIGURE 8.17  Binding of tRNA. X-ray-crystallographic model
of Thermus thermophilus ribosome with associated tRNAs. 50S
is red, 30S is magenta, and tRNAs in the A, P, and E sites are blue,
green, and yellow, respectively.) Inset: The formation of a peptide
bond between the peptidyl-tRNA in the P site and aminoacyl-tRNA
in the A site. The mRNA (light blue) travels along the 30S subunit,
and the growing peptide (yellow) exits from a channel formed in the
50S subunit. (PDB codes: 1GIX and 1GIY)

The 70S ribosome harbors three binding sites for tRNA
(Fig. 8.17
). During translation, each tRNA molecule moves through the sites in an assembly-line fashion,
first entering at one site, and then moving progressively
through the others before being jettisoned from the ribosome. The first position is the aminoacyl-tRNA acceptor
site (A site), which binds an incoming aminoacyl-tRNA.
The growing peptide is attached to tRNA berthed in the
peptidyl-tRNA site (P site). Finally, a tRNA recently
stripped of the polypeptide is located in the exit site
(E site). Figure 8.17 also illustrates the path mRNA takes
into the ribosome and the nascent (that is, growing) peptide emerging from it.

The Ribosome Is a “Ribozyme”

The ribosome makes the peptide bonds that stitch amino
acids together, and it does so by using a remarkable enzymatic activity called peptidyltransferase, present in the 50S
subunit. Contrary to expectation, the peptidyltransferase

activity resides not in ribosomal proteins, but in the rRNA.
Peptidyltransferase is actually a ribozyme (an RNA molecule that carries out catalytic activity), and it is a part of 23S
rRNA that is highly conserved across all species (Fig. 8.16
inset, loop V). Proteins surrounding this active center offer
structural assistance to ensure that the RNA is folded properly and to interact with tRNA substrates.
The sequences of ribosomal RNAs from all microbes are
very similar, in large part because rRNA plays an important catalytic role in the activities of ribosomes. But there
are differences in rRNA sequences that increase in relation to the evolutionary distance between species. As a
result, rRNA serves as a molecular clock that measures the
approximate time since two species diverged. More information on molecular clocks can be found in Section 17.3.

How Do Ribosomes Find the
Right Reading Frame?

Every mRNA has three potential reading frames, depending on which base the ribosome happens to start with. A
ribosome that chooses the wrong frame will produce proteins with totally different amino acid sequences. In addition, a shifted reading frame often generates an inadvertent
stop codon that prematurely terminates the peptide. So
how does the ribosome find the right frame? The key is a
section of untranslated RNA sequence positioned upstream
of the protein-coding segment of mRNA. The upstream
leader RNA contains a purine-rich consensus sequence
(5′-AGGAGGU-3′) located four to eight bases upstream of
the start codon. This upstream sequence is called the ribosome-binding site or Shine-Dalgarno sequence, after
Lynn Dalgarno and her student John Shine at Australian
National University, who discovered it in 1974.
The Shine-Dalgarno site is complementary to a sequence
at the 3′ end of 16S rRNA (5′-ACCUCCU-3′), found in
the 30S ribosome subunit. Binding of mRNA to this site
positions the start codon (such as AUG or GUG) precisely
in the ribosome P site, ready to pair with an N-formylmethionyl-tRNA. Elegant proof that the Shine-Dalgarno
sequence actually binds to the 3′ end of 16S rRNA is
described in eTopic 8.2.
Recall from Section 7.2 that many genes in the bacterial
chromosome are arranged in tandem (an operon) and are
transcribed together to produce a polygenic (formerly polycistronic) mRNA. Because the beginning of each gene in
a polygenic mRNA carries its own ribosome-binding site,
different ribosomes can bind simultaneously to the start of
each gene. Mutating the first gene in a three-gene operon
can halt translation of the first protein, but the second
and third proteins can still be translated because the RNA
sequence for each has its own ribosome-binding site.

CHAPTER 8



TRANSCRIPTION, TRANSLATION, AND BIOINFORMATICS

Note:

Eukaryotic ribosomes have a different mechanism for
finding the start codon. They generally start translating at the first
AUG after the 5′ cap. The 5′ cap is a 7-methylguanosine added posttranscriptionally to the 5′ end of eukaryotic mRNA molecules. The
normal role of the cap is thought to be as a signal to transport RNA
out of the nucleus and/or to stabilize mRNA.

Polysomes, Coupled Transcription/
Translation, and Transertion
Polysomes. Once a ribosome begins translating mRNA

and moves off of the ribosome-binding site, another ribosome can immediately jump onto that site. The result is
an RNA molecule with multiple ribosomes moving along
its length at the same time. The multiribosome structure
is known as a polysome (Fig. 8.18A). Ribosomes in a
A.

Nascent
proteins
DNA

RNA polymerase
Polymerase
movement
Ribosome
movement

Beginning of
mRNA
5′

Ribosomes
RBS
(ribosome-binding site)

B.
7

30S subunit

3

4

50S subunit

8



289

polysome are closely packed and arranged helically along
the mRNA (Fig. 8.18B). Polysomes help protect the message from degrading RNases and enable the speedy production of protein from just a single mRNA molecule.
Coupled transcription and translation. Because bacte-

ria and archaea lack nuclear membranes, ribosome subunits floating through the cytoplasm have an opportunity
to bind to the 5′ end of mRNA and begin making protein even before RNA polymerase has fi nished making
the mRNA molecule. The simultaneous building of both
mRNA and proteins is called coupled transcription and
translation (Fig. 8.18A). For certain genes, transcriptiontranslation coupling requires a protein to physically link the
ribosome to RNA polymerase. One such protein is RfaH,
described in the Current Research Highlight.
The coupling of transcription and translation in bacteria
makes it possible for the cell to use translation as a means
of regulating transcription. One process, attenuation, is
explained further in Chapter 10. Note, however, that much,
if not most, translation—at least in E. coli and Bacillus subtilis—seems to occur at the polar ends of cells, which are
polyribosome-rich and have little to no DNA (Fig. 8.19).
Thus, although transcription-translation coupling happens
when transcripts are first made, most translation occurs on
free mRNA transcripts that have diffused away from the
nucleoid and into polyribosome-rich areas.
The coupling of transcription and translation presents a
potential problem. Ribosomes generally travel along mRNA
more slowly than mRNA is generated by RNA polymerase,
so RNA polymerase can potentially scoot ahead of the
ribosome and leave large tracts of RNA unprotected and
susceptible to nucleases. The cell handles this problem by
modulating transcription speed. The rate of RNA synthesis
averages about 45 nt per second, which roughly equals the
average rate of translation (16 amino acids per second, or

1
A.

9

6

5

Area of transertion
Nascent
peptide

FIGURE 8.18

 Coupled transcription and translation
in bacteria. A. During coupled transcription and translation in

prokaryotes, ribosomes attach at mRNA ribosome-binding sites and
start synthesizing protein before transcription of the gene is complete. B. Model of E. coli polysome showing the nascent polypeptides (numbered) exiting from each ribosome. A representative ribosome is shown in the dashed circle. Note the helical arrangement of
ribosomes along the chain, which are held together by mRNA (blue
tracing). The closer the ribosome is to the 3′ end of the mRNA, the
longer the synthesized protein molecules grow.

BAKSHI, ET AL. 2012. MOL MICRO 85:21.

2

mRNA
tracing

B.

Ribosomes

Ribosomes

DNA

Nucleoid

FIGURE 8.19  Most translation in E. coli is not coupled to
transcription. A. Most ribosomes exist in nucleoid-free areas of

the cell, primarily at the cell poles. DNA was visualized using a red
fluorescent dye. Ribosomes contained a protein (S2) fused to yellow
fluorescent protein, which here appears green. B. Computerized
model showing the distribution of polysomes in the cell.

290



PART 2



GENES AND GENOMES

48 nt/s). However, these speeds vary. For example, RNA
polymerase pauses momentarily at sites rich in GC content
(GC base pairs, with three hydrogen bonds, are harder to
melt than AT pairs, which have only two hydrogen bonds).
Once sigma factor exits the transcription complex, proteins
called NusA and NusG enter the complex and can actually
lengthen the pause in RNA polymerase activity to allow
time for the trailing protein-synthesizing ribosome to catch
up to the polymerase. Pausing allows the ribosome to follow RNA polymerase closely and protect the RNA.
Transertion. Transcription-translation
coupling has
another benefit for the bacterial cell: expanding, or decompacting, the nucleoid. Many membrane proteins are inserted
into membranes while they are still being translated (Section 8.5 discusses protein secretion mechanisms). The
cotranslational insertion of membrane proteins sets up a
situation whereby transcription, translation, and membrane
insertion can all be coupled—a process called transertion.
Transertion links the nucleoid to the cell membrane along
the cylindrical portion of the cell and expands the width
of the nucleoid. This expansion may help, among other
things, to counteract nucleoid contraction produced by
transcription-generated DNA supercoils. Decompaction
will facilitate diffusion of ribosome subunits, RNA polymerase, and regulatory proteins into the nucleoid.
Transcription in eukaryotic microbes is not coupled to
translation. In contrast to bacteria and archaea, eukaryotic

microbes use separate cellular compartments to carry out
most of their transcription and translation. They transcribe

1. RNA polymerase binds to the –10 and
–35 regions of DNA and reads the
template strand. RNA transcription
begins at nucleotide +1.
Promoter
P
t

DNA

Sense (coding)
strand
Template
strand

5′

–35

genes in the nucleus where internal, noncoding parts of the
mRNA (introns) are removed by a process known as RNA
splicing. The processed transcripts are then transported
to the cytoplasm and translated. Most eukaryotic DNA
viruses do the same. However, a small amount of translation is performed in the eukaryotic nucleus, where it can
also be coupled to transcription.

Defining a Gene

Before we describe the mechanics of translation, it will help
to illustrate the alignments between the DNA sequence
of a structural gene (a gene encoding a protein), and the
mRNA transcript containing translation signals and the
protein-coding sequences. Figure 8.20 shows the “sense”
and “template” DNA strands of a two-gene operon. The
sequence of the sense strand matches that of the mRNA
transcript, but with T’s substituting for U’s. The template
strand is the strand actually “read” by RNA polymerase.
Note that +1 marks the DNA base where the mRNA transcript starts and that a single transcript includes both operon
genes (polygenic). In the mRNA transcript, an untranslated “leader” sequence precedes the gene A protein-coding
region, located between translation start and stop signals
(discussed later). Downstream of the translation stop signal
for gene B lies an untranslated “trailer.” The leader and
trailer sequences help regulate gene expression. As you proceed in this chapter, refer back to Figure 8.20 to clarify
important relationships connecting a DNA operon, its
composite genes, the polygenic transcript, and the resulting proteins.

Transcription
start
–10

Gene A
+1

3′ Direction of
transcription

2. Messenger RNA has an untranslated
region of variable length. Each part of the
transcript encoding a protein has a
ribosome-binding site (RBS).

Ribosome-binding site

Translation
start codon

Transcription

Translation
stop codon

5′
mRNA

3. Ribosomes begin translating a few nucleotides
downstream from each RBS at a translation start
codon−the amino terminus of each translated protein.

Untranslated
leader

Translation

Protein

FIGURE 8.20  Alignment of structural genes in a bacterial operon, the mRNA transcript, and protein products. In this figure, the
term “gene” refers to the region of DNA corresponding to the entire mRNA transcript, including upstream and downstream untranslated areas.

CHAPTER 8



TRANSCRIPTION, TRANSLATION, AND BIOINFORMATICS

Thought Question

IF3

8.6 Figure 8.20 illustrates an operon and its relationship

E

to transcripts and protein products. Imagine that a mutation
that stops translation (TAA, for example) was substituted for
a normal amino acid about midway through the DNA sequence
encoding gene A. What happens to the expression of the gene
A and gene B proteins?

P



291

1. IF3 dissociates
30S and 50S
subunits.

A

30S

mRNA
5′

AUG

IF1

The Three Stages of Protein Synthesis

Once the ribosome has been properly positioned on the
message, peptide synthesis can begin. Like transcription, peptide synthesis has three stages: initiation, which
brings the two ribosomal subunits together, placing the
first amino acid in position; elongation, which sequentially adds amino acids as directed by the mRNA transcript; and termination. Several steps in this process can
be inhibited by certain antibiotics (described later in this
section).

IF3

fMet
fMet-tRNA

fMet-tRNA

Transcription
terminator region

IF2

GTP

3. IF2 interacts
with initiator tRNA.

IF2
GTP
IF3

IF1
4. IF2-fMet tRNA binds
30S subunit at P site.

5′

5. IF1 and IF3 are released.
GTP hydrolysis releases IF2.

IF3

50S

E
Gene B

IF1

5′

Initiation of translation. In bacteria such as E. coli, initia-

tion of protein synthesis requires three small proteins called
initiation factors (IF1, IF2, and IF3).
Initially, IF3 binds to the 30S subunit to separate the
30S and 50S subunits. Separating the subunits allows other
initiation factors and mRNA access to the 30S subunit
(Fig. 8.21
, step 1). IF1 and mRNA join the 30S subunit. IF1 blocks the tRNA A site, and the mRNA sequence
for the ribosome-binding site aligns with its complementary sequence on 16S rRNA (step 2 ). Next, IF2 complexed
to GTP escorts the initiator N-formylmethionyl-tRNA
(fMet-tRNA) to the start codon located at what will be the

P

2. 30S subunit binds
to IF1 and mRNA.

A

5′
30S

IF1

IF2

GDP

6. 50S subunit associates
with 30S subunit.

FIGURE 8.21

 Translation initiation. The end result of translation initiation is assembly of the 50S-30S-mRNA complex with the
initiator tRNA-fMet set in the P site. See text for details.

Translation
start codon

Translation
stop codon

Translation

Ribosome-binding
some-binding site

Protein

Untranslated
Untran
trailer

P site (steps 3 and 4). N-formylmethionyl-tRNA binds to
all start codons and is the only aminoacyl-tRNA to bind
directly to the P site. Once the initiator tRNA is in place,
GTP is hydrolyzed, and IF1 and IF3 are released (step 5).
The 50S subunit then docks to the 30S subunit (step 6).
The ribosome is now “locked and loaded,” ready for elongation. Note that initiation is much more complex in the
Archaea, involving as many as six different IF proteins.

292



PART 2



GENES AND GENOMES

Termination of translation. Eventually, the ribosome

arrives at the end of the coding region, but not the end
of the RNA. As noted previously, the end of the coding

Amino
acid

50S

Elongation of the peptide. In elongation, three basic

steps are repeated: (1) An aminoacyl-tRNA binds to the
A (acceptor) site; (2) a peptide bond forms between the
new amino acid and the growing peptide pre-positioned
in the P site; (3) the message must move by one codon
(Fig. 8.22 ). First an elongation factor (EF-Tu) associates with GTP to form a complex (EF-Tu-GTP) that binds
to most charged aminoacyl-tRNAs (except for the initiator tRNA). Sequences within the 50S rRNA recognize
features of the EF-Tu-GTP–aminoacyl-tRNA complex,
guiding it into the A site (Fig. 8.22, step 1). Correct selection of a tRNA is guided in large part by codon-anticodon pairing, but conformational changes sensed by various
ribosomal proteins customize the fit. If the fit is not perfect, the tRNA is rejected.
Once an aminoacyl-tRNA is in the A site, a peptide
bond is formed between the amino acid moored there
and the terminal amino acid linked to tRNA in the P site.
Simultaneously, a GTP is hydrolyzed and the resulting EFTu-GDP is expelled. Peptide bond formation effectively
transfers the peptide from the tRNA in the P site to tRNA
in the A site (Fig. 8.22, steps 2 and 3).
For protein synthesis to continue, the ribosome must
advance by one codon, which moves the peptidyl-tRNA
from the A site into the P site, leaving the A site vacant.
The process, called translocation, involves another elongation factor, EF-G, associated with GTP. EF-G-GTP binds
to the ribosome, GTP is hydrolyzed, and the 30S subunit rotates clockwise to ratchet the 50S subunit ahead on
the message by one codon (step 4). The 30S subunit then
rotates back (step 5). How EF-G uses a fingerlike motion to
complete translocation is explained in Special Topic 8.1.
The translocation maneuver opens up the A site, moves the
peptidyl-tRNA into the P site, and slides uncharged tRNA
into the E (exit) site. The next aminoacyl-tRNA that enters
the A site stimulates a conformational change in the ribosome that telegraphs through to the E site and ejects the
uncharged tRNA.
Notice that EF-Tu and EF-G recycle sequentially on and
off the ribosome by binding to the same area of the ribosome. Because EF-G-GTP and the EF-Tu-GTP–aminoacyl-tRNA complex are structurally similar (an example of
molecular mimicry) and because both bind to the same site,
the two factors must cycle on and off the ribosome sequentially. Although this process seems incredibly complex, the
ribosomes of E. coli manage to link together 16 amino acids
per second. Scientists have now visualized the staggered
movements of a single ribosome as it translates an mRNA
molecule (eTopic 8.3).

EF-Tu-GTP

fMet

tRNA
E

P

1. EF-Tu-GTP binds tRNA
and guides it to A site.

A

30S
EF-Tu-GDP

50S

E

P

2. GTP is hydrolyzed and
EF-Tu-GDP is released.
EF-Ts exchanges GTP
for GDP to restore
EF-Tu-GTP.

A

30S

Peptidyltransferase
50S

E

3a. Peptidyltransferase
activity catalyzes a
peptide bond.

P

A
3b. Peptide is transferred
from tRNA in P site to
tRNA in A site.

30S

EF-G-GDP
4 Translocation: EF-G4.
GTP binds; GTP is
hydrolyzed; the 30S
subunit rotates; the 50S
subunit advances one
codon. tRNA in the A
site moves into the P
s
site. Uncharged tRNA
s
shifts to the E site.

50S

E

30S
rotates 6º

P

30S

50S

E

P

A

5. EF-G-GDP exits; the
30S subunit resets. The
A site can receive a new
charged tRNA. tRNA
entering the A site
ttriggers ejection of the
E site tRNA.

30S

FIGURE 8.22  Elongation of the peptide. At the end of each
elongation cycle, the ribosome has moved forward by one codon, which
positions the tRNA with nascent peptide in the P site and the tRNA
from which the peptide was passed in the E site, ready for ejection.

CHAPTER 8



TRANSCRIPTION, TRANSLATION, AND BIOINFORMATICS



293

SPECIAL TOPIC 8.1, , Translocation: EF-G Gets Physical

THE BLAVATNIK FAMILY FOUNDATION/©THE NEW YORK ACADEMY OF SCIENCE.
ALL RIGHT RESERVED.

Translocation of the ribosome down an mRNA molecule is a
critical part of translation. Ribosomes must move one codon
along an mRNA molecule while tRNAs in the ribosome A
(acceptor) site and P (peptidyl-tRNA) site shift to the P site
and E (exit) site, respectively. Elongation factor G (EF-G) plays
a major role in this process. When EF-G-GTP binds to a pretranslocation ribosome (see Fig. 8.22), it triggers the ratchetlike movement of the 30S subunit relative to the 50S subunit.
During subunit ratcheting, the CCA acceptor ends of tRNAs
move from the A and P sites to the P and E sites, leaving the
anticodon ends in the original sites. Hydrolysis of GTP bound
to EF-G then moves the anticodon ends of these tRNAs, along
with mRNA, to the new sites. The result is the posttranslocation ribosome in which mRNA has moved one codon and
tRNAs in the A and P sites have moved to the P and E sites,
respectively (see Fig. 8.22).
One question, however, has troubled structural biologists
FIGURE 1  Thomas Steitz (right) and associate research
for some time. Cryo-electron microscopy and X-ray-crystalscientists Matthieu Gagnon (left) and Jinzhong Lin examlographic examinations of EF-G bound to posttranslocation
ine the EF-G–binding site on a model of the 70S ribosome.
ribosomes show an elongated form of EF-G with its domain
IV projecting into the decoding center of the ribosome—a
The study by Steitz’s team shows that EF-G is far more
place where tRNA in the A site binds to its codon. The quesflexible than previously thought and suggests that controltion is, How can EF-G bind to a pretranslocation ribosome
ling flexibility by GTP binding and stabilization is key to
without colliding with tRNA already in the A site? A team led
completing translocation. GTP hydrolysis, then, is required
by Thomas Steitz at Yale University (Fig. 1) discovered the
to dissociate EF-G from the posttranslocation ribosome.
answer using a new way to trap EF-G bound to pretranslocation ribosomes from Thermus thermophilus.
RESEARCH QUESTION
Part of their strategy involved placing a nonhydrolyzPropose three ways that an antibiotic might inhibit protein
able peptidyl-tRNA in the P site to prevent peptide transsynthesis by interfering with EF-G.
fer to tRNA in the A site. The result was a ribosome stalled
Lin, Jinzhong, Matthieu G. Gagnon, David Bulkley, and
in the pretranslocation state. When they added EF-G, they
Thomas A. Steitz. 2015. Conformational changes of elonwere able to crystallize the pretranslocation complex and
gation factor G on the ribosome during tRNA translocation.
perform X-ray crystallography to determine EF-G structure.
Cell 160:219–227.
The results, shown in Figure 2A, revealed that domain IV of
EF-G was not extended before
A. Pretranslocation complex
B. Posttranslocation complex
translocation, but was tucked
away in a manner that did not
impinge on tRNA in the A site.
The authors propose that once
2. tRNA in A site
EF-G
50S
50S
EF-G-GTP binds to the ribomoves to P site.
some, the GTP-binding site
I
I
becomes ordered, triggering a
A
V
P
P
V
conformational change in EF-G
E
E
III
IV
to an extended fingerlike form
III
II
IV
(Fig. 2B). The extended form
reaches into the A site to
1. EF-G
tRNA in the
complete translocation of the
domain IV
E, P, and
3. Previous
extends into
A sites.
anticodon ends of tRNAs and
tRNA in E
30S
A site.
site
exits.
30S
moves the associated mRNA
down the ribosome. The model
is similar to a finger flicking a
FIGURE 2  Structures of EF-G bound to the pretranslocation (A) and
posttranslocation (B) ribosome.
paper clip along a table.

294



PART 2



GENES AND GENOMES
Release factor
1 or 2 (RF1)

region is marked by one of three stop codons. Translocation after forming the last peptide bond brings
the mRNA stop codon into the A site (Fig. 8.23 ,
step 1). No tRNA binds, but one of two release
factors (RF1 or RF2) will enter (also step 1). RF
binding leads to ejection of tRNA in the E site and
activates the peptidyltransferase, thereby cutting the
bond that tethers the completed peptide to tRNA in
the P site (step 2).
With the protein released, the ribosome must
disassemble. RF3 causes RF1 or RF2 to depart
the ribosome (Fig. 8.23, step 3). Then, ribosome
recycling factor (RRF), along with EF-G, binds at
the A site, and an accompanying GTP hydrolysis
undocks the two ribosomal subunits (step 4). IF3
then reenters the 30S subunit to eject the remaining uncharged tRNA and mRNA (step 5), thereby
preventing the 30S and 50S subunits from redocking. The liberated ribosomal subunits are now
free to diffuse through the cell, ready to bind yet
another mRNA and begin the translation sequence
anew.

50S

E

A

5′
30S

E

Release
factor 3

5′
30S

2. RF1 activates
peptidyltransferase,
which releases the
completed protein
from tRNA in P site.

STOP

RF1
50S

3. RF3 enters and
ejects RF1 or RF2.

E

8.7 While working as a member of a pharmaceutical

RF3

5′

company’s drug discovery team, you find that a soil
microbe snatched from the jungles of South America
produces an antibiotic that will kill even the most
deadly, drug-resistant form of Enterococcus faecalis,
which is an important cause of heart valve vegetations
in bacterial endocarditis. Your experiments indicate
that the compound stops protein synthesis. How could
you more precisely determine the antibiotic’s mode
of action? Hint: Can you use mutants resistant to the
antibiotic?

30S

STOP

GTP
EF-G
RF3

50S

E

GTP

4. Ribosome recycling
factor (RRF) and EF-G
enter the A site. RF3
leaves. GTP hydrolysis
undocks 50S from 30S.

P

5′
30S

Streptomycin (Fig. 8.24A), a well-known member
of the aminoglycoside family of antibiotics, is produced by a species of Streptomyces. The drug targets bacterial small ribosomal subunits by binding
to a region of 16S rRNA in the 30S subunit that
forms part of the decoding A site and to protein
S12, a protein critical for maintaining the specificity
of codon-anticodon binding. Streptomycin bound
to 16S rRNA makes decoding of mRNA at the A
site “sloppy” by permitting illicit codon-anticodon matchups that result in a mistranslated protein
sequence.
Bacteria can become resistant to streptomycin via
spontaneous mutations in the S12 gene (rpsL) or 16S

STOP

50S

Thought Question

Antibiotics That Affect Translation

1. Stop codon enters A
site. No corresponding
tRNA, so ribosome
release factor 1 or 2
enters. Uncharged
tRNA exits E site.

STOP

RRF

IF3
EF-G

50S

RRF

5′
IF3
30S

FIGURE 8.23

GDP

5. IF3 enters the 30S
subunit to remove
uncharged tRNA and
prevent reassociation
of 30S and 50S.

 Termination of translation. The completed
protein is released, and the ribosome subunits are recycled.

CHAPTER 8

TRANSCRIPTION, TRANSLATION, AND BIOINFORMATICS





295

that modifies chloramphenicol in a
way that destroys its activity.
CH2 OH
Binds to A site;
HN
Erythromycin, made by Strep1
2
mistranslation. HO
NH
O2N
CH CH
(acetyl)
tomyces erythraeus, is one of a large
OH NH
OH
HN
H2N
group of related antibiotics called
Enzymes that acetylate
O
Cm
confer
resistance
macrolides, whose hallmark is a
CH O
(acetyl)
HN
OH
to it.
H3 C
large lactone ring of 12–22 carbon
O
CHCI2
CHO
atoms (Fig. 8.24D). They all attack
the 50S subunit by binding to 23S
D. Erythromycin
HO
rRNA in the nascent peptide exit
O
H 3C
CH3
tunnel near the peptidyltransferase
HO CH2
O
H3C
center. Binding alters peptidyltransHO
OH
O
HO
OH
N
CH
HO
ferase structure and interferes with
3
CH3
H 3C
NH
HO
H 3C
H3C
peptide bond formation. Resistance
O
Binds to peptidylCH3
O
transferase site.
to macrolides usually involves an
O
O
O
Lactone
efflux pump or methylation of the
B. Tetracycline
CH
3
CH3
ring
OCH3
relevant area of 23S rRNA by an
CH3
H C
O
CH3 3
N
CH3
enzyme produced from a mobile
H
H
HO
OH
genetic element.
OH
H 3C
NH2
Other
translation-targeting
OH
antibiotics
interfere
with mR NA
O Binds to A site; inhibits
OH O
OH O
tRNA binding.
binding to the ribosome (kasugaC06570
mycin), prevent translocation by
targeting EF-G (fusidic acid), or
FIGURE 8.24  Antibiotics that inhibit protein synthesis in bacteria. Streptomycin
(A) and tetracycline (B) bind to the A site. Streptomycin causes mistranslation, tetracycline inhibuse structural similarity to tR NA
its tRNA binding. Chloramphenicol (C) and erythromycin (D) bind to the peptidyltransferase site,
(molecular mimicry) to trick pepthus inhibiting peptide bond formation.
tidyltransferase into action without having a bona fide tR NA in
the A site (puromycin). We chronicle the discovery and
rRNA. The altered ribosomal protein or rRNA remains
use of antibiotics more completely in Chapter 27.
functional but does not bind streptomycin. Some bacteria gain resistance by acquiring an aminoglycoside phosThought Questions
photransferase that modifies streptomycin so that it cannot
bind to its target. Additional mechanisms are discussed in
8.8 How might one gene code for two proteins with different
Chapter 27. Other therapeutically important aminoglycoamino acid sequences?
sides include gentamicin, tobramycin, and amikacin.
8.9 Why involve RNA in protein synthesis? Why not translate
Tetracycline and derivatives such as doxycycline
directly from DNA?
(Fig. 8.24B) also target the 30S ribosomal subunit,
8.10 Codon 45 of a 90-codon gene was changed into a
where they bind to 16S rRNA near the A site. But instead
translation stop codon, producing a shortened (truncated)
of causing mistranslation, the tetracyclines prevent amiprotein. What kind of mutant cell could produce a full-length
noacyl-tRNA from binding to the A site. Resistance to
protein from the gene without removing the stop codon? Hint:
tetracycline can be conferred by an efflux transport sysWhat molecule recognizes a codon?
tem that effectively removes the antibiotic from the bacterial cell. Genes encoding this drug resistance transport
system are usually carried on mobile genetic elements like
Unsticking Stuck Ribosomes:
plasmids that can be passed from cell to cell (see SectmRNA and Protein Tagging
tion 9.1). Other resistance mechanisms are described in
Premature transcription termination or cleavage of mRNA
Chapter 27.
near its 3′ end leaves an mRNA without a translational stop
Another species of Streptomyces produces chloramphenicol
codon. What happens when a ribosome translates these
(Fig. 8.24C), which attacks the 50S subunit. It binds to 23S
damaged mRNA molecules? Without a stop codon, there
rRNA at the peptidyltransferase active site and inhibits peptide
is nothing to trigger ribosome release when the ribosome
bond formation. Resistance to this drug comes from an ability
reaches the end of the message. So the ribosome is stuck at
to synthesize an enzyme, chloramphenicol acetyltransferase,
A. Streptomycin

C. Chloramphenicol (Cm)

NH2

3

Binds to peptidyltransferase site.

296

PART 2





GENES AND GENOMES

the end of the mRNA with a peptidyl-tRNA in the ribosome
P site. How can the cell fix this potentially toxic situation?
The answer is a translation rescue molecule, tmRNA,
with properties of tRNA and mRNA. The tRNA end has
an attached amino acid (alanine). The mRNA end encodes
a peptide tag (Fig. 8.25A). When tmRNA finds a stalled
ribosome, the aminoacyl-tRNA end enters the unoccupied
ribosome A site (Fig. 8.25B, steps 1 and 2). A peptide bond
forms between the stalled polypeptide and the alanine on the
A.

Ala

tmRNA (step 3). The tmRNA is now attached to the nascent
peptide and translocates to the P site (step 4). The mRNA
section of tmRNA then displaces the old mRNA and is
translated (step 5). Translation adds a 10-amino-acid peptide
tag to the carboxyl end of the incomplete protein, marking
the protein for destruction. A stop codon in tmRNA triggers
protein release and ribosome disassembly (step 6). Finally,
a helper protein (SspB) recognizes the proteolysis tag and
brings the useless aberrant polypeptide to the ClpXP protease
(discussed in Section 8.4) for degradation. Mutant cells lacking this rescue system often struggle to grow.

AA-stem CA

C
A
C
C
U
C
G
A
C

G
G
G
G
C
U
A

U
G CU U
G
AUUCG A

G

C
G
G
G
A
U
U
U
G
C
G
A
A
A
C
C
C
A
A
G
G
U
G
C
A
U
G
C

8.11 What would happen if the tyrosine residue UAC in the
mRNA-like domain of tmRNA was altered by mutation to UAA?

C
CG C C U C A
G C G G T ψC A

G
C
U
U
U
A
A
G
G
A
G
U
G
U
A
G
G
A
G
C
C
A
U
GA
U

G
U
A
C
G

Thought Question

tRNA-like
domain

A U CG G A C U A
GC C U G G

A
U
AA
G GG U U G
G CGU
C C CG A A
U GCG
GG

U

G
A
A
U
G
U
A
A
A
G
A
C
U
G
A
C
U
A
A

C
G
A
A
C
G
G
U
C
G

AU UC A
AA

G
U
U
U
G
U
U
A
G
U

C

C
U
C
U
U

G

C
U
C
C
G
A
U
C
C
C

A
G
C G
G C
C C G
U
U
G
C
C
U
G

U
C
U
C
U
C
C

C
U
A
G
A
G
A
A

A
G
G
A
C
G
G
G
G
AU
AC
A
G
A
G
A
G
G

To Summarize


A
A
C
C
C



A
A
A
C

U A GU C g c a a a c g a c g a a a a c u a c
A
A
A
A
A
A
G
C
C
G
C
A

G
G
U
U
G
G
C
G
A

G
C
U
G
C

C
G
A
C
G

A N D E N Y
Degradation A
tag
L
A
A

A

A

Stop
codon

A
A

Ala

B.

g G
c G
u A
u G
u A
a U
U
g C
c G
a U
g C
c
u CC
A
U
A
A UA

Specific codons mark the beginning and end of a gene.
The Shine-Dalgarno sequence in mRNA located before
the start codon helps the ribosome find the correct reading frame in the mRNA.

U



Resume

U

Triplet nucleotide codons in mRNA encode specific
amino acids. Transfer RNA molecules interpret the
genetic code and bring specific amino acids to the A
(acceptor) site in the ribosome.





Transcription and translation are coupled in bacteria
and archaea.
Initiation of protein synthesis in bacteria requires
three initiation factors that bring the ribosomal subunits
together on an mRNA molecule.
Peptidyltransferase activity of the ribosome is carried out by ribosomal RNA, not protein. The peptide
elongates by one amino acid when the ribosome ratchets
one codon length along the mRNA.

GTP

EF-Tu

GTP

A

5′

FIGURE 8.25

tmRNA
5′

1. Stalled
ribosome

GTP

EF-Tu

P

EF-Tu

5′
2. tmRNA entry into
A site witrh EF-Tu-GTP

3. Transpeptidation of Ala to
peptide in P site with EF-Tu-GTP

 tmRNA and protein tagging. A. Structure of SsrA, a type of tmRNA in E. coli. The tRNA-like domain is at the top left, and the
mRNA-like portion encoding the proteolysis tag is at the bottom. The stop codon is highlighted orange. B. Mechanism of tmRNA tagging in E. coli.

CHAPTER 8











TRANSCRIPTION, TRANSLATION, AND BIOINFORMATICS

Translation terminates upon reaching a stop codon. A
release factor enters the A site and triggers peptidyltransferase activity, thus freeing the completed protein from
tRNA in the P site.
Ribosome release factor and EF-G bind to the A site to
dissociate the two ribosomal subunits from the mRNA.
Antibiotics that affect translation can cause ribosomes to misread mRNA (streptomycin; binds 30S
subunit), inhibit aminoacyl-tRNA binding to the A site
(tetracycline; binds 30S subunit), interfere with peptidyltransferase (chloramphenicol; binds 50S subunit), trigger peptidyltransferase prematurely (puromycin; binds A
site, 50S subunit), cause translocation to abort (erythromycin; binds 50S subunit), or prevent translocation
(fusidic acid; binds EFG).
tmRNA rescues ribosomes stuck on damaged mRNA
that lacks a stop codon.

8.4

Protein Modification,
Folding, and Degradation

Once a protein is made, is it functional? For many proteins,
translation is not the last step in producing a functional
molecule. Often a protein must be modified after translation either to achieve an appropriate 3D structure or to
regulate its activity. Primary, secondary, and tertiary structures of proteins can be modified after the primary protein sequence has been assembled by the ribosomes. And
what happens when a protein is damaged or is no longer
needed? A healthy cell “cleans house” by degrading damaged or unneeded proteins. The precious amino acids are
then recycled into making new proteins.

Protein Processing after Translation

Completed proteins released from the ribosome contain
N-formylmethionine (fMet) at the N terminus (as previously

Protein Folding: Assume the Position

As a new protein emerges from the ribosome, how does
it fold into exactly the correct shape to do its job? Christian Anfinsen (1916–1995) won the 1972 Nobel Prize in
Chemistry for demonstrating that, for some proteins, folding is governed solely by the protein itself. In other words,
the optimal 3D structure of a protein is determined solely
by the linear sequence of amino acid residues. But three
decades later, other scientists discovered that the folding
of many proteins requires assistance from other proteins.
These helper proteins are called chaperones (or chaperonins). Chaperones associate with target proteins during
some phase of the folding process and then dissociate,
usually after folding of the target protein is completed.
Although chaperones exhibit some specificity, a given
chaperone can help fold many different types of proteins.
The major chaperone family in most species includes
GroEL (60 kDa), GroES (10 kDa), DnaK (70 kDa), DnaJ
(40 kDa), and trigger factor (48 kDa). Because their levels

GTP

GTP

GTP

EF-Tu

Translational
termination

5′
4. tmRNA translocation to P site;
template swapping with EF-Tu-GTP

297

described). With some proteins, the N-formyl group is “sliced”
off the N terminus by methionine deformylase, leaving methionine. For other amino acids, methionine aminopeptidase
removes the entire amino acid. N-formylmethionine (fMet)
is important during the course of an infection because fMet
peptides are produced only by bacteria and mitochondria, not
by archaea or by the cytoplasmic ribosomes of eukaryotes.
Our white blood cells can detect low concentrations of fMet
peptides (around 10 –12 M) as a sign of invading bacteria or of
necrotic (dying) host cells releasing mitochondria.
Other types of protein processing, such as the addition of acetyl groups or AMP, can change protein function. Proteolytic cleavages can either activate or inactivate
a protein. Examples of modified bacterial enzymes include
glutamine synthetase (adenylylation), isocitrate dehydrogenase (phosphorylation), and a variety of ribosomal proteins
(acetylation). These modifications directly regulate enzyme
activity (glutamine synthetase and isocitrate dehydrogenase) or alter tertiary structure (ribosomal proteins).

EF-Tu
EF-Tu



5. Translocation of tmRNA
ORF to tag the truncated protein

6. Ribosome
protein released

298



PART 2



GENES AND GENOMES

A. GroEL chaperone
ATP causes
structural change
in molecule.

GroEL-ATP

GroES controls
access to GroEL.
Chaperoned
protein fits inside
the GroEL
chamber.

GroEL-GroES-ATP

B. DnaK chaperone

GroEL-GroES (top view)

DnaK

Target
protein

FIGURE 8.26

 E. coli GroEL-GroES and DnaK (HSP70)
structures. A. Three-dimensional reconstructions of GroEL-ATP,

GroEL-GroES-ATP, and GroEL-GroES from cryo-EM. The first two
panels are side views; the third panel is a top view. GroES is red.
(PDB codes: 2C7E, 1PCQ) B. DnaK clamping down on a peptide
(yellow). (PDB code: 1DKX)

in E. coli increase in response to
high-temperature stress, these
chaperones
were
originally
named heat-shock proteins
(HSPs) and are, in fact, more
resistant to heat denaturation
than is the average protein. Representatives of these chaperones
are found in all species. Because
their molecular weights are similar, DnaK examples throughout
nature are called HSP70s, while
homologs of GroEL and DnaJ are
called, respectively, HSP60s and
HSP40s. Chaperones increase in
response to heat stress because
they are needed to help refold
heat-damaged proteins.
The GroEL and GroES chaperones form a stacked ring with
a hollow center like a barrel
(Fig. 8.26). The chaperoned

A.

protein fits inside. The small capping protein GroES controls entrance to the chamber, as shown in Figure 8.26A
and eTopic 8.4. Cycles of ATP binding and hydrolysis
cause conformational changes within the chamber that
can reconfigure target proteins. DnaK (HSP70) chaperones have a very different structure (Fig. 8.26B). They
do not form rings like the GroEL and GroES chaperones,
but can clamp down on a peptide to assist folding. Proteins emerging from a bacterial ribosome enter a folding
pathway that involves a hierarchy of these chaperones.

Protein Degradation: Cleaning House

What happens when a cell no longer needs a specific protein or when a cell synthesizes a protein with incorrect
amino acids? Because the cell’s needs constantly change,
the presence of useless proteins can adversely affect the cell
and must be destroyed. This is particularly true of regulatory proteins, whose concentrations must change with time
or in response to alterations in the cellular condition.
Many normal proteins contain degradation signals
called degrons that dictate the stability of a protein. The
N-terminal rule describes one type of degron. The rule
states that the N-terminal amino acid of a protein correlates
with its stability. For example, proteins beginning with leucine, phenylalanine, tryptophan, or tyrosine experience a
short half-life (2 minutes or less), whereas proteins with
aspartic acid, glutamic acid, or cysteine in the lead position
have a longer half-life. A protein called ClpS facilitates degradation of these short-lived proteins. ClpS recognizes the
B.

12.5 nm

12 nm
α7

ClpY
Active sites
17 nm

ClpQ

β7
15 nm
β7

ClpQ

α7

ClpY

1.3 nm

FIGURE 8.27  Protein degradation machines. A. Bacterial ClpY ATPase and ClpQ protease
(Haemophilus influenzae). (PDB code 1G3I) Two of the six subunits from each ring were removed
to reveal the interior cavity. The active sites involved in peptide bond cleavage are indicated in
pink. B. The 20S proteasome from the methanoarchaeon Methanosarcina thermophila. (PDB
code: 1G0U)

CHAPTER 8



TRANSCRIPTION, TRANSLATION, AND BIOINFORMATICS

destabilizing N-terminal amino acids and then presents the
protein to the bacterial ClpAP protease (described below).
Abnormally folded proteins are recognized by proteases in part because hydrophobic regions that are normally buried within the protein’s 3D structure become
exposed. The protein is progressively degraded into
smaller and smaller pieces by a series of these proteases.
Initial cuts, usually involving ATP-dependent endoproteases like Lon protein or ClpP, are followed by digestion with tripeptidases and dipeptidases. Endopeptidases
cleave proteins somewhere within the sequence but not
from the ends of the sequence. Many peptidases use ATP
hydrolysis to help unfold the target protein prior to digestion. Unfolding is necessary for the protein to slide into a
barrel-shaped protease such as ClpAP, ClpXP, or ClpYQ in
bacteria (Fig. 8.27).
Bacterial Clp proteases have a proteolytic core made of
two homoheptameric protein rings of either ClpP or ClpY.
The ClpP protease has interchangeable homohexameric
ATPase caps made of ClpX, ClpA, ClpB, or ClpC, each of
which recognizes different substrates. ClpY plays a similar
capping role for ClpQ. The accessory proteins recognize

1. DnaK and DnaJ
chaperones bind
to nascent protein.



299

and present different substrate proteins to the ClpP protease, thereby regulating which proteins are degraded. Protein-degrading enzymes are classified as serine, cysteine, or
threonine proteases, depending on the key residue in their
active sites.
Bacterial Clp proteases are structurally similar to eukaryotic proteasomes, which are even more complex proteindegrading machines. Proteasomes are found primarily in
eukaryotes and archaea, although a few bacteria, such as
the lung pathogen Mycobacterium tuberculosis, have them.
Proteasomes are described in eTopic 8.5. Eukaryotic proteasomes recognize and then degrade proteins tagged by
ubiquitin, a 76-amino-acid peptide. Some bacterial and
viral pathogens exploit ubiquitination to reroute host
metabolism.
What happens to proteins damaged by stress? Are they
always degraded? Microbes are constantly exposed to environmental insults such as high temperature or pH extremes,
which damage proteins and cause them to misfold. As an
energy-saving device and to prevent interruption of protein function, injured proteins go through a kind of triage
process that evaluates whether they are salvageable or must
be destroyed before they can endanger the cell. Chaperones constantly hunt for misfolded (or otherwise damaged)
proteins and attempt to refold them. But if the protein is
released from a chaperone and remains misfolded, it can, by
chance, either reengage the chaperone or bind a protease that
destroys it (Fig. 8.28). This fold-or-destroy triage system is
essential if a microbe is to survive environmental stress.

DnaJ
Trigger
factor

DnaK

FIGURE 8.28

 E. coli protein folding versus
degradation triage pathways. The diagram depicts

Nascent
protein

DnaK

DnaK

2. Protein may be
folded directly to
an active form.

3. If not properly
folded, the
protein can be
fed to GroEL for
refolding.

Native protein
ATP

GroEL

what can happen to a newly synthesized protein.
However, a protein that unfolds in response to environmental stress (for example, heat) will undergo the
same triage process.

Protein bound
to ATPase
subunit
ATP

Protease

Remodeling

4. If still not properly folded,
the protein may be passed to
a protease for degradation.

Degraded protein

300



PART 2



GENES AND GENOMES

8.5

To Summarize














Protein modifications are made after translation.
The N-terminal amino acid (N-formylmethionine, or
fMet) can be removed by methionine aminopeptidase,
or just the formyl group can be removed by methionine
deformylase.
An inactive precursor protein can be cleaved into a
smaller active protein, or other groups can be added to
the protein (for example, phosphate or AMP).
Chaperone proteins help translated proteins fold properly.
All proteins in all cells are eventually degraded by
specific devices such as proteases or proteasomes.
The N-terminal rule describes one type of degradation
signal (degron) that marks the half-life of a protein (that
is, how long it takes 50% of the protein to degrade).
ATP-dependent proteases such as Lon or ClpP usually
initiate the degradation of a large protein.
Damaged proteins randomly enter chaperone-based
refolding pathways or degradation pathways until the
protein is repaired or destroyed.
Cell
membrane
Cytoplasm
2a. Some integral
membrane proteins
are inserted directly.

1. Ribosome is
“paralyzed” by SRP and
moves to the membrane
to interact with FtsY.

Secretion: Protein
Traffic Control

Microorganisms, especially Gram-negative bacteria, face a
challenge in delivering proteins to different target locations
in the cell. Recall that Gram-negative microbes are surrounded by two layers of membrane (the inner membrane,
or cell membrane, and an outer membrane), between which
lies a periplasmic space (see Section 3.3). Many proteins are
specifically destined for one or another of these cell compartments. Other proteins are secreted completely out of
the cell into the surrounding environment (for example,
hemolysins that lyse red blood cells). But how do these
diverse proteins know where to go? Protein traffic out of
the cell is directed by an elaborate set of protein secretion
systems. Each system selectively delivers a set of proteins
originally made in the cytoplasm to various extracytoplasmic locations.
The term “secretion” is used to describe movement of a
protein out of the cytoplasm. There are protein secretion
systems that move proteins out of the cytoplasm into the
cytoplasmic membrane and across the membrane to the
periplasm, others that move proteins to the outer membrane, and still others that deliver proteins across both of
the membranes and into the surrounding environment.
An added complication of protein export is
that periplasmic proteins are usually delivered unfolded into the periplasm and require
Periplasm
another set of chaperones to fold properly in
this cell compartment.

ffs (sRNA)
Signal
recognition
particle

Nascent
protein

Integral
membrane
proteins

Ffh
mRNA

5′
Ribosome

2b. Periplasmic
proteins are
secreted via the
Sec system.

FIGURE 8.29

FtsY

SecYEG

SRP and cotranslational export in E. coli. A ribosome “paralyzed”
by an SRP does not resume translating protein until encountering FtsY in the membrane.
Translation can then recommence. Some proteins designated for integral membrane location are inserted directly (top). Other integral membrane proteins and proteins destined
for the periplasm are inserted or secreted via the Sec system (bottom).


Protein Export Out
of the Cytoplasm

Proteins destined for the bacterial cell membrane (such as membrane transport proteins)
or envelope regions—including periplasm
(binding proteins), outer membrane (porins),
or extracellular spaces (proteases)—require
special export systems. These systems manage to move hydrophilic proteins through
one or more hydrophobic membrane barriers.
Proteins meant for the inner membrane (for
example, cytochromes) contain very hydrophobic N-terminal signal sequences of 15–30
amino acids. Signal sequences tether nascent
proteins to the membrane and confer conformations that allow the proteins to melt into
the fabric of the membrane. Inner membrane
proteins also contain hydrophobic transmembrane-spanning regions (20–25 amino acids)

CHAPTER 8

that aid in this insertion process. These
hydrophobic regions are important
because they are compatible with the
hydrophobicity of the membrane itself.
A nutrient transport protein often has
12 such membrane-spanning regions,
which weave back and forth across the
membrane.
One special export system begins
with a complex called the signal recognition particle (SRP), which targets
proteins for inner membrane insertion.
A second export mechanism uses a protein called trigger factor that assists proteins destined for the periplasm. (Trigger
factor was mentioned earlier as a chaperone.) These two protein traffic pathways
converge on a general secretion complex composed of three proteins, collectively called the SecYEG translocon,
embedded in the cell (inner) membrane.
Depending on the exported protein,
SecYEG will assist export to the periplasm or insertion into the membrane.

Protein Export to the
Cell Membrane



TRANSCRIPTION, TRANSLATION, AND BIOINFORMATICS



301

Cell
membrane

5′

1. Trigger factor allows
the ribosome to
complete synthesizing
the pre-secretion protein.
SecB

Cytoplasm

Periplasm

2. Protein wraps
around the pilot
protein SecB.

mRNA
3. The protein is
delivered to SecA
and SecYEG.
ATP

4. The protein is pushed
through the SecYEG
channel to the periplasm.
ATP hydrolysis is required.
SecYEG

SecA

ATP

5. SecA repeatedly releases
the protein, withdraws, and
pushes more of the protein
through SecYEG.

Signal sequence

ADP + Pi

LepB

6. LepB cleaves the
signal sequence.
Periplasmic chaperones
fold the protein.

The pathway leading proteins to the
inner (cell) membrane begins with an FIGURE 8.30  The SecA-dependent general secretion pathway. This pathway
SRP. In E. coli, the SRP consists of a exports many proteins across the cell membranes of Gram-negative and Gram-positive
54-kDa protein (Ffh) complexed with a bacteria.
small RNA molecule (ffs). SRP binds to
the signal sequences of integral cell memthat carry out enzymatic reactions. For example, one form
brane proteins as they are being translated (Fig. 8.29 )
of superoxide dismutase (SOD), an enzyme that degrades
and halts further translation in the cytoplasm. The nascent
superoxide, is a periplasmic protein in Salmonella enterica
protein with its paralyzed, nontranslating ribosome is
and other Gram-negative bacteria. Many periplasmic prodelivered to the membrane-embedded protein FtsY, where
teins, such as SOD and maltose-binding protein (which
translation resumes. The partially translated protein is
imports the sugar maltose), are delivered to the perinow subject to one of two fates: It may be cotranslationplasm by a common pathway called the general secretion
ally inserted directly into the cell membrane, meaning that
pathway.
the protein is inserted even as it is still being translated; or
The general secretion pathway has several steps. First,
it may be completely synthesized, after which it is delivered
the
peptide is completely translated in the cytoplasm
to the SecYEG translocon for insertion. The route to mem(Fig.
8.30 , step 1). Trigger factor interacts with newly
brane insertion depends on the protein to be inserted.
synthesized protein as the protein exits the ribosome and
keeps pre-secreted proteins in a loosely folded conformation, awaiting interaction with the next component of the
Protein Export to the Periplasm:
secretion machinery. The completed pre-secretion proThe Sec-Dependent General
tein is then captured by a piloting protein called SecB
(step 2), which unfolds the pre-secretion protein and delivSecretion Pathway
The periplasm contains important proteins that bind
ers it to SecA, a protein peripherally associated with the
nutrients for transport into the cell and other proteins
membrane-spanning SecYEG translocon (step 3). Keeping



PART 2



GENES AND GENOMES

a pre-secretion protein unfolded in the cytoplasm assists
the secretion process because sliding an unfolded protein
through a membrane is far easier than trying to deliver a
folded one.
One model has the SecA ATPase acting like a plunger
(Fig. 8.30, step 4). It inserts deep into the SecYEG channel, shoving about 20 amino acids of the target export protein into the channel. ATP hydrolysis causes SecA to release
the protein and withdraw (step 5). At this point, SecA can
bind fresh ATP, rebind the target protein, and reinsert, pushing another 20 amino acids through. Another protein complex (not shown) may pull the translocating protein out of the
channel. Proteins needed in the periplasm have cleavable signal sequences at their amino-terminal ends. Immediately following translocation of the amino-terminal sequence into the
periplasm, the sequence is snipped off by periplasmic signal
peptidases (LepB is one of several examples in E. coli). This
cleaving completes translocation and releases the mature protein into the periplasm (step 6). Signal peptidases, however,
will not cleave signals from proteins destined to stay embedded within the membrane (integral membrane proteins).

Note:

“Translocation” can refer to the movement of a ribosome along mRNA, or it can describe the movement of a protein
from one cell compartment (cytoplasm) to another (periplasm).

Streptococcus pyogenes.

HtrA
2 µm

FIGURE 8.31

 Location of the ExPortal of Streptococcus
pyogenes. HtrA was identified using immunofluorescence. Note

that HtrA is located at the septum.

in the ExPortal include HtrA (assists in pili formation and
covalent attachment of proteins to the cell wall) and sortase
(aids maturation of secreted proteins), as well as Sec system components and chaperones. Some proteins that pass
through the ExPortal are truly secreted; others are not.
The latter proteins have a transmembrane domain (missing
in Gram-negative homologs) that anchors the proteins to
the Gram-positive cytoplasmic membrane. The anchored
protein is extracellular but will not float away. Eukaryotic
microbes such as the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae also possess secretion systems that move proteins to the membrane
and beyond. However, the eukaryotic Sec systems are more
complex and are evolutionarily distinct from bacterial Sec
systems. Archaeal secretion systems are actually more similar to those of eukaryotes than to those of bacteria.

Periplasmic proteins delivered by the Sec system arrive
unfolded and inactive. Because the folding chaperones
mentioned earlier are cytoplasmic, periplasmic proteins
need another set of dedicated periplasmic chaperones to
guide their tertiary folding. Another problem with
periplasmic proteins is that the oxidizing environTransient pore
ment of aerobic cells can oxidize cysteines within
allows substrate
a protein and produce inappropriate cysteine disulPeriplasm
protein to pass.
fide bonds that destroy enzyme function. Special
TatC TatB TatA oligomer
periplasmic disulfide reductases are required to
disrupts
membrane
reduce these S–S bonds back to two SH groups.
bilayer.
Many periplasmic proteins, however, need certain
disulfide bonds to be active, so the periplasm also
contains a disulfide bond catalyst (DsbA) to make
those bonds.
TatA
Gram-positive bacteria must also export proteins
across the cell membrane and then fold and process them once they are secreted. However, Grampositive bacteria lack a periplasmic space that could
Cytoplasm
facilitate interactions between newly secreted proteins and the accessory processing proteins. Many
streptococci solve this problem by clustering their
Protein recognized
secretion systems and accessory factors at the cytofor transport by
plasmic membrane in an anionic phospholipid
TAT system.
microdomain called the ExPortal. The ExPortal
is located near the cell septum and appears linked FIGURE 8.32  The twin arginine translocase (TAT). Model for the Tat
to peptidoglycan synthesis (Fig. 8.31). Proteins protein translocase, which includes proteins TatA, TatB, and TatC.

J. W. ROSCH, ET AL. 2005. MOL. MICROBIOL.
58: 959.

302

CHAPTER 8



TRANSCRIPTION, TRANSLATION, AND BIOINFORMATICS

Export of Prefolded Proteins
to the Periplasm

In a dramatic departure from Sec-dependent transport systems, some proteins, like TorA, a component of an anaerobic respiratory chain, can be transported fully folded across
the membrane to their periplasmic destination. These proteins contain the amino acid motif RRXFXK within their
N-terminal signal sequence (where R = arginine, F = phenylalanine, K = lysine, and X = any amino acid). This sequence,
called the “twin arginine motif” targets the protein to the
membrane-embedded twin arginine translocase (TAT),
a transport complex that ships fully folded proteins across
the cell membrane to the periplasm (Fig. 8.32). Whereas

A.



303

Sec-dependent transport is ATP driven, the TAT system is
powered by the proton motive force (see Chapters 4 and 14).
TatA oligomers transiently rupture the membrane bilayer to
form temporary pores that allow protein substrates to pass.

Journeys to the Outer Membrane

Outer membrane proteins (OMPs) are made in the cytoplasm and exported to the periplasm by the SecA-dependent
secretion system. Some OMPs have hydrophobic C-terminal
signal sequences that facilitate insertion into the outer membrane, but all have a beta barrel structure that ultimately suits
them for outer membrane placement (for instance, see TolC,
Fig. 8.33 ). Periplasmic chaperones prevent aggregation

B.
Beta barrel
channel

4 nm
Outer
membrane

TolC outer
membrane
channel

Alpha helix
tunnel

HlyD

Periplasmic protein

Inner
membrane

HlyB

Cytoplasm
ATP
ADP + Pi

ATP

Hemolysin

ADP + Pi

ATP binds to
ABC site in HlyB.
ATP hydrolysis
drives transport.

VASSILIS KORONAKIS ET AL. 2000. NATURE 405:914–919

Periplasm

10 nm

FIGURE 8.33  Type I secretion: the HlyABC transporter. A. Hemolysin (HlyA) is transported directly from the cytoplasm into the
extracellular medium through a multicomponent ABC transport system. The HlyB and D proteins are dedicated to HlyA transport. TolC is
shared with other transport systems. Not drawn to scale. B. Molecular model of TolC. The beta barrel channel spans the outer membrane, and
the alpha helix tunnel extends into the periplasm. Three monomers (red, yellow, and blue) make up the channel. Source: Part A modified from Moat
et al. 2002. Microbial Physiology, 4th ed. Wiley-Liss.

304



PART 2



GENES AND GENOMES

of OMPs as they traverse the periplasm and deliver the proteins to a multisubunit, outer membrane machine called the
BAM (beta barrel assembly machine) complex that facilitates
OMP assembly in the outer membrane. Although the players seem to be known, the mechanism by which beta barrels are folded and inserted into the outer membrane bilayer
remains unclear. BAM has also been implicated recently
in the transport of so-called autotransporter proteins such
as the attachment protein pertactin of Bordetella pertussis.
Autotransporters, which also possess a beta barrel domain,
were previously thought to mediate their own transport
across the outer membrane unassisted by other transporters.

membrane systems take over and complete export. Other
systems provide nonstop service, delivering the protein
directly from the cytoplasm to the extracellular space.
The diversity of system design is impressive. It is the
result, in some instances, of selective evolutionary pressures appropriating established cell processes (for example,
pilus assembly). New systems evolve through the accidental duplication of one set of genes followed by random
mutations that innovatively redesign the duplicated set
for a new purpose. We know this because the footprints
of genetic divergence have been left behind in the DNA
sequence. Type I secretion is described here. Other systems
will be covered during the discussion of pathogenesis in
Chapter 25.

Journeys through the Outer Membrane

For many reasons, Gram-negative bacteria need to export
proteins completely out of the cell and into their surrounding environment. Some exported proteins digest extracellular peptides for carbon and nitrogen sources; others act
as free-floating toxins that bind and kill host cells. Still
others are injected directly into eukaryotic cells by pathogenic or symbiotic microbes to commandeer host metabolic processes. Seven secretion systems, identified as type
I–type VII, have evolved to ship these proteins out of the
cell (Table 8.2). A few start with the Sec system just to
get the protein into the periplasm, where dedicated outer

Type I Protein Secretion

Chapter 4 describes the family of ATP-binding cassette
(ABC) influx transporters, whose signature is an amino
acid motif that binds ATP. (The term “cassette” refers to
a sequence of amino acids that is conserved in many proteins with similar functions.) In addition to ABC influx
transporters, similar ABC transporters function in the
opposite direction to export various toxins, proteases, and
lipases, as well as antimicrobial drugs (multidrug efflux
transporters). These ABC transporters are the simplest of

TABLE 8.2,Comparison of Mechanisms that Secrete Proteins across the Outer Membrane
Typea

Mechanism

Structureb

Location of protein
substratec

Location of
secretory signalsd

Number of
components

I

Coupled to TolC

ABC type

Cytoplasm

N terminus, not cleaved

3

II

Extending and
contracting

Pilus-like structure

Periplasm

Cleaved N terminus for
Sec-dependent transport

12–16

III

Proteins injected directly
into host cell cytoplasm

Syringe, related to flagella
biogenesis

Cytoplasm

None

20

IV

Conjugation-like

Multicomponent

Some are cytoplasmic;
others are periplasmic

None

8 or 9

V

Autotransport

Self-transporting channel
in outer membrane formed
by C-terminal domain

Periplasm

N terminus, cleaved

1

VI

Proteins injected directly
into host cell cytoplasm

Contractile piston, phage
tail origin

Cytoplasm

None

12–20

VII

Unknown

Unknown

Cytoplasm

Unknown

At least 4

a

The seven classes are grouped on the basis of their structure.

b

Types II, III, and IV are evolutionarily related to mechanisms that assemble pili (type II) or flagella (type III) or that carry out conjugation (type IV). Type VI systems are related
to phage tail proteins. Type VII is unrelated to the rest.

c

Some systems pick up protein substrates from the cytoplasm and transport them across both membranes. Substrates for other systems are collected in the periplasm.

d

Substrates differ as to the presence of N-terminal signal sequences.

CHAPTER 8



TRANSCRIPTION, TRANSLATION, AND BIOINFORMATICS

the protein secretion systems and make up what is called
type I protein secretion (for example, the Hly system that
secretes hemolysin; Fig. 8.33). Type I systems all have
three protein components, one of which contains an ATPbinding cassette. One component is an outer membrane
channel, the second is an ABC protein at the inner membrane, and the third is a periplasmic protein lashed to the
inner membrane.
Proteins secreted through type I systems never contact the periplasm, because they pass through a continuous channel that extends from the cytoplasm to the outer
membrane. The inner membrane and periplasmic subunits are generally substrate specific, but numerous ABC
export systems share the channel protein TolC. TolC is
an intriguing protein composed of a beta barrel channel embedded in the outer membrane and an alpha helix
tunnel spanning the periplasm (Fig. 8.33B). The type I
transport shown in Figure 8.33A exports a hemolysin
(HlyA) from E. coli that lyses red blood cell membranes.
HlyB and HlyD are the ABC and periplasmic components, respectively.
Six other protein secretion systems are briefly summarized in Table 8.2. Some move proteins directly from
the cytoplasm to the outside, similar to the type I system, whereas others pick up proteins deposited in the
periplasm by the Sec system. They all play important roles
in microbial pathogenesis and are more fully discussed in
Chapter 25.

To Summarize












Special protein export mechanisms are used to move
proteins to the inner membrane, the periplasm, the outer
membrane, and the extracellular surroundings.
N-terminal amino acid signal sequences help target
membrane proteins to the membrane.
The general secretory system involving the SecYEG
translocon can move unfolded proteins to the inner
membrane or periplasm.
The signal recognition particle (SRP) pauses the
translation of a subset of proteins that will be placed into
the membrane.
SecB protein binds to certain unfolded proteins that
will eventually end up in the periplasm, and pilots them
to the SecYEG translocon.
The twin arginine translocase (TAT) can move a subset of already folded proteins across the inner membrane
and into the periplasm.





305

Type I secretion systems are ATP-binding cassette
(ABC) mechanisms that move certain secreted proteins directly from the cytoplasm to the extracellular
environment.

8.6

Bioinformatics: Mining
the Genomes

Discovering how biological information flows from DNA
to RNA to protein was a major accomplishment of the
twentieth century. So, too, was the ability to sequence
DNA and analyze protein structure and function. We can
now call on the vast store of information gathered over the
last half century to make predictions about the genetics and
physiology of microbes even when we cannot grow them in
the laboratory. These predictions are made using bioinformatics, an interdisciplinary field that combines computer
science, mathematics, and statistics. The following sections
reveal basic principles of this field.

Annotating a Genome Sequence

Bioinformatics has forever changed how the science of
microbiology is conducted. Since 1998, the complete
genomes of almost 3,500 microbial species have been published, and many others have been partially sequenced.
Bioinformatic scientists compare genes from different species to deduce an organism’s physiology and evolutionary
development, even if the organism cannot be grown in
the laboratory. Recall that less than 1% of microorganisms can be cultured. Bioinformatics, then, is critical to
understanding the complexity of the uncultured microbial world.
Chapter 7 explained how we sequence a genome and
introduced you to metagenomics. But how do we learn
what genes are encoded in a newly sequenced genome?
The first step is annotation. Annotation is analogous to
identifying separate sentences and words in an unknown
language. Annotating a DNA sequence is done with computers using the known rules of transcription and translation to identify the start and stop sites of potential genes.
DNA sequences are then translated in silico to determine
amino acid sequences. When a sequence appears to encode
a protein, the DNA sequence is called an open reading
frame (ORF).
Seeking ORFs. Computer programs such as ORF fi nders

use the universal genetic code to deduce protein sequences
potentially formed in all reading frames on RNA molecules transcribed from either direction on the chromosome

306



PART 2



GENES AND GENOMES

All six reading frames
are translated in silico.

A. Bacterial sequence
Frame 3

ORF 3

ORF 2

Frame 2

Arrows indicate the
relative locations and
direction of transcription
of different ORFs in
the dsDNA.

ORF 2
ORF 1

Frame 1

dsDNA
200

400

800

1,000

1,200

1,400

ORF 4 ORF 4

ORF 4

ORF 6

600

ORF 6

ORF 4

Exons

bp

Frame 4

(No ORFs here) Frame 5
ORF 6
Frame 6

ORF 6

B. Eukaryotic sequence

1,600

Actual protein is
ORF 1 because of
length and upstream
ribosome-binding
site.

Exons are the parts
of a eukaryotic gene
that encode the actual
protein.

DNA

Introns
Transcription
and splicing
mRNA

Noncoding sequences (introns) must
be spliced out of primary mRNA.
Final mRNA leaves nucleus.
Computer programs can
predict introns.

(Fig. 8.34A). An ORF, the equivalent of a sentence in our
analogy, is defi ned as a DNA sequence that can potentially
encode a string of amino acids of minimum length—say,
50 residues. The 50 residues of the ORF could encode a
5,500-Da (5.5-kDa) protein, since the average weight of an
amino acid is 110 Da. Each ORF begins with a translation
start codon (usually ATG, or more rarely, GTG or TTG). A
translation start codon marks where ribosomes start to read
a messenger RNA molecule. An ORF ends with a translation termination codon (in the DNA, these are TAA, TAG,
or TGA). In addition, the computer can identify an ORF
by looking for potential ribosome-binding sites upstream
of the start codon, but these ribosome-binding sites may
differ between species, so fi nding one is not essential to
declaring the presence of an ORF.
While the preceding methods work for prokaryotes,
identifying ORFs in eukaryotes is more difficult. In
eukaryotes, most genes contain introns (long, noncoding
sequences that occur in the middle of genes), as do the initial mRNA products made from those genes (Fig. 8.34B).
The vast majority of known bacterial and archaeal genes
do not contain introns. Introns serve several regulatory

FIGURE 8.34

Predicting open
reading frames (ORFs) in a DNA
sequence. A. Bacterial ORFs. Each predict

ed ORF in this 1,600-bp sequence begins
with AUG or GUG and ends with a translation
terminator codon. B. In eukaryotes, finding
ORFs is complicated by the presence of noncoding DNA sequences called introns.

functions in eukaryotes that determine whether a protein
product is made. However, the eukaryotic cell must use
special splicing mechanisms to remove the intron sequences
and re-join the protein-encoding sequences, called exons,
of the mRNA prior to translation. (In eukaryotic organisms, the RNA transcribed directly from DNA is called
the preliminary mRNA transcript or pre-mRNA; the
“final” mRNA transcript is produced when the introns
have been spliced out.) Because there are few identifying
sequence characteristics that mark an intron, extremely
sophisticated computer analysis is needed to determine
where to remove introns in order to derive the ORF coding sequence of a eukaryotic gene.
Assigning function. We know from considerable experimental precedent that proteins with the same function, regardless of species, usually have critical amino acid sequences
in common because they evolved from the same ancestral
sequence. Sequences common to two different protein or
DNA molecules are called homologous sequences. During the annotation process, ORFs are compared to hundreds of thousands of known proteins to look for sequence

CHAPTER 8



TRANSCRIPTION, TRANSLATION, AND BIOINFORMATICS

homology. ORFs with sufficient homology to known proteins can then be assigned putative function. Powerful
computer programs are available to carry out these analyses quickly (for example, visit the Joint Genome Institute
website).
If a query protein sequence does not show high levels of
similarity with known proteins, “annotation by function”
can be assigned when a protein domain exhibits characteristics or motifs similar to proteins of known function.
For example, periodic hydrophobic regions may indicate a
membrane protein, or an amino acid sequence (or motif)
matching those of known ATPases may suggest a similar function for the query protein. Annotation by function provides an extremely valuable starting point toward
unraveling a protein’s function, but biological validation is
required for confirmation.
Genes encoding transfer RNAs and ribosomal RNAs do
not encode proteins but can be identified because of the
conservation of these sequences across vast phylogenetic
distances. The results of annotation can be represented in
many different forms. Figure 8.35 shows a commonly used

Clusters of Orthologous Groups:
Functional Categories

Protein-coding
region: plus strand

J Translation
K Transcription
L DNA replication, repair
D Cell division

Protein-coding
region: minus strand



307

method of presenting the results—namely, a circular display map (in this case chromosome I of the Gram-negative pathogen Vibrio vulnificus). Genes are color-coded by
their predicted function. V. vulnificus causes lethal blood
or wound infections associated with eating, or catching,
raw shellfish. Knowing the sequence of V. vulnificus helps
identify which genes are associated with disease.

Homologs, Orthologs, and Paralogs

Homologies found between genes or proteins suggest an evolutionary relatedness. Genes or proteins that are homologous
(homologs) probably evolved from a common ancestral gene.
Homologous genes or proteins can be classified as either
orthologous or paralogous. Orthologous genes (orthologs)
have functions essentially the same but occur in two or more
different species. For example, the gene for glutamine synthase (gltB) in E. coli is orthologous to gltB in Vibrio cholerae
and to gltB in the Gram-positive bacterium Bacillus subtilis.
Paralogous genes (paralogs) arise by duplication within the
same species (or progenitor) but evolve to carry out different

3,200,000

1
200,000

3,000,000
400,000

O Protein modification, turnover, chaperones
M Membrane biogenesis
N Motility, secretion

2,800,000
600,000
GC %

P Inorganic ion transport/metabolism
T Signal transduction
C Energy
G Carbohydrate metabolism/transport
E Amino acid metabolism/transport
F Nucleotide metabolism/transport

800,000

Chromosome I

rRNA
genes
2,400,000

H Coenzyme
I

2,600,000

Lipid metabolism

Q Secondary metabolite sunthesis

1,000,000
tRNA
genes

R Prediction
S Unknown function

2,200,000
1,200,000

2,000,000

1,400,000
1,800,000

FIGURE 8.35

1,600,000

Circular display map of the Vibrio vulnificus genome (chromosome I; 3,377 kb). The color code indicates gene
clustering by function. The two outer rings represent genes transcribed from different DNA strands. The innermost circle uses peaks to show
GC content levels above (red) or below (green) the genome average.


308



PART 2



GENES AND GENOMES

functions (Fig. 8.36). For example, genes encoding type III
protein secretion systems, which export virulence proteins,
have evolved from paralogous genes encoding flagellar biogenesis. The two sets of genes share a common ancestor but
have since evolved completely different functions (in this case,
secretion and motility). Paralogous genes are maintained in a
microbial genome because their distinct functions contribute
to the organism’s adaptive potential. Duplicate genes of identical function usually result in loss of one copy or the other by
degenerative evolution (see Chapter 9).
Many computer programs and resources used to analyze
DNA and protein sequences are freely available on the Web.
Here are some useful programs. You can find the program
by simply querying for it in any search engine.






BLAST (Basic Local Alignment Search Tool), by the
National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI),
compares a sequence of interest with all other DNA or
protein sequences deposited in sequence databases.

Ancestral gene

1. Gene A in species w is
duplicated to produce two
copies of A.

2. With time, the two copies
diverge, forming A1 and A2.
These genes are paralogous
and likely have evolved
different functions.



ExPASy (Expert Protein Analysis System) contains
many molecular tools, including Swiss-Prot, the definitive index of known proteins.
Joint Genome Institute Genome Portal has compiled
known genome sequences of microbes and eukaryotes.

Some of these programs are designed to align DNA
sequences or deduced protein sequences from different species. The goal can be to identify genetic relatedness between
species or assign function of a gene or protein. The relatedness between species is best determined by aligning DNA
sequences (discussed in Section 17.3). To assign function to a
newly sequenced gene, it is best to compare protein products
rather than the DNA sequence. Recall that one amino acid
can be encoded by more than one DNA codon. For instance,
a DNA strand (nontemplate) encoding the peptide Ala-LeuSer could be 5′ GCT CCT TCC or 5′ GCA CCG TCA. It
is easier to see the homology using the deduced peptide. On
the other hand, not all genes encode proteins. Prime examples
are the genes encoding stable ribosomal RNA molecules. The
DNA sequences for these rRNAs are highly conserved across
species, and their similarities reveal homology even among the
three ancestral domains (Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya).

A

Gene duplication

A1
A2

A1 is paralogous to A2

3. Two species, x and y,
evolve from w.
Speciation
x

KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes)
outlines biochemical pathways in many sequenced organisms. Areas within this site graphically display reference
biochemical pathways (for example, glycolysis) and then
indicate which proteins in that pathway are predicted to
occur in any organism with a sequenced genome.
Motif Search searches DNA or proteins for sequence
signatures such as ATP-binding sites.

A

Species w

Multiple Sequence Alignment, using various tools of the
European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI), aligns sequences
of genes identified as homologous by BLAST analysis.





A

y

A1x
A2x
Species x

A1x is
orthologous
to A1y
A2x is
orthologous
to A2y

A1y
A2y
Species y

4. The descendant genes of A1 and
A2 are now called A1x, A1y and A2x,
A2y. A1x is orthologous to A1y. The
comparison is between two species.
A1x is still paralogous to A2x.

FIGURE 8.36

Paralogous versus orthologous genes. An
ancestral gene can undergo a duplication to evolve an orthologous
or paralogous gene.


Note:

As first mentioned in Section 8.3, do not confuse template and nontemplate strands of DNA for a given gene. The template strand, read 3′ to 5′ by RNA polymerase, is transcribed to
make the 5′-to-3′ RNA transcript. The nontemplate DNA strand,
also called the sense strand, has the same sequence as the RNA
transcript, with the substitution of T’s for U’s.

A word of caution: It is enticing to make definitive proclamations about gene or protein function based on the computer analysis of a DNA sequence. As good as a prediction
may seem, it is only a prediction—a well-educated guess. Biochemical confirmation of function must be made, if possible. Nevertheless, the predictions we can make are powerful.
In one recent example, a metabolic model was constructed
for the Gram-positive anaerobe Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, a major member of the human intestinal microbiome
(Fig. 8.37). This organism has anti-inflammatory properties
and produces a major energy source, butyrate, used by epithelial cells lining the large intestine. The bioinformatically

310



PART 2



GENES AND GENOMES

generated model was used to design a defined minimal
medium that would grow the organism. The defined medium
had several amino acid and vitamin growth factors added
because genes encoding their synthetic pathways were missing from the bacterium. The organism can now be grown in
defined media. This is an example of what has been called
functional genomics. Functional genomics is an integrative
process in which bioinformatic approaches enable scientists
to make predictions about function for a set of genes and
then test those predictions experimentally.

specifically degrades a sulfonated polysaccharide, porphyran, present in edible marine red algae (seaweed). The team
performed a bioinformatic BLAST analysis looking for
this enzyme in other species and discovered that all orthologs of porphyranase, except one, were encoded by marine
microbes. This makes sense because the biological source
of the substrate is found in the sea.
The one exception was Bacteroides plebeius, a human
gut microbe found only in Japanese individuals. Metagenomic studies found no examples of a porphyranase gene
in gut microbiota from North American or French individuals, or from any terrestrial source. Why the Japanese?
Curiously, red seaweed, known as nori, is a common food
in Japan, and the only source of the porphyran substrate for
this CAZyme. Sequence analysis of the B. plebeius genome
showed that this human intestinal microbe received an
unusual set of genes from a marine bacterium, probably by
horizontal gene transfer. One of these was the porphyranase CAZyme gene. Horizontal gene transfer is discussed
in Sections 7.1 and 9.6. Figure 8.38 shows the presentday sequence homologies between genes transferred to the
ancestor of B. plebeius from ancestors of the marine bacteria
Z. galactanivorans and Microscilla species. These data support the idea of horizontal transfer.
How might Japanese gut bacteria have acquired the
marine microbe’s porphyranase gene? In the eighth century, the Japanese government accepted seaweed as a form
of payment, suggesting that seaweed was very important in
Japanese culture. The authors propose that consumption
of red seaweed with its attendant marine bacteria containing porphyranase is the likely route by which the gene was
transferred to the gut microbe. The gene, now part of the
Japanese intestinal microbiome, enables humans to digest
the porphyran polysaccharide in red seaweed.

Thought Question

8.12 An ORF 1,200 bp in length could encode a protein of
what size and molecular weight? Hint: Find the molecular
weight of an average amino acid.

Bioinformatics and the
Human Gut Microbiome

Bioinformatic analysis has contributed much to our understanding of the human microbiome, including its formation. One interesting example comes from a study of
carbohydrate-active enzymes (CAZymes)—enzymes that
humans need to digest complex polysaccharides. Oddly, the
genes encoding these enzymes are not found in the human
genome but are present in the Gram-negative anaerobe
Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, a prominent member of the
human intestinal microbiota. Recently, a new CAZyme
(porphyranase) was identified by Mirjam Czjzek, Gurvan
Michel, and PhD student Jan-Hendrik Hehemann at Université Pierre et Marie Curie (Fig. 8.38) from a marine
bacterium called Zobellia galactanivorans. This enzyme
A. B. plebeius genes

B.
CMB22
GH86
β-Agarase
130

GH86
β-Agarase B

TonBsusD dependent
-like receptor-like Sulfatase

3577 3573 3571 3570

352

53%

110

52% 48%

1670 1671 1672 1679
69%

50%

36%

38%

48%

1689 1690 1691 1692 1693 1694 1695 1696 1697 1698 1699 1700

39%

28%

33%

4656

GH2
β-Galactosidase

FIGURE 8.38

1701

42%

49%

4663

56%

3640 3639 3638 3637

susD TonBGH16
-like dependent
β-Porphyranase
receptor-like
CMB22

Z. galactanivorans
Microscillia sp. PRE1
B. plebeius (conserved with gut Bacteroidetes)
B. plebeius (conserved with marine Bacteroidetes)

 Origin of Bacteroides plebeius CAZyme gene. A. Percent homology between Bacteroides plebeius gene sequences
and genes horizontally transferred from Zobellia galactanivorans and Microscilla. The B. plebeius porphyranase CAZyme is gene 1689.
B. Gurvan Michel, Mirjam Czjzek, and Jan-Hendrik Hehemann. CMB = unannotated gene; GH = glycoside hydrolase family. Source: Hehemann, et al.

2010. Nature 464:908–912

©TRISTAN BARBEYON

68%

CHAPTER 9



GENE TRANSFER, MUTATIONS, AND GENOME EVOLUTION



315

CHAPTER 9

Gene Transfer, Mutations, and Genome Evolution
9.2 Recombination
9.3 Mutations
9.4 DNA Repair
9.5 Mobile Genetic Elements
9.6 Genome Evolution

C U R R E N T R E S E A RC H

highlight

Antibiotics and evolution. Streptococcus pneumoniae produces invasive disease such as pneumonia but also causes
recurrent ear infections. The most recent ear infection strain
will contain genes incorporated from earlier strains. JanWillem Veening found that antibiotics may stimulate this
evolution. S. pneumoniae takes up DNA from dead cells via
transformation, a process initiated by competence genes located near the replication origin. Antimicrobials that stall replication forks but allow initiation can increase copy number
(gene dosage) and expression of origin-proximal genes. Veening showed that a sublethal dose of 6-(p-hydroxyphenylazo)uracil (HPUra), which reversibly binds DNA polymerase III, will
stall replication forks and trigger expression of competenceregulated gene ssbB-gfp (green cells). Thus, some antibiotics
may stimulate in vivo pneumococcal evolution by activating
transformation.
Source: Slager et al. 2014. Cell 157:395–406.

Control (uninduced)

+ Competence factor

A N I N T E RV I E W W I T H
JAN-WILLEM VEENING, MICROBIOLOGIST, UNIVERSITY OF
GRONINGEN AND UNIVERSITY OF LAUSANNE

How might gene dosage–induced
competence enhance evolution during
Streptococcus pneumoniae infections?
Many types of stress, including some
antibiotics, cause gene dosage–induced
competence in S. pneumoniae. Because
humans are often co-colonized by multiple pneumococcal strains, competence
and DNA uptake can help one strain
acquire resistance and virulence factors from others. Circumstantial evidence strongly suggests that gene dosage–induced
competence plays a very important role for successful pneumococcal carriage. It will be interesting to see whether other
key regulators located close to the origin of replication in the
pneumococcus, or in other bacteria, are affected by gene dosage and how the cell’s physiology changes in response.

+ HPUra
SsbB-Gfp

SsbB-Gfp

D

NA is a dynamic molecule. Genome sequences
change over generations through mutations,
DNA rearrangements, and gene transfers
between species. Bacterial and archaeal genomes
sometimes shuttle large clusters of genes between
members of different taxonomic domains. All this
interspecies and intraspecies DNA traffic has led
ecologists to expand the definition of the “microbial
genome” to include DNA in a cell plus DNA from other
organisms to which the microbe has potential access.

© ANNE DE JONG

9.1 Mosaic Genomes and Gene Transfer

Are there potential applications for your findings?
Antibiotics that stall replication elongation include the
commonly used fluoroquinolones. Our work suggests that
physicians should, whenever possible, treat pneumococcal infections with alternative antibiotics that do not activate competence, like beta-lactam antibiotics. In addition,
we are trying to identify novel compounds that can inhibit
competence development. Such compounds might be used
together with existing antibiotics to reduce the spread of
antibiotic resistance.
315

316



PART 2



GENES AND GENOMES

We often think of meaningful evolution as having to take
place over thousands if not millions of years. But that is not
always so. One striking example involves the pathogen Streptococcus pneumoniae, which causes serious lung infections in
any age group, and also recurrent ear infections in infants.
A team of researchers headed by Fen Hu and Garth Erhlich
(Drexel University) found convincing evidence of evolution
in a strain of S. pneumoniae isolated from an 8-month-old
child stricken with recurrent ear infections over 7 months.
Genome sequences of strains isolated during separate bouts
revealed 16 distinct recombination events leading from
the earliest to the latest isolate. During her short life, the
child had been colonized by multiple strains of pneumococcus that readily exchanged DNA via transformation. As
the Current Research Highlight suggests, the high level of
horizontal gene transfer was likely influenced by antibiotic
treatments. The resultant gene transfers allowed the species
to quickly evolve and cause recurrent disease.
Two other scientists, John Sullivan and Clive Ronson from
New Zealand, witnessed microbial evolution taking place in
soil within a mere decade. These researchers were studying
the microbe Mesorhizobium loti, a symbiotic bacterial species
that forms nitrogen-fixing nodules on plant roots. Genes
encoding symbiosis are located as a group on the mesorhizobial chromosome. In addition to these symbiotic rhizobia,
there are many nonsymbiotic species that are incapable of
forming root nodules. In a remarkable experiment, Sullivan
and Ronson inoculated a single strain of M. loti into an area
of land devoid of natural nodulating rhizobia. Seven years
later, they discovered that the area contained many genetically diverse symbiotic mesorhizobia now able to nodulate
the flowering plant Lotus corniculatus. These microbes did
not exist before the experiment. The 500-kb genome segment encoding symbiosis had somehow made its way from
M. loti into these other bacteria—essentially generating new
species. How did this happen so quickly?
In Chapter 9 we address the mechanisms that mediate
transient, as well as heritable, DNA movements between species. Next we describe the competing processes of mutagenesis and mutation repair required for self-preservation and
evolutionary change. We close the chapter by explaining
how all these processes collaborate over millennia to remodel
genomes and build biological diversity. The consequences of
gene flow during evolution will be discussed in Chapter 17.

9.1

Mosaic Genomes and
Gene Transfer

Genomic analysis shows that over millennia, microbes undergo
extensive gene loss and gain. Archaea, for example, arose from
a common eukaryotic-archaeal phylogenetic branch and, as a
result, possess many traits in common with eukaryotes, such

as the structure and function of their DNA and RNA polymerases. However, many archaeal genes whose products are
involved with intermediary metabolism look purely bacterial.
In fact, 37% of the proteins found in the archaeon Methanocaldococcus jannaschii are found in all three domains—Archaea,
Eukarya, and Bacteria. Another 26% are otherwise found only
among bacteria, while a mere 5% are confined to archaea and
eukaryotes. Archaea, then, enjoy a mixed heritage.
Another surprise arising from bioinformatic studies is
the mosaic nature of the E. coli genome and, indeed, of
all microbial genomes. Though we have intensively studied E. coli for over 100 years, we now find that the organism’s DNA is rife with pathogenicity islands, fitness islands,
inversions, deletions (when compared to similar species),
paralogous genes, and orthologous genes. How did all this
genomic blending happen? The answer appears to involve
heavy gene traffic between species (horizontal gene transfer), recombination events occurring within a species, and
a variety of mutagenic and DNA repair strategies. All of
these processes accelerated natural selection, where trial
and error shaped genome content.

The Discovery of Horizontal
Gene Transfer

In 1928, a perceptive English medical officer, Frederick
Griffith (1879–1941), found that he could kill mice by injecting them with dead cells of a virulent pneumococcus (Streptococcus pneumoniae, a cause of pneumonia), together with live
cells of a nonvirulent mutant. Even more extraordinary was
that he recovered live, virulent bacteria from the dead mice.
Were the dead bacteria brought back to life? Unfortunately,
Griffith was killed by a German bomb during an air raid on
London in 1941 and never learned the answer.
In a landmark series of experiments published in 1944,
Oswald Avery (1877–1955), Colin MacLeod (1909–1972),
and Maclyn McCarty (1911–2005) proved that Griffith’s
experiment was not a case of resurrecting dead cells.
Instead, DNA released from dead cells of the virulent strain
entered into the harmless living strain of S. pneumoniae—
an event that transformed the live strain into a killer. The
process of importing free DNA into bacterial cells is now
known as transformation.
Transformation provided the first clue that gene
exchange can occur in microorganisms. Why do bacteria
carry out this and other forms of gene transfer? Genome
comparisons show that the fundamental purpose of bacterial gene transfer is to acquire genes that might be useful as the environment changes. The natural movement of
genes between species or genera is called horizontal gene
transfer or lateral gene transfer. Horizontal gene transfer
between cells differs from vertical gene transfer, which is
the generational passing of genes from parent to offspring

CHAPTER 9



GENE TRANSFER, MUTATIONS, AND GENOME EVOLUTION

(as in cell division). If horizontal acquisition of a gene system improves the competitiveness of the cell, the new genes
will be retained and the descendants will have evolved into
a new kind of organism.
Before we can discuss how bacterial genomes evolve,
we need to understand the various gene exchange mechanisms available to them. Following the explanations of gene
exchange, we will discuss the processes that incorporate newly
acquired DNA into genomes (for example, recombination).

Transformation of Naked DNA

How do live bacteria import DNA from dead bacteria? Many
bacteria can import DNA fragments and plasmids released
from nearby dead cells via the process of transformation.
Natural transformation requires specific protein complexes
called transformasomes. Organisms in which transformation is a natural part of the growth cycle include Grampositive bacteria like Streptococcus and Bacillus, as well as
Gram-negative species such as Haemophilus and Neisseria. At
least 82 species have been shown to be naturally competent.
Other bacteria, such as E. coli and Salmonella, do not
possess the equipment needed to import DNA naturally.
They require artificial manipulations to drive DNA into
their cells. These laboratory techniques include perturbing

CF

ComB

P

Peptidoglycan
cell wall

Transformasome

CF

5. Transformasome binds
extracellular DNA. One
strand is transported; one
strand is degraded.

ComB

ATP

ATP

ADP

ComC CF
Competence factor export
ComE

D

Com

ComE

P

Competence
factor action

comX

cgl operon

cel operon

cfl operon

coi operon

SigH

3. Phosphate from ComD is
transferred to ComE. ComE-P
stimulates sigma factor H
(SigH) transcription.

FIGURE 9.1

isms typically involves the growth phase–dependent assembly of a transformasome complex across the cell membrane
(Fig. 9.1). The transformasome is composed of a binding

Cytoplasmic
membrane

ComC

CF

Gram-positive organisms, competence, and quorum
sensing. Natural transformation in Gram-positive organ-

ComA

CF

CF

the membrane by chemical (CaCl2) and electrical (electroporation) methods. CaCl2 alters the membrane, making
these cells chemically competent so that DNA can pass.
Electroporation, on the other hand, uses a brief electrical
pulse to “shoot” DNA across the membrane.
Why do species such as Neisseria undergo natural transformation? First, species that indiscriminately import
DNA may use the transformed DNA as food. Second, the
more finicky species that transform only compatible DNA
sequences may use DNA released from dead compatriots to repair their own damaged genomes. Note that the
transformation process is random. A cell does not choose
which genes to import or keep. Finally, transformation can
influence evolution, enabling species to adjust to new environments by acquiring new genes from other species via
horizontal gene transfer. Transformation may have enabled
pathogens such as Neisseria gonorrhoeae, the cause of gonorrhea, to acquire genes whose protein products now help
the organism evade the host immune system.

CF

2. As cell
CF
numbers rise,
external CF level
increases and activates
ComD sensor kinase.

317

DNA fragment

1. Precursor to competence
factor (CF) is made and
cleaved, and active CF is
secreted.

CF



4. SigH directs transcription of
transformasome components.

 Transformation in Streptococcus. The process of transformation in this organism begins with the synthesis of a signaling
molecule (competence factor, CF) and concludes with the import of a single-stranded DNA strand through a transformasome complex.

318



PART 2



GENES AND GENOMES

protein that captures extracellular DNA floating in the environment, plus proteins that form a transmembrane pore. A
nuclease degrades one strand of a double-stranded DNA
molecule while pulling the other strand intact through the
pore and into the cell. Once inside, the strand can be incorporated into the chromosome by recombination, a process
we will discuss in Section 9.2.
Once the transformasome is assembled, the cell is competent, meaning that it can import free DNA fragments
and incorporate them into its genome by recombination.
What triggers growth phase–dependent competence?
For some Gram-positive bacteria, competence for transformation is generated by a chemical conversation
(quorum sensing; see Sections 4.5 and 10.5) that takes
place between members of the culture. Every individual
in a growing population produces and secretes a small,
15- to 20-amino-acid peptide, generically called competence factor (CF), that progressively accumulates in the
medium until it induces a genetic program that makes the
population competent (Fig. 9.1, step 1). The sequence
of the CF peptide is unique to each species, as are the
specifics of the induction process. For Streptococcus pneumoniae, the level of CF in the medium increases (step 2)
as the population increases—that is, as the cell density
increases.
Above a certain concentration threshold, competence
factor is able to bind to a sensory protein built into the
cell membrane (ComD for S. pneumoniae). This binding
begins what is called a phosphorylation cascade (the passing of a phosphate group from one protein to another;
eTopic 4.1). In the competence phosphorylation cascade,
the sensory protein phosphorylates itself using ATP and
then passes the phosphate to a cytoplasmic regulatory
protein, ComE, which stimulates expression of a novel
sigma factor, SigH (Fig. 9.1, step 3). Sigma H is specifically used to transcribe genes encoding the transformasome (step 4). The protein products of these genes are
assembled at the membrane, and the cell becomes competent (step 5).
Why would organisms regulate transformation competence by quorum sensing? One hypothesis holds that
cells are unlikely to encounter stray DNA when growing
in dilute natural environments such as ponds, where other
bacteria are scarce. So, in this situation, why waste energy
making the transformasome? When these same cells are
growing at high density, as in a biofilm, they are more
likely to encounter DNA released from dying neighbors.
This is DNA they could use to repair their own damaged
genomes, to consume as food, or to sample for a new survival mechanism, should the DNA come from a different species present in a biofilm consortium. Regulation by
quorum sensing would ensure that the transformasome

would not form until there was a good chance that free
foreign DNA was available.
Thought Question

9.1 Figure 9.1; illustrates the process of transformation in

Streptococcus pneumoniae. Will a mutant of Streptococcus
lacking ComD be able to transform DNA?

Gram-negative species transform DNA without competence factors. Gram-negative species capable of natural

transformation do not appear to make competence factors. Either they are always competent, like Neisseria, or
they become competent when starved (for example, Haemophilus). Competence development does not depend on
cell-cell communication. Gram-negative organisms have
a cytoplasmic membrane transformasome similar to that
employed by Gram-positive microbes, but Gram-negative bacteria also must overcome an outer membrane barrier to DNA importation. Neisseria species, for example,
appear to import DNA through a system paralogous to
type IV pilus assembly (discussed in Section 8.5). Type
IV pili reversibly assemble and disassemble at the cell surface, expanding and contracting as a result. This happens
constantly during the growth of a culture and can help
cells move across solid surfaces. During transformation in
species of Neisseria, disassembly of a pilus is thought to
drag transforming DNA into the cell and across the two
membranes.
In another departure from the Gram-positive example, transformation in species of Haemophilus and Neisseria is species and sequence specific, thereby limiting gene
exchange between different genera. Specificity is due to
particular sequences in DNA that are recognized by part
of the uptake apparatus. However, not all Gram-negative competence systems display such specificity; Acinetobacter calcoaceticus, a lung pathogen, is able to take up
DNA from any source at very high frequency. This is possible because the DNA-binding part of its transformation
system does not need to recognize a specific nucleotide
sequence.

Gene Transfer by Conjugation

Conjugation, sometimes erroneously called “bacterial sex,” requires cell-cell contact typically initiated by
a special pilus protruding from a donor cell (Fig. 9.2).
The pilus can also dramatically contribute to biofilm
formation (eTopic 9.1). Conjugation occurs in many species of bacteria and archaea, even in hyperthermophiles



GENE TRANSFER, MUTATIONS, AND GENOME EVOLUTION

1 µm

FIGURE 9.2



DENNIS KUNKEL MICROSCOPY, INC.

CHAPTER 9

Sex pilus connecting two E. coli cells.

Pseudocolor added.

such as Sulfolobus species. In nature, mixed-species biofilms are thought to enable DNA transfer between different species, albeit at a low frequency. As for the
mechanism of DNA transfer by conjugation, most species
use type IV–like protein secretion systems because a protein is transferred along with DNA (as described next and
in Section 8.5).
In the case of the Gram-negative E. coli, the tip of the
specialized plasmid-encoded sex pilus attaches to a receptor on the recipient cell and then contracts, drawing the
two cells closer. The two cell envelopes fuse and generate a
conjugation complex, through which single-stranded DNA
passes from donor to recipient. The conjugation complex is
similar to the transformation complex.
Bacterial conjugation requires the presence of special
transferable plasmids that usually contain all the genes
needed for pilus formation and DNA export. In some
cases, plasmids can also contain genes encoding antibiotic
resistance. A well-studied, transferable plasmid in E. coli is
called fertility factor, or F factor (Fig. 9.3 ). F factor
can transfer itself to another recipient cell, but if it integrates into the chromosome of its host, it can also transfer host genes. To carry out plasmid replication and DNA



319

transfer, F factor uses two replication origins, oriV and
oriT, located at different positions on the plasmid. The
origin oriV is used to replicate and maintain the plasmid
in nonconjugating cells, whereas oriT is used only to replicate DNA during DNA transfer. F factor also contains
several tra genes, whose protein products carry out the
DNA transfer process.
Conjugation begins with cell-cell contact between a
donor F+ cell that carries the plasmid and a recipient F– cell
(Fig. 9.3, step 1). Formation of a fused membrane conjugation conduit (step 2) triggers synthesis of an F factor–
encoded helicase/endonuclease (also called TraI or relaxase)
that nicks the phosphodiester backbone at the nic site in
oriT (step 3). TraI forms a relaxosome complex with other
F factor–encoded proteins. The relaxosome unwinds donor
double-stranded DNA and begins the transfer process. The
blowup at step 3 in Figure 9.3 shows a model of the multifactor relaxosome complex called a conjugation bridge.
The translocated TraI relaxase remains bound to the 5′ end
of the nicked strand, and the 5′ DNA-protein complex is
transferred through a pore protein in the recipient. The
translocated relaxase and the 5′ end of the strand remain
in the membrane, while the rest of the strand is transferred
through the pore. The intact circular strand remains in the
donor. DNA polymerase III (Pol III) is then recruited to
oriT in the donor, where replication begins (step 4). In contrast to bidirectional replication, which is used to duplicate the chromosome, replication for conjugative transfer
occurs unidirectionally, by rolling-circle replication (step 5)
(see Section 7.4).
DNA polymerase III synthesis of the replacement strand
in the donor cell drives movement of the transferred strand
through the pore. The polymerase uses the untransferred
intact circular strand as a template (see Fig. 9.3, steps 4
and 5).
Once the transfer is complete, the relaxase re-ligates the
5′ end it was holding to the 3′ tail of the transferred strand
in the recipient. Thus, the last portion of F factor moved
to the recipient is oriT. Once circularized, the plasmid replicates and the F – recipient cell becomes a new F+ donor
cell (Fig. 9.3, step 6). Ultimately, the conjugation complex
spontaneously comes apart, and the membranes seal. This
transfer process is very quick, taking less than five minutes
to transfer the entire 110-kb F factor.
Is it possible for two donors to exchange DNA with each
other? The answer is generally no; donors have mechanisms
in place to prevent such exchange. For example, a membrane protein encoded by the F factor will inhibit formation of a conjugation complex with another donor that
possesses the same protein. This mechanism prevents the
pointless transfer of a plasmid to a cell that already has that
plasmid.

320



PART 2



GENES AND GENOMES

Mating-pair formation
Sex pilus
Chromosome F factor
1. Sex pilus from the
F+ plasmid donor
(left) attaches to
receptors on the
recipient cell (right).

Donor
Recipient (F – cell)

Donor (F + cell)
Relaxosome

Sex pilus contracts.

2. Contraction of the
pilus draws the two
cells together and
forms a relaxosome
bridge.

Recipient

TraJ
TraH
TraI

nic

Relaxase nicks
DNA at oriT
(nic site).
Nick at oriT

3. The F factor is
nicked at oriT, and
the 5′ end begins
transfer through the
bridge.

TraK

DNA

5′′
5

Cell
membrane
Cell membrane
pore

TraG

3′
DNA transfer
4. The strand
remaining in the
donor is replicated.

FIGURE 9.3
5. Once in the
recipient, the
transferred strand
circularizes and
replicates.



The conjugation process.

Some plasmids, such as F factor in E. coli, can
mediate cell-to-cell transfer of DNA. Purple
arrowheads mark the 3′ end of replicating
DNA. The blowup at step 3 shows a model of
the DNA secretion apparatus. The relaxosome
complex is composed of TraH, TraI (the helicase/
endonuclease), TraJ, and TraK. The blowup
illustrates the step in which the TraI endonuclease
is about to nick the donor plasmid. The 5′ end of
the nick will move through the pore and remain
attached to the membrane while the rest of the
single-stranded DNA passes into the recipient.

5′

6. The recipient has
been converted to a
donor.

Source: Step 3 blowup adapted from G. Schröder et al. 2002.

F + cell

The F-factor plasmid can integrate into the chromosome.

An F-factor plasmid can remain a plasmid or can be integrated
into the chromosome of the recipient cell (Fig. 9.4). Integration of the plasmid into the genome involves recombination
between two circular DNA duplexes—a process explained in
Section 9.2. Because the plasmid can exist in extrachromosomal and integrated forms, it is sometimes called an episome
(epi, Greek for “over”; and some from “chromosome”).
A strain with the F factor integrated into the chromosome is called an Hfr (high-frequency recombination)

F + cell

J. Bacteriol. 184:2767–2779.

strain. The strain is called “high-frequency” because
every cell is capable of transferring chromosomal DNA
to an F – cell. Very few cells with an integrated F factor
are present in an F+ culture. A cell with F factor inserted
into the chromosome is capable of transferring all or part
of the chromosome into a recipient cell. Essentially, the
entire chromosome becomes the F factor. However, the
integrated F factor is actually the last bit of DNA transferred during Hfr conjugation. Because it takes nearly
100 minutes to transfer the entire E. coli chromosome

CHAPTER 9



oriT

tra

oriV
IS3

A

IS3

IS3

B

C

IS3

A

A

C

321

tra

oriT

oriV

B



FIGURE 9.4  Hfr formation. Insertion
element 3 (IS3) (Section 9.5) serves as a
region of sequence homology between
an F factor and the host chromosome.
Chromosome and F-factor copies of IS3
are recognized by host cell recombination
proteins that then integrate F factor into the
host chromosome. The transfer genes (tra)
and replication origins (oriV = vegetative;
oriT = transfer) are shown.

Plasmid

1. Plasmid and chromosome copies
of insertion sequence IS3 recombine
to integrate F plasmid into the
chromosome.

Part of circular
host chromosome

GENE TRANSFER, MUTATIONS, AND GENOME EVOLUTION

tra

oriT

2. Tip of arrowhead marks where DNA
strand begins transfer. Sequences nearest
the arrow’s base transfer first (gene B is
transferred before genes C and A).

oriV

IS3

B

C
Hfr

Plasmid

(as opposed to only 5 minutes for the free F plasmid),
the integrated F factor is rarely transferred before the
conjugation bridge breaks, so the recipient almost never
becomes an F+ or Hfr cell. How Hfr conjugation was used
in the past to map E. coli genes is described in eTopic 9.2.
Today, rapid DNA sequencing is used to map genes in any
organism. Nevertheless, conjugation remains important
for evolution and as a tool for scientists to move genes
between species.
An integrated F factor can excise from the chromosome.

Another type of gene shuffl ing can occur when an integrated F factor reverses course and excises from the chromosome via host recombination mechanisms. The F factor
is usually excised completely and restored to its original
form. Occasionally, however, it is excised along with some
neighboring DNA from the host chromosome, yielding
a product that remains an F-factor plasmid but also contains some chromosomal DNA. The derivative F plasmid
containing host DNA is called an F-prime (F′) plasmid or
F-prime (F′) factor (Fig. 9.5).

In contrast to the Hfr transfer of chromosomal genes,
genes hitchhiking on an F′ plasmid do not have to recombine into the recipient chromosome to be maintained. The
extra genes can be expressed as part of the F′ plasmid. The
resultant strain is called a “partial diploid” because it contains two copies of those few genes—one set on the chromosome, the other on the F′ factor. Partial diploids are
useful to the cell because the second copy of the gene can
be the raw material that evolves into a new gene. Partial
diploids are useful to geneticists because they can reveal
whether a mutant allele of a gene is dominant over a normal
(wild-type) allele. Partial diploids can also help geneticists
understand gene organization.
Many different types of plasmids can be found in the
microbial world. Most are not transferable by themselves.
However, one group of plasmids that cannot transfer themselves can be mobilized if a transferable plasmid such as
F factor is also present in the same cell. Mobilizable plasmids usually contain an oriT-like DNA replication origin
recognized by the conjugation apparatus of the transferable
plasmid. As a result, when the transferable plasmid begins

322



PART 2



GENES AND GENOMES

Integrated F factor
A

oriT

IS3

IS3

B
Hfr

Rare illegitimate recombination

IS3
A

B

IS3

Aberrant excision (frequency about 10–6 )
A

FIGURE 9.5



Deletion

IS3

Formation of an F ′ factor.

A rare, illegitimate recombination event in
an Hfr cell occurs between sequences within
the integrated F factor and sequences in
the host chromosome proper. The result is
excision (deletion) of the gene from the host
chromosome and production of a plasmid
containing F factor and host genes. This
F′-factor plasmid is capable of transferring
to a new cell via conjugation.

F′ plasmid

B

conjugating, so does the mobilizable plasmid. This is one
way in which antibiotic resistance genes on plasmids called
R factors can be spread throughout a microbial population.
Note that not all mobilizable plasmids contain antibiotic
resistance genes.
Thought Question

9.2 Transfer of an F factor from an F+ cell to an F– cell

converts the recipient to F+. Why doesn’t transfer of an Hfr do
the same?

(Fig. 9.6B). Subsequent transfer, integration, and expression of the Ti plasmid in the plant cell genome trigger the
release of plant hormones that stimulate tumorous growth
of the plant. Plant cells within the tumor release amino acid
derivatives, called “opines,” that the microbe can then use
as a source of carbon and nitrogen. The unique mode of
action of A. tumefaciens has made this bacterium an indispensable tool for plant breeding and enables entirely new
(nonplant) genes to be engineered into crops (discussed in
Chapter 16).

Note:
Agrobacterium practices interdomain conjugation. You

may be surprised to learn that some bacteria can actually transfer genes across biological domains. One striking
example is Agrobacterium tumefaciens, which causes crown
gall disease in plants (Fig. 9.6A). This Gram-negative plant
pathogen contains a tumor-inducing (Ti) plasmid that can
be transferred via conjugation to plant cells. The bacteria detect and swim toward phenolic compounds released
from the wound of a damaged plant where they attach

Conjugation in bacteria and archaea is mechanistically
different from conjugation among eukaryotic microbes. Some
eukaryotic microbes exchange nuclei through a structure, called
a conjugation bridge, very different from that of bacteria (see
Chapter 20).

Gene Transfer by Phage Transduction

Bacteriophages harbor their own genomes, distinct from
those of their host cells, but could phages also pluck host

CHAPTER 9

GENE TRANSFER, MUTATIONS, AND GENOME EVOLUTION



ROBERT CALENTINE/VISUALS UNLIMITED

A.

B.
Agrobacterium cell

1 µm

MARTHA HAWES, UNIVERSITY OF ARIZONA

Plant cell

FIGURE 9.6

 An example of gene transfer between
bacteria and plants. A. Crown gall disease tumor caused by the



323

unnecessary. Thus, bacteriophages can accidentally move
bacterial genes between cells as an offshoot of the phage
life cycle (see Section 6.4 and eTopic 7.2). The process in
which bacteriophages carry payloads of host DNA from
one cell to another is known as transduction. There are
two basic types of transduction: generalized and specialized. Generalized transduction can take any gene from
a donor cell and transfer it to a recipient cell, whereas
specialized transduction (also known as restricted transduction) can transfer only a few closely linked genes
between cells.
How does transduction happen? Bacteriophages capable of generalized transduction have trouble distinguishing their own DNA from that of the host when attempting
to package DNA into their capsids, so pieces of bacterial
host DNA accidentally become packaged in the phage capsid instead of phage DNA. In the case of Salmonella P22
phage, the packaging system recognizes a certain DNA
sequence on P22 DNA called a pac site. During rollingcircle replication, P22 DNA forms long concatemers containing many P22 genomes arranged in tandem. The pac
site defines the ends of the phage genome, marking where
the packaging system cuts the P22 DNA and starts packaging DNA into the next empty phage head. However,
certain DNA sequences on the Salmonella chromosome
also “look” like pac sites. As a result, the packaging system sometimes mistakenly packages host DNA instead of
phage DNA.
The result of this mistake is that 1% of the phage
particles in any population of P22 contain no phage DNA
but carry host DNA plucked from around the chromosome
(Fig. 9.7). The phages that carry host DNA are called
transducing particles. Any single transducing particle will
contain only one segment of host DNA, but different
particles in the phage population will contain different
segments of host DNA. When a transducing particle injects
its DNA into a cell, no new phages are made, but the hijacked
host DNA can recombine, or exchange, with sequences
in the host chromosome of the newly infected cell, thus
changing the genetic makeup of the recipient.

bacterium Agrobacterium tumefaciens. B. Electron micrograph of
A. tumefaciens attached to plant cells.

Thought Question

genes from one cell and move them to another? Norton
Zinder (1928–2012) first suspected that bacteriophages
could taxi chromosomal DNA between cells. To test this
idea, he grew Salmonella in two tubes separated by a fine
filter through which viruses could pass, but not bacteria.
The experiments, reported in 1966, showed that a filterable agent, or virus, could carry genetic material between
bacterial strains; direct contact between bacteria was

9.3 A prophage genome embedded in the chromosome of
a lysogenic cell will prevent the replication of any new phage
DNA (from the same phage group) that has infected the
cell. By preventing the replication of superinfecting phage
DNA, the prophage genome protects itself from destruction by lysis. Is a lysogen also protected from generalized
transduction carried out by a similar phage? For example,
can a P22 lysogen of Salmonella be transduced by P22
grown on a different strain of Salmonella? Explain why or
why not.

324



PART 2



GENES AND GENOMES

1. P22 phage DNA infects
a host cell and makes
subunit components for
more phage.

Virion genome
Capsid

Host DNA

Virus DNA

Tails
2. DNA is packaged
into capsid heads.
Some capsids
packages host DNA.

3. New phage
assembly is completed.

4. Cell lyses; phage is
released.

5. Transducing phage
particle injects host DNA
into new cell, where it may
recombine into the
chromosome.

FIGURE 9.7

Recombination
crossover events
exchange host DNA
for donor DNA.

 Generalized transduction.
Generalized
transduction by phage vectors can move any segment of donor
chromosome to a recipient cell. The number of genes transferred
in any one phage capsid is limited, however, to what can fit in the
phage head.

Specialized (restricted) transduction is a phagemediated gene transfer mechanism similar to the F′
factors described previously. In contrast to generalized
transduction, specialized transduction can move only
a limited number of host genes. E. coli phage lambda
(discussed in Chapter 11) provides the classic example of specialized transduction. Lambda phage DNA
is linear when it first enters the cell; then it circularizes at cohesive ends called cos sites. Next, a small
DNA sequence in lambda called attP can recombine
with a similar host DNA sequence (called attB) located
between the gal (galactose catabolism) and bio (biotin
synthesis) genes on the E. coli chromosome (Fig. 9.8,
step 1). This process, carried out by the phage integrase
protein, produces a chromosome with an integrated
phage genome, referred to as a prophage, flanked by
chimeric att sites called attL and attR. These sites are
called “chimeric” because each one is made half from
the bacterial and half from the phage att sites. Prophage DNA remains latent until something happens to
the cell to activate it.
Specialized transduction begins with the reactivation of this prophage DNA, often by DNA damage.
Usually, the phage enzymes that excise the lambda
DNA do so precisely. The chromosome and viral DNAs
are restored to their native states. The viral DNA will
then replicate and make more phage particles containing normal phage DNA. On rare occasions, however,
improper excision (mediated by host recombination
enzymes) can take place between host DNA sequences
that lie adjacent to the phage insertion site (attB in
Fig. 9.8, step 2) and similar DNA sequences within the
prophage. Improper excision yields a virus that will lack
a few viral genes (tail genes missing in Fig. 9.8, step 3)
but will include host genes lying adjacent to the phage
attachment site (the galactose utilization gene gal in
step 3). With some phages, the specialized transducing
particles can replicate unaided. However, in Figure 9.8
the result is a defective, specialized transducing phage
DNA (lambda dgal, or λdgal). Specialized transducing
phage particles that are defective cannot replicate by
themselves, but require the presence of a helper phage
to supply missing gene products.
Once formed, specialized transducing phages can
deliver the hybrid DNA molecule to a new recipient
cell. This is the transduction process. Once in that
cell, the phage DNA can integrate into the host attB
site, carrying the donor host gene(s) with it (Fig. 9.8,
steps 4 and 5). The result will be another partial
diploid situation in which the new recipient contains two copies of a host gene: one originally present on its chromosome, and one brought in by the
transducing DNA.


