■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

A.

B.

DR. KURT KONHAUSER/USGS

DR. KURT KONHAUSER/USGS

654

FIGURE 17.9

■ Banded iron formations. A. Jim Crowley, U.S. Geological Survey, studies a banded iron formation in Dales Gorge,
Australia. B. The BHP Billiton Iron Ore mine at Newman, Western Australia.

Chemical biosignatures. A different kind of biosignature

is given by organic molecules specific to a particular lifeform. Certain organic molecules may last within rock for
hundreds of millions of years. A particularly durable class
of molecules consists of membrane lipids. Recall from
Chapter 3 that some bacterial cell membranes contain steroid-like molecules called hopanoids. A hopanoid consists
of four or five fused rings of hydrocarbon with side groups
that vary depending on the kind of bacteria. The hopanoid
derivative 2-methylhopane is found in sedimentary rock of
the Hamersley Basin of Western Australia, dated to 2.5 Gyr
ago. This biosignature offers evidence that some kind of
bacteria existed by the end of the Archaean eon.

Banded Iron Formations
Reveal Oxidation by O2

An extraordinary event in the planet’s history was the evolution of the first oxygenic phototrophs: cyanobacteria that
split water to form O2. The entry of O2 into Earth’s biosphere is often portrayed as a sudden event that would have
been disastrous to microbial populations lacking defenses
against its toxicity. In fact, geological evidence shows
that oxygen arose gradually in the oceans, starting about
2 Gyr ago, and may have arisen and disappeared numerous times before reaching a high, steady-state level in our
atmosphere. The mechanism of the oxygen fluctuation is
unknown, but it caused cycles of aerobic and anaerobic
microbial metabolism.
Evidence for oxygen in the biosphere comes from the
oxidation state of minerals, particularly those containing
iron. The bulk of crustal iron is in the reduced form (Fe2+),
which is soluble in water and reached high concentrations

in the anoxic early oceans. Sedimentary rock, however,
contains many fine layers of oxidized iron (Fe3+), which
is insoluble and forms a precipitate, such as iron oxide
(Fe2O3). The layers of iron oxide suggest periods of alternating oxygen-rich and anoxic conditions. The layered rock
is called a banded iron formation (BIF) (Fig. 17.9A). A
common form of banded iron consists of gray layers of silicon dioxide (SiO2) alternating with layers colored red by
iron oxides and iron oxyhydroxides [FeOx(OH)y]. Banded
iron formations are widespread around the world and provide our major sources of iron ore (Fig. 17.9B).
Banded iron formations are often found in rock strata
containing signs of past life such as 13C depletion and other
biomarkers. For example, the Isua formations (Greenland)
and Hamersley formations (Western Australia), which both
show 13C depletion, also contain extensive banded iron.
Calculations indicate that the layers of oxidized iron could
result from biological metabolism involving iron oxidation.
One possibility is that chemolithotrophs oxidized the iron,
using molecular oxygen produced by cyanobacteria. The
Archaean and early Proterozoic eons experienced fluctuating levels of molecular oxygen in the atmosphere. These
fluctuations could have led to oscillating levels of iron
oxide, thus producing bands in the sediment, as microbes
used up all the oxygen.
Alternatively, Dianne Newman, at the California Institute
of Technology, proposes that the iron oxides arose directly
from anaerobic photosynthesis, in which the reduced iron
served as the electron donor (Fig. 17.10). In iron phototrophy, light excites an electron from Fe2+, oxidizing the ion
to Fe3+, while the excited electron cycles through an electron transport system to yield energy (discussed in Chapter 14). Newman discovered iron phototrophy in modern
purple bacteria such as Rhodopseudomonas palustris. In the

CHAPTER 17
A.

ORIGINS AND EVOLUTION

■

655

Fe

2+

B.
Photosynthetic iron oxidation
Microbial community
Fe

3+

Fe2O3 precipitates
in sediment.

Fe2+
Fe2+ moves to upper water
layers, where phototrophic
microbes oxidize it.
COURTESY OF DIANE NEWMAN

ancient Earth, photosynthetic oxidation of Fe2+ to Fe3+, or “photoferrotrophy,” could have occurred in cycles
until the marine iron was all oxidized, generating sedimentary layers
of iron oxides and iron oxyhydroxides.
Today, photoferrotrophs thrive in deep
anoxic lakes that resemble the anoxic
Archaean ocean.
By 2.3 Gyr ago, the prevalence of
oxidized iron and other minerals indicates the steady rise of oxygen from
photosynthesis in Earth’s atmosphere.
Most of the dissolved Fe2+ from the
ocean floor was oxidized, leaving the
oceans in the iron-poor state that persists today. As the most efficient electron acceptor, molecular oxygen
enabled the evolution of aerobic respiratory bacteria. Aerobic bacteria gave
rise to mitochondria, which enabled the
evolution of eukaryotes and, ultimately,
multicellular organisms (Fig. 17.11).
Remarkably, modern cells still consist mainly of reduced molecules,
highly reactive with oxygen—a relic
of the time when our ancestral cells
evolved in the absence of oxygen. The
conditions under which such cells may
have evolved can be simulated in the
laboratory. Conditions resembling our
model of early Earth spontaneously
generate some of life’s most common
molecules, such as adenine and simple amino acids (presented earlier, in
Special Topic 1.1). These simulation
experiments can never prove the actual
conditions under which life began, but
they can suggest testable models with
intriguing implications.

■

FIGURE 17.10 ■ Iron phototrophy. A. Dianne
Newman proposes that early iron phototrophs
caused the iron oxide deposition generating banded
iron formations. B. Photosynthetic oxidation of Fe2+
to Fe3+ may have generated sedimentary layers of
Fe2O3 and FeOx(OH)y.

Origin and evolution of life on Earth
Multicellular plants and animals

?

?
Eukaryotic microbes

?

Aerobic bacteria and archaea

?

Sulfate reducers

?

Oxygenic cyanobacteria and archaea

Banded iron formations
Oxygen in atmosphere

Existence of
life uncertain
Evolution of diverse life
Oldest stromatolites
13

To Summarize
■

■

Elements of life were formed
through nuclear reactions within
stars that exploded into supernovas
before the birth of our own Sun.
Reduced
molecules
compose
Earth’s interior. Oxidized minerals are found only near the surface.
Early Earth had no molecular oxygen (O2).

Formation
of Earth
Hadean
4

FIGURE 17.11

C/12C ratios
provide evidence for
photoautotrophy.
34 32
S/ S ratios show
sulfate reduction
by microbes.
Archaean

Hopanoids provide
evidence for bacteria.
Proterozoic

3
2
Gigayears (Gyr) before present

1

0

■ Proposed time line for the origin and evolution of life. The planet
Earth formed during the Hadean eon (about 4.5 Gyr ago). The environment was largely reducing until cyanobacteria pumped O2 into the atmosphere. When the O2 level reached sufficient levels (about 0.6 Gyr ago), multicellular animals and plants evolved. Question marks
designate periods when evidence for given life-forms is uncertain.

Fe3+

656

■

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

Archaean rocks show evidence for life based on fossil
stromatolites, isotope ratios, and chemical biosignatures.
Fossil stromatolites appear in chert formations formed
3.4 Gyr ago. Isotope ratios for carbon indicate photosynthesis at 3.7 Gyr ago. Bacterial hopanoids appear at
2.5 Gyr ago.
Microfossils of filamentous and colonial prokaryotes
date to 2.0 Gyr ago. At 1.2 Gyr ago, larger fossil cells
resemble those of modern eukaryotes.
Banded iron formations reflect the cyclic increase and
decrease of oxygen produced by cyanobacteria and consumed through reaction with reduced iron. After all the
ocean’s iron was oxidized, oxygen increased gradually in
the atmosphere.
A.

17.2

Early Metabolism

How did the earliest life-forms gain energy without oxygen
gas to respire and without the complex machinery of photosynthesis? The nature of the first metabolism is unknown,
but geochemistry and modern metabolism indicate several
features of the earliest living systems (Fig. 17.12A).
Oxidation-reduction reactions. The early oceans contained
oxidized forms of nitrogen, sulfur, and iron that could
interact with reduced minerals from the crust. For example, nitrate (NO3 –) or sulfate (SO42–) could be reduced by
hydrogen gas to yield energy (hydrogenotrophy; discussed
in Chapter 14). The oxidized molecules were generated by
reactions driven by ultraviolet radiation, which penetrated

Visible light

Life in Archaean eon
Early metabolism
Oxidized
Water

Fe3+ H2O

O2

NOy

SOx CO2

Cyanobacteria, stromatolites

Purple
Green

Anoxygenic
photosynthesizers

N2

S

HCHO

NH3

H2S

CH4

Methanotrophs
and fermenters
Iron-sulfur bacteria
Methanogens
Fe2+
Sediment

H2

Reduced

B.
Bacteriorhodopsin

FIGURE 17.12

Chlorophyll
Absorbance

■

■

400

500

600
Wavelength (nm)

700

■

Early metabolism.

A. Oxidized minerals diffused down
from the air and water and reduced
minerals in the sediment, upwelling
from hydrothermal vents. B. Early
photosynthesis may have resembled
that of haloarchaea, whose bacteriorhodopsin absorbs light in the
central range of sunlight (green-yellow,
500–600 nm) between the blue and
red chlorophylls of cyanobacteria and
plants. Source: Part B adapted from Shil
DasSarma, University of Maryland.

CHAPTER 17

the atmosphere in the absence of the ozone layer. Sulfur
isotope ratios (34S/32S) suggest the growth of sulfatereducing bacteria as early as 3.47 Gyr ago.
Light-driven ion pumps. A simple light-driven pump,
such as the bacteriorhodopsin of haloarchaea (halophilic
archaea), could have conducted the fi rst kind of phototrophy. The absorption spectrum of bacteriorhodopsin
matches the peak of solar radiation reaching the upper layers of ocean (Fig. 17.12B), in contrast to the chlorophylls
of cyanobacteria and anoxygenic bacteria, which absorb the
outer ranges of blue and red. Perhaps these chlorophyllusing bacteria evolved in the presence of haloarchaea, fi lling the unexploited photochemical niches.
Methanogenesis. Climate models of early Earth suggest a

methane atmosphere, produced by methanogenic archaea.
Methanogenesis involves reaction of H 2 and CO2 producing CH4 and H 2O. Methanogens show highly divergent
genomes—a fi nding that suggests early evolution of their
common ancestor. Their biochemistry and evolution (discussed in Chapter 19) are consistent with proposed models
of ancient life.

Models for the First Cells

Various models have been proposed to explain how the first
living cells originated from nonliving materials, and how
they replicated and evolved. Models for early life attempt
to address the following questions: In what kind of environment did the first cells form? What kind of metabolism
did the first cells use to generate energy? What was their
hereditary material?
Three kinds of models attempt to explain how nonliving materials gave rise to a cell. The prebiotic soup model
proposes that abiotic (nonliving) reactions involving
A. The prebiotic soup model
H2O

H2

ORIGINS AND EVOLUTION

■

657

simple reduced chemicals such as ammonia and methane could have assembled complex organic molecules of
life. These complex macromolecules eventually acquired
the apparatus needed for self-replication and membrane
compartmentalization. Metabolist models propose that
central components of intermediary metabolism, including using the TCA cycle to generate amino acids, arose
from self-sustaining chemical reactions based on inorganic chemicals. These abiotic reactions then acquired
self-replicating macromolecules and membranes. Finally,
the RNA world is a model of early life in which RNA
performed all the informational and catalytic roles of
today’s DNA and proteins. The concept of an RNA world
draws upon genome sequences, which reveal thousands of
catalytic and structural RNAs.
The prebiotic soup. In the mid-twentieth century, bio-

chemists Aleksandr Oparin at Moscow University, and
Stanley Miller and Harold Urey at the University of Chicago, showed that organic building blocks of life such as
amino acids could arise abiotically out of a mixture of
water and reduced chemicals, including CH4, NH3, and
H 2 (Fig. 17.13). The mixture was subjected to an electrical discharge, similar to the lightning discharges that
arise from volcanic eruptions, which would have been
common in the late Hadean or early Archaean eon. The
chemical reaction produced fundamental amino acids
such as glycine and alanine. Similar experiments by Juan
Oró, at the University of Houston, showed the formation
of adenine by condensation of ammonia and hydrogen
cyanide.
The same amino acids and nucleobases arising from
early-Earth simulation are also found in meteorites, which
are believed to retain the chemistry of the early solar system
“frozen” in time. But unlike the chemical experiments, the
meteorites show a remarkable predominance of left-handed

B.

H2NCH2COOH

NH3
CH4

■

Electrical
discharge

Glycine
and other
biomolecules

Cells

FIGURE 17.13 ■ The prebiotic soup model for
the origin of life. A. In the prebiotic soup, inorganic

molecules could have reacted to form complex macromolecules that eventually acquired the apparatus
for self-replication and membrane compartmentalization. B. Lightning accompanies eruption of the
Galunggung Volcano in West Java, Indonesia, in 1982.
The first biomolecules may have formed as a result of
lightning triggered by volcanic eruption.

R. HADIAN, U.S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY

Heat and
pressure

658

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

mirror forms (L-enantiomers) of the amino acids—the
same L form utilized in the protein synthesis of all life on
Earth. Some researchers hypothesize that organic compounds formed in outer space were restricted to the L form
by an unknown process and then “seeded” the propagation
of L-form compounds in Earth’s prebiotic soup.
The original model conditions for the prebiotic soup
assumed that molecules in the early Archaean ocean were
largely reduced, with little or no oxygen present in the
atmosphere. More recent geochemical evidence suggests
that the early ocean actually included oxidized forms of
nitrogen, sulfur, and iron that arose through reactions
driven by ultraviolet radiation, which penetrated the atmosphere in the absence of the ozone layer. These oxidized
minerals could have reacted with the reduced crustal minerals, releasing energy to drive production of more complex
biomolecules.
Forming the first cell, or “proto-cell,” must have
required enclosing the first biochemical reactants within a
membrane-like compartment. Jack Szostak and colleagues
at Harvard Medical School investigate how such compartments can arise spontaneously from fatty acid glycerol
esters. The fatty acid derivatives are “amphipathic”; that
is, they possess both hydrophobic portions that associate
together and hydrophilic portions that associate with water.
In water, the fatty acid derivatives collect in “micelles”—
small, round aggregates in which the hydrophobic portions
associate in the interior and the hydrophilic portions associate with water. Under certain conditions, micelles can
aggregate to form hollow vesicles of membrane. Szostak
showed how the vesicles can take up molecules such as

A. A metabolist model
H
C O

H S CH3

OH

O

CO2
H

FeS catalyzes
conversion.

–

Ketone is
O Base1
O P O P O
aminated.
H
H
–
–
O
O
H O
H
O

C O

CH3
Pyruvic
acid

Oxaloacetic
acid
NH3
Amino acids

O–

P
O

C O

TCA cycle
in cells

O

O

CH3

COOH

COOH

origin of biosynthesis on the basis of CO2 fi xation, the
fundamental metabolism of all life today. Proponents of a
metabolist model, including Harold Morowitz at George
Mason University, and Günter Wächterhäuser at the University of Regensburg, propose that CO2-based metabolism
originated through self-sustaining reactions (Fig. 17.14A).
Simulation experiments suggest that such premetabolic reactions could have been catalyzed by metal sulfides prevalent
in the early ocean. For example, abiotic polymerization of
CO2 into TCA cycle intermediates may be catalyzed by FeS.
How did simple inorganic reactions lead to biochemical cycles involving more complex biopolymers, such as
nucleic acids and proteins? A major challenge is to explain
the genetic code by which nucleic acid codons are assigned
to unique amino acids. The genetic code may have arisen
from an earlier pretranslational mechanism of amino acid
biosynthesis (Fig. 17.14B). In this mechanism, proposed
by Morowitz and colleagues, each amino acid was originally synthesized from a TCA cycle acid complexed to a
dinucleotide. The dinucleotide later evolved into the first
two nucleotides of the codon specifying the amino acid.
The proposed link between a specific dinucleotide and each
amino acid would explain certain features of the genetic
code, such as the fact that most amino acids specified by
a codon starting with the same nucleotide are synthesized
from the same TCA cycle acid (discussed in Chapter 15).

O

H

COOH

CH2

Metabolist models. Other models attempt to explain the

B. A model for origin of the genetic code

C O
H2 + CO2

RNA, suggesting a primitive cell-like form. These spontaneous processes of membrane formation offer models for
how the first living cells may have arisen.

H

R
O
O Base2
H
H

OH OH

FIGURE 17.14

O
–

O

P
O–

Side chain
is modified.

O
O

P
O–

O

H
H

O Base1
H
H NH
O

O
O

O–

P
O

H
H

2

R′
O

Amino
acid
residue

O Base2
H
H

OH OH

■ Metabolist models for the origin of life. A. Self-sustaining abiotic
chemical reactions, such as polymerization of CO2 and H2, could have formed the basis of
cellular metabolism. The reductive TCA cycle arose out of intermediates with small thermodynamic transitions to CO2. B. The genetic code may have originated from synthesis of an amino
acid complexed to a dinucleotide. This dinucleotide could later have evolved into the first two
nucleotides of the codon specifying the amino acid.

CHAPTER 17

■

ORIGINS AND EVOLUTION

■

659

The RNA world. Neither the prebiotic soup model nor the

metabolist models account for the evolution of macromolecules that encode complex information, such as nucleic
acids and proteins. A candidate for life’s fi rst “informational
molecule” is RNA. RNA is a relatively simple biomolecule,
with only four different “letters,” compared to the 20 standard amino acids of proteins. Its purine base adenine arises
spontaneously from ammonia and carbon dioxide under
conditions believed to resemble those of the Archaean eon.
Its ribose sugar is a fundamental building block of living
cells, with key roles in numerous biochemical pathways,
such as the Calvin cycle. Most exciting, in 2009, John
Sutherland and co-workers discovered an organic reaction
pathway that generates a sugar-base ribonucleotide in the
absence of any enzyme. This discovery suggests a way that
the fi rst RNA molecules could have formed before there
were living cells.
For several reasons, RNA is a better candidate than
DNA for the earliest information molecule. Compared
to DNA, RNA requires less energy to form and degrade.
RNA’s pyrimidine base uracil is formed early by biochemical pathways; only later is it converted to the thymine used
by DNA.
Most important, RNA molecules have been shown to
possess catalytic properties analogous to those of proteins.
Catalytic RNA molecules are called ribozymes. The first
ribozyme, discovered by Nobel laureate Thomas Cech in
the protist Tetrahymena, can splice introns in mRNA.
Other ribozymes actually catalyze synthesis of complementary strands of RNA, suggesting a model for early replication of RNA chromosomes. The most elaborate example of
catalytic RNA is found in the ribosome. X-ray crystallography of the ribosome reveals that the key steps of protein
synthesis, such as peptide bond formation, are actually catalyzed by the RNA components, not proteins (discussed in
Chapter 8). The ribosomal proteins possess relatively little
catalytic function; their main role seems to be protection
and structural support of the RNA.
Could RNA molecules have composed the earliest cells?
In 2009, Tracey Lincoln and Gerald Joyce at the Scripps
Research Institute devised a system in which two RNA
ribozymes catalyze each other’s synthesis. The ribozyme
model system suggests how, in the earliest cells, RNA
might have fulfilled the key functions that are today filled
by DNA and proteins, including information storage, replication, and catalysis (Fig. 17.15). This model is known as
the “RNA world.”
The prominent function of RNA in the ribosome, one of
life’s most ancient and conserved molecular machines, suggests a model for the transition from an RNA world to the
modern cell. In the ribosome, the actual steps of catalysis,
such as forming the peptide bond, are conducted by RNA
subunits acting as ribozymes. The ribozymes are stabilized

Ribozyme

Ribonucleoprotein
enzyme

Protein enzyme
with nucleotide
coenzyme

FIGURE 17.15 ■ From the RNA world to proteins. Earliest
cells may have been composed of RNA enzymes (ribozymes). As the
RNA cells evolved, ribozymes acquired protein subunits that eventually assumed most of their catalytic functions. Remnants of the
original RNA may persist as nucleotide cofactors such as NADH.

by protein subunits. Thomas Cech, Sidney Altman, and
colleagues propose that the earliest RNA components of
cells evolved by acquiring proteins to enhance stability. The
proteins helped prevent the tendency of RNA to hydrolyze (come apart in reaction with water). As cells evolved,
their peptide components increased through natural selection, and the RNA subunits may have shrunk by reductive
evolution (the evolutionary loss of unneeded parts). A few
complexes, such as the ribosome, still maintain their ribozymes; for others, perhaps all that remains are one or two
nucleotides. Dinucleotide cofactors such as NADH persist
in enzymes today, perhaps representing vestigial remnants
of the RNA world. For more on RNA evolution, and surprising applications for medicine, see eTopic 17.1.
The RNA-world model explains the central role of
RNA throughout the history of living cells. Yet the role
of RNA offers little clue as to the origins of cell compartmentalization and metabolism. No single model of life’s
origin yet addresses all the requirements for a living cell—
metabolism, membrane compartmentalization, and hereditary material. Each model does, however, offer important
insights into the evolutionary history and mechanisms of
life today.

Thought Question

17.3 Outline the strengths and limitations of each model of
the origin of living cells. Which aspects of living cells does
each model explain?

Unresolved Questions about Early Life

Overall, geology and biochemistry provide compelling
evidence that organisms resembling today’s cyanobacteria

660

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

lived on Earth at least 2.5 Gyr ago, possibly 3.7 Gyr ago,
and that bacteria with anaerobic metabolism evolved as
early or earlier. Many intriguing questions remain. We outline here three unresolved questions regarding the temperature of early Earth, the role of methane in the early
atmosphere, and the actual source of Earth’s first cells.
Thermophile or psychrophile? The apparent existence of
life so soon after Earth cooled suggests a thermophilic
origin. Thermophily is supported by the fact that in the
domains Bacteria and Archaea, the deepest-branching
clades (that is, kinds of organisms that diverged the earliest
from others in the domain) are thermophiles. Such organisms could have thrived at hydrothermal vents, which offer
a continuous supply of H 2S and carbonates.
On the other hand, after meteoric bombardment abated,
early Earth should have become glacially cold. In the
Archaean, solar radiation was 20%–30% less intense than it
is today, and the thin CO2 atmosphere was insufficient to
increase the temperature by a greenhouse effect. A colder
habitat would support psychrophiles. Psychrophiles might
have had an advantage in an RNA world, given the thermal
instability of RNA compared to DNA and proteins.
A world of methane? Among Earth’s earliest life-forms

were methanogens (methane producers). Methanogens
are one of the most widely divergent groups of organisms
and persist today in environments ranging from anaerobic
sediment to the human intestine. Methanogenesis requires
only carbon dioxide and hydrogen gas, which would have
been plentiful in early anoxic sediment. The production
of methane, an extremely potent greenhouse gas, could
have greatly increased Earth’s temperature during the
Archaean eon. Thus, methanogenesis could explain how
Earth escaped the permanent freeze of Mars. Overheating
would have been halted when the oxygen gas produced by
cyanobacteria enabled growth of methanotrophs, bacteria
that oxidize methane. The decline of methane and the rise
of CO2 then would have brought about relative thermal
stability.
The debate over the temperature and climate of early
Earth has interesting implications for Earth today, when we
again face the prospect of massive global climate change.
Human agriculture favors explosive growth of methanogens, which threaten to accelerate global warming faster
than the biosphere can moderate it. Understanding the
climate of early Earth may help us better understand and
manage our own climate, discussed in Chapter 22.
Origin on Earth or elsewhere? Emerging evidence from
fossils and geochemistry has inexorably pushed back the
earliest known dates for several kinds of metabolism closer
to 3.7 Gyr ago (see Fig. 17.11). This implies that as soon

as Earth cooled to a temperature suitable for life, all the
fundamental components of cells evolved almost immediately. How could life, with all its diverse kinds of metabolism, have arisen so quickly?
The idea that life-forms originated elsewhere and
“seeded” life on Earth is called panspermia. Theories of
panspermia remain highly speculative. One hypothesis is
that microbial cells originated on Mars and were then carried to Earth on meteorites. As the solar system formed,
Mars would have cooled sooner than Earth, and because it
is also smaller than Earth, Mars’s weaker gravity would have
generated less bombardment by meteorites. Martian rocks
ejected into space by meteor impact have reached Earth, and
calculations based on simulated space habitats show that
microbes could survive such a journey. A Martian origin,
however, gains us only about half a billion years; it does not
really explain the origin of life’s complexity and diversity.
Did life-forms come from still farther away, perhaps borne
on interstellar dust from some other solar system?
A more likely explanation is that life evolved on early
Earth faster than it does today. Today, RNA viruses such
as influenza and HIV mutate and evolve much faster than
modern cells (discussed in Chapter 11). If early cells with
RNA genomes mutated as fast as viruses, they would have
evolved and diverged faster than cellular organisms that we
know today.
Thought Question

17.4 Suppose a NASA rover discovered living organisms
on Mars. How might such a find shed light on the origin and
evolution of life on Earth?

To Summarize
■

■

■

■

Early metabolism involved anaerobic oxidation-reduction reactions. Likely forms of early metabolism include
sulfate respiration, light-driven ion pumps, iron phototrophy, and methanogenesis.
Prebiotic soup models propose that the fundamental
biochemicals of life arose spontaneously through condensation of reduced inorganic molecules.
Metabolist models propose that components of intermediary metabolism arose from self-sustaining chemical
reactions that connected nucleotides with amino acids,
forming the basis of the genetic code.
The RNA-world model proposes that in the first cells,
RNA performed all the informational and catalytic roles
of today’s DNA and proteins.

CHAPTER 17

■

■

■

Thermophile or psychrophile? Classic models of early
life assume thermophily, but Earth may actually have
been cold when the first cells originated.
A world of methane? If the first cells were methanogens, methane production could have led to the first
greenhouse effect, warming Earth and enabling evolution of other kinds of life.
Origin on Earth or elsewhere? Isotope ratios suggest
the presence of complex metabolism by 3.7 Gyr ago,
shortly after Earth cooled (4.0 Gyr ago). Simpler cells
existing before 4.0 Gyr ago may have evolved much faster
than life today. A more speculative possibility is that life
first evolved on another planet.

17.3

Microbial Phylogeny
and Gene Transfer

The unifying assumption of modern biology is genetic
relatedness, or molecular phylogeny. Phylogeny generates
a series of branching groups of related organisms called
clades. Each clade is a monophyletic group—that is,
a group of organisms that share a common ancestor not
shared by any kind of organism outside the clade. Each
monophyletic group then branches into smaller monophyletic groups, and ultimately species, the fundamental kind of organism (discussed in Section 17.5). The full
description of branching divergence of a species is called
its phylogeny. Phylogeny, however, consists of more than
branching divergence; the ancestry of all life-forms includes
horizontal gene transfer (discussed in Chapter 9). Both
vertical gene flow (parent to offspring) and horizontal gene
transfer shape all life-forms, including humans.

Divergence through Mutation
and Natural Selection

Populations of organisms diverge from each other through
several fundamental mechanisms of evolution. These
include:
■

Random mutation. DNA sequences change through
rare mistakes (in bacteria and archaea, typically one out
of a million base pairs) as the chromosome replicates
(discussed in Chapter 7). Replication errors result in
mutation. Most mutations are neutral; that is, they have
no effect on gene function.

■

Natural selection and adaptation. In a given environment, natural selection favors organisms that produce greater numbers of offspring in that environment

■

ORIGINS AND EVOLUTION

■

661

(discussed in Section 17.4). Genes encoding traits under
selection pressure may show mutation frequencies much
higher or lower than those generated by the random
mutation rate. Natural selection enables a population to
adapt to a changing environment.
■

Reductive evolution (degenerative evolution). In the
absence of selection for a trait, the genes encoding the
trait accumulate mutations without affecting the organism’s reproductive success. Because mutations that
decrease function are more common than mutations
that improve function, accumulating mutations without selection pressure leads to decline and ultimately
loss of the trait. The loss or mutation of DNA encoding unselected traits is called reductive evolution (or
degenerative evolution).

Random mutations with neutral effects that are not subject to selection tend to accumulate at a steady rate over
generations because the error rate of the DNA replication
machinery stays about the same. The resulting “genetic
drift” causes sequences in separate populations to diverge
over time. The constancy of the mutation rate (within limits) provides a tool for us to measure the time of divergence
of organisms based on their DNA sequences.

Thought Question

17.5 What kinds of DNA sequence changes have no effect on

gene function? (Hint: Refer to the table of the genetic code,
Figure 8.10.)

Molecular Clocks Are Based
on Mutation Rate

An important conceptual advance of the twentieth century
was that information contained in a macromolecule such
as protein or DNA could measure the history of a species.
The temporal information contained in a macromolecular sequence is called a molecular clock. Molecular clocks
have revolutionized our understanding of the emergence
of all living organisms, including human beings. The first
molecular clocks, based on protein sequencing and DNA
hybridization, were developed in the 1960s. Subsequently,
the sequences of ribosomal RNA (rRNA) were used by
Carl Woese to reveal the divergence of three domains of
life. The rRNA sequence is particularly useful because ribosome structure and function are highly similar across all
organisms. Genome sequences now offer many other genes
to measure divergence at different levels of classification.
A molecular clock is based on the acquisition of new
random mutations in each round of DNA replication. In

662

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

or 18S rRNA (eukaryotes).
(Sedimentation coefficients
are discussed in Chapter 3.) The SSU rRNA is
particularly useful because
2A: A T G T CC T T GCG T A A CG
2B: A CG T T C T T GC A T AGCG
certain portions of its
sequence are remarkably
conserved across all forms
3A: A T A T CC T T GCG T GA CG
3B: A CGC T C T T GA A T AGCG
3C: A CG T A CC T GC A T AGCG of life. These portions can
be used to define primFIGURE 17.16 ■ The molecular clock. As genetic molecules reproduce, the number of mutations
ers to amplify DNA of the
(shaded in yellow and green) accumulated at random is proportional to the number of generations and
gene encoding the rRNA,
thus the time since divergence. In each sequence designation (for example, “2A”), the number indicates
using the polymerase chain
the generation and the letter identifies a specific strain.
reaction (PCR; discussed
in Section 7.6). The gene
Figure 17.16, each offspring in generation 2 acquires two
sequence lying between the pair of highly conserved rDNA
new mutations; their sequences now differ by 25%. In the
sequences will show greater variation, allowing distinction
next generation, each individual propagates the earlier
between different clades. PCR can be used to amplify genes
mutant sequences while acquiring two more random mutaeven from a mixture of uncultured organisms.
tions. Strain 3A now differs by 50% from strains 3B and
Use of a molecular clock requires the alignment of
3C, which differ by 25% from each other. (Actual mutation
homologous sequences in divergent species or strains
frequencies, of course, are much lower—about one base
(Fig. 17.17 ). Alignment is the correlation of portions
per million per generation.) We assume that the chromoof two gene sequences that diverged from a common ancessomes of offspring acquire a consistent number of random
tral sequence (homologous sequence). The process requires
mutations from their parents, and therefore the number of
assumptions and decisions about base substitutions, as well
sequence differences between two species should be proas insertions and deletions. For example, in Figure 17.17
portional to the time of divergence between them.
the best alignment requires us to assume that three bases
Ideally, the molecular clock works best for a particular
were lost from the fourth sequence (or else inserted into
gene sequence with the following features:
Root sequence: A T G T T C T T GC A T A A CG

■

■

■

The gene has the same function across all types of
organisms compared. That is, all versions are orthologous; they have not evolved to serve different functions.
Functional difference may lead to different rates of change.
The generation time is the same for all organisms
compared. Shorter generation times (more frequent
reproductive cycles) lead to overestimates of the overall
time of divergence because of the increased opportunity
for DNA mutation.
The average mutation rate remains constant among
organisms and across generations. If different kinds of
life mutate at different rates, then organisms with more
rapid rates of mutation will appear to have diverged over
a longer time than is actually the case.

In practice, these requirements are never fulfilled exactly,
but we do the best we can. Genes that show the most consistent measures of evolutionary time encode components
of the transcription and translation apparatus, such as ribosomal RNA and proteins, tRNA, and RNA polymerase. The
most widely used molecular clock is the gene encoding the
small-subunit rRNA (SSU rRNA). The SSU rRNA is also
known by its sedimentation coefficient: 16S rRNA (bacteria)

A. SSU rRNA sequences from uncultured soil bacteria
A A A T G T T GGGC T T CCGGC AG T AG T GAG T G
A A A T G T T GGGA T T CCGGA AG T AG T GAG T G
A A A T GC T GGGC T T CCGGA AG T AGCGAG T G
A A A T G T T GGGC T T CCGGGAGCGAG T GCCC
B. Alignment

Similarity

(1) A A A T G T T GGGC T T CC GGC AG T AG T GAG T G

27/29 = 93%

(2) A A A T G T T GGGA T T CCGGA AG T AG T GAG T G

26/29 = 90%

(3) A A A T GC T GGGC T T CCGGA AG T AGCGAG T G

24/29 = 83%

(4) A A A T G A T GGG T T T CCGGGAG – – GCGAG T GCCC
C. Phylogenetic tree
7%
10%
17%

(1)
(2)
(3)

Divergence
100% – 93% = 7%
100% – 90% = 10%
100% – 83% = 17%

(4)

FIGURE 17.17

■ DNA sequence alignment. A. SSU rRNA
sequences from different organisms can be aligned at homologous
regions. B. The best alignment is that which minimizes mismatches.
C. A possible phylogenetic tree of divergence of the four sequences.

CHAPTER 17

the ancestor of the other sequences). The relative differences among the sequences can be used to propose a tree
of divergence (Fig. 17.17C). In the tree, the length of
each branch is proportional to the number of differences
between two sequences. The number of differences, or
divergence, is given by 100% minus the percent similarity
between the aligned sequences.
In practice, a much larger amount of sequence with multiple differences is needed to calculate a phylogenetic tree.
All trees are based on probability, with ambiguities depending on the assumptions of how sequences change. The data
are calculated by computer programs, which may yield different results, depending on their assumptions. Standard
assumptions include the following:
■

Minimum number of changes. The best alignment
between two sequences is that which assumes the smallest number of mutational changes.

■

Functional sequences change more slowly. Sequences
that encode essential catalytic portions of the gene product are maintained by selection pressure and change
more slowly than portions of the molecule without
essential function.

■

Third-base codon positions show more random
change. In a protein-coding gene, many codons have
multiple anticodons that differ at the third base, so
third-base changes are least likely to change the amino
acid. Thus, third-base nucleotides offer the best molecular clock information.

Phylogenetic Trees

Once homologous sequences are aligned, the frequency
of differences between them can be used to generate a
phylogenetic tree that estimates the relative amounts of

■

ORIGINS AND EVOLUTION

■

663

evolutionary divergence between the sequences. If divergence rate over time, or mutation rate, is the same for all
sequences compared, then divergence data can be used to
infer the length of time since two organisms shared a common ancestor.
A phylogenetic tree is a model. All phylogenetic trees
depend on complex mathematical analysis to measure
degrees of divergence and propose a tree that most probably
connects present sequences with their common ancestor.
Because we can never know the exact tree with certainty,
different types of calculations may lead to slightly different
results. Two common approaches are:
■

Maximum parsimony. Evolutionary distances are
computed for all pairs of taxa based on the numbers of
nucleotide or amino acid substitutions between them.
A proposed common ancestor, or “ancestral state,” is
reconstructed. All possible trees comparing relative time
of divergence from the common ancestor are computed.
The “best fit” tree is defined as the one requiring the
fewest mutations to fit the data (that is, the one that
is most “parsimonious”). A limitation of parsimonious
reconstruction is that more than one tree may produce
results consistent with the data.

■

Maximum likelihood. For each possible tree, one
calculates the likelihood (probability) that such a tree
would have produced the observed DNA sequences.
The probability of given mutations is based on complex
statistical calculations. Maximum-likelihood methods
require large amounts of computation but obtain the
most information from the data, usually generating one
tree or a small set of probable trees.

A portion of a computed phylogenetic tree is shown in
Figure 17.18 . The sequence data were obtained from
PCR-amplified sequences of SSU rRNA from isolates in

Branch
Node
Desulfurococcus
mobilis
pJP7

pSL91
pJP74

Pyrodictium
occultum

pJP74
Sulfolobus acidocaldarius

Root

Pyrodictium occultum
Sulfolobus
acidocaldarius

Radial phylogenetic tree (unrooted)

FIGURE 17.18

Desulfurococcus mobilis
pSL91

pJP7
Pyrobaculum aerophilum (outgroup)

0.1
10 mutations/100 nt
(nucleotides)

Rectangular phylogenetic tree (rooted)

■ Phylogenetic trees: rooted and unrooted. Comparison of rRNA sequences was used to generate a phylogenetic tree
for thermophiles isolated from Obsidian Pool in Yellowstone National Park. Left: The radial phylogenetic tree shows the degrees of relatedness among taxa based on the number of molecular substitutions on each branch (see scale bar). Right: The rectangular tree shows the same
divergence distances lined up in parallel. This rectangular tree includes a root, the distance to an outgroup organism. A rooted tree indicates
the position of a common ancestor. Source: Susan M. Barnes et al. 1996. PNAS 93: 9188.

664

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

PLOS BIOL 8(2): E1000313. DOI: 101371/JOURNAL.
PBIO.1000313.

Obsidian Pool, a thermal spring at Yellowstone National
the phylogeny of selected bacteria from the human intesPark. The sequences were analyzed by Susan Barns and coltine, within a larger clade (the gammaproteobacteria, preleagues at Indiana University in the laboratory of Norman
sented in Chapter 18). The phylogenetic tree is based on a
Pace, a pioneering investigator of extreme habitats. Note
set of protein sequences of “housekeeping” genes—that is,
that some of the Obsidian Pool samples are known species,
genes encoding functions essential for all cells, and ususuch as the thermophile Pyrodictium occultum, whereas
ally transmitted vertically (parent to offspring). Escherichia,
others are uncharacterized organisms given alphanumeric
Shigella, and Salmonella are closely related genera, includdesignations, their existence known only by the rRNA
ing pathogenic strains, as well as normal members of the
sequences reported here. In fact, any microbial habitat surgut microbiome. The genus Klebsiella includes species that
veyed by PCR, including a human body, will yield previgrow outside the gut, causing pneumonia. Photorhabdus
ously unknown species (as in the shower curtain biofilm
luminescens is a nematode bacterium that helps its host pardescribed in eTopic 17.2).
asitize insects. Erwinia carotovora infects carrots and other
The Obsidian Pool rRNA sequences were aligned by
plants; it is closely related to Yersinia pestis, the cause of
the method illustrated in Figure 17.17, and divergence
bubonic plague. Photobacterium profundum is a marine
distances were analyzed by maximum likelihood. In each
barophile (high pressure) growing in a deep-sea trench.
tree, the total distance (in terms of base-substitution freOverall, the tree shown is rooted by Shewanella, a genus of
quency) between any two sequences is approximated by the
metal reducers used to construct fuel cells. The tree shows
distance from each sequence and its branch point, or node
how bacteria of bewildering diversity, from human patho(Fig. 17.18). A node for a group of branches is called a
gens to deep-ocean dwellers, diverged relatively recently
root—that is, a common ancestor. Moving from the root
from a common ancestor.
to the tips of the branches means moving forward in time.
One group, the genus Buchnera, appears to have diverged
Phylogenetic trees can be drawn in different ways. The
much faster than the other bacteria. Buchnera species are
tree at left in Figure 17.18 is a radial tree, in which branches
intracellular endosymbionts of aphids (Fig. 17.19 inset). The
indicate distance outward from their nodes. The tree at right
intracellular symbionts have undergone reductive evolution,
shows the same divergence distances from nodes, drawn as
losing many functions supplied by their host. Intracellular
a rectangular tree. In a rectangular tree, all branches run
endosymbionts typically mutate much faster than free-living
in parallel. A rectangular tree helps compare divergent
bacteria. In addition, they undergo intense selection pressure
branches, although it takes up more space than a radial tree,
for adaptation to their obligate host. And yet, other bacteria
especially when large numbers of organisms are compared.
(Regiella) within the same host evolved the opposite way—
If the length of each branch corresponds to a given length
they gained genes encoding parasitic factors. Endosymbiosis
of time, we expect all the branches to add up to the same
is discussed further in Section 17.6.
total length. In some trees this condition is approximated, but in microIntestinal proteobacteria
Aphid embryo
bial trees the lengths differ greatly.
5%
Escherichia and Shigella
In Figure 17.18, for example, SulfolBuchnera
5% sequence change
500 Myr (approximate)
Salmonella
obus acidocaldarius appears to have
Regiella
Klebsiella
evolved much more than DesulfuroPhotorhabdus luminescens
coccus mobilis. The reason is that S.
acidocaldarius and its recent ancesErwinia carotovora
tors have accumulated mutations
Yersinia pestis
faster. In every tree, some lineages
100 µm
Sodalis glossinidius
accumulate mutations faster than
others. The difference in rate arises
Buchnera
Haemophilus and Pasteurella
from differences in mutation rate and
(endosymbiont
with accelerated
Photobacterium profundum
from differences in generation time
mutation rate)
“Fan” or “bush” of
Vibrio
between organisms whose sequences
similarly divergent
are compared. Thus, our molecular
Shewanella
strains
clocks are inevitably distorted, especially for distantly diverged organ- FIGURE 17.19 ■ Intestinal bacteria and related proteobacteria. The phylogenetic tree
was derived from concatenated sequences of highly conserved “housekeeping” proteins. The
isms with disparate mutation rates.
scale bar corresponds to 5% amino acid sequence divergence. Inset: Aphid embryo contains
A phylogenetic tree can compare bacterial symbionts, with DNA labeled by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). Green =
any set of organisms, even from mul- Buchnera; pink = Regiella; blue = aphid nuclei. Source: Phylogeny modified from Morgan Price et al. 2008.
shows Genome Biol. 9:R4 and from Fabia Battistuzzi et al. 2004. BMC Evol. Biol. 4:44.
tiple habitats. Figure 17.19

Buchnera and several other lineages show a widening
branch. The widening branch indicates a “fan” or “bush”
of strains equally distant from a common node (branch
point). The cause of “bushy” branches is debated; some
researchers argue that all branches become bushy once
enough strains have been sequenced.
How do we calibrate a phylogenetic tree—that is, relate
the number of mutations to the time since divergence? We
need an external measure of time. A tree can be calibrated
if some kind of fossil evidence or geological record exists
to confirm at least one branch point of the tree. But for
microbes, such fossil calibrations remain speculative. One
convincing method of calibration is to correlate the divergence of microbial species growing only inside of particular host species with the divergences of their hosts, based
on the host fossil record. For example, the exceedingly
rapid divergence of Buchnera species (Fig. 17.19) can be
calibrated on the basis of their host insects. Such calculations, however, reveal vastly divergent rates of evolutionary
change in different bacterial taxa.
Could a life-form mutate even faster than Buchnera?
Some RNA viruses, such as HIV, mutate so fast that
they form multiple strains within one host (discussed in
Chapter 11).

■

ORIGINS AND EVOLUTION

■

665

COURTESY OF CARL WOESE

CHAPTER 17

Archaea
Crenarchaeota Thaumarchaeota
Hyperthermophiles
Euryarchaeota

Bacteria
Green nonsulfur
bacteria
Gram-positive
bacteria
Proteobacteria/
mitochondria
Cyanobacteria/
chloroplast
Spirochetes
Thermotogae

Thought Question

17.6 What are the major sources of error and uncertainty in
constructing phylogenetic trees?

Sulfur
thermophiles
Last
common
ancestor

Thermophiles
Halophiles
Methanogens

Root
Entamebas
Slime molds
Animals
Fungi
Plants
Microsporidians
Ciliates
Flagellates
Trichomonads
Diplomonads

Eukarya

Carl Woese first used SSU rRNA phylogeny to reveal the
existence of a third kind of life, Archaea, roughly as distant
from bacteria as from eukaryotes (Fig. 17.20). The three
fundamental groups of life-forms—Archaea, Bacteria, and
Eukarya—are termed domains. How was an entire domain
of life missed in the past? Many archaea grow in habitats
previously thought inhospitable for life; for example, Thermoplasma species grow at 60°C and pH 2 (Fig. 17.21).
Others, such as methanogens and halophiles, were long
known to microbial ecologists, but without tools for
genetic analysis they were simply classified among bacteria.

FIGURE 17.20

■ Three domains of life. Carl Woese (1928–2012)
(inset) used SSU rRNA sequencing to reveal three equally distinct
domains of life: Bacteria, Eukarya (eukaryotes), and Archaea.

Rooting the tree of life. Where is the root of the tree, the

position of the last universal common ancestor of all lifeforms? Which of the three domains (Bacteria, Archaea,
Eukarya) was the fi rst to diverge from the other two? The
question has profound importance for biology because the
research community bases its “model systems” for study
on their commonalities with organisms of importance to
humans. For example, investigators of intron splicing in

2 μm

FIGURE 17.21

M. YASUDA, ET AL. "MORPHOLOGICAL VARIATION..." APPL.
ENVIRON. MICROBIOL. 1995 61: 3482-3485.

Divergence of Three Domains of Life

■ Thermoplasma. This archaeon lives at 60°C at
pH 2—with no cell wall, only a cell membrane.

666

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

archaea argue that archaea represent a model system for
related processes in complex eukaryotes such as humans.
The root, however, can be found only by measuring
divergence relative to an outside group of organisms. Since
no “outgroup” exists for the tree of all life, how is the tree
rooted? One approach is to compare a pair of homologous
genes within one organism—homologs that diverged from
a common ancestral gene and acquired distinct functions
(paralogs). The pair of paralogs chosen for analysis must
have diverged within the common ancestral cell before the
divergence of the three domains of life. The early divergence is determined by comparing the pair’s sequence similarity in many different organisms and constructing a tree
of gene phylogeny. A limitation of this approach is that
genes with different functions have been subjected to natural selection in addition to random variation.
Most phylogenetic data so far indicate a root between
Bacteria and the common ancestor of Archaea and Eukarya;
that is, Bacteria diverged from Archaea and Eukarya before
Archaea and Eukarya diverged from each other. While the
position of the root remains controversial, the three major
divisions of life based on rRNA phylogeny have been confirmed by sequence data from the numerous genomes
published to date. Furthermore, structural and physiological comparison of the three domains largely confirms
the rRNA tree (Table 17.2). Note first that all living cells
on Earth share profound similarities. All cells consist of
membrane-enclosed compartments that shelter the same
fundamental apparatus of cell production: the DNA-RNAprotein machine. The fundamental components of this
machine appear to have evolved before the three domains
diverged from their last universal common ancestor. From
a molecular standpoint, all cells on Earth appear more similar than they are different.
Nonetheless, important differences emerge between
each pair of domains; indeed, each domain shows distinctive traits absent or scarce in the other two. We summarize
here the major features common to most members of each
domain. Various classes and species within each domain are
explored in Chapters 18–20.
Archaea, bacteria, and eukaryotes. Of the three domains,

the eukaryotes stand out as having a nucleus and other
complex membranous organelles (see Table 17.2). Eukaryotic organelles include mitochondria and chloroplasts,
which evolved from internalized bacteria. Bacteria and
archaea possess no nucleus and have relatively simple intracellular membranes. Their size is limited by diffusion across
the cell membrane, with occasional exceptions, such as the
“giant bacterium” Epulopiscium fishelsoni. The larger size
and complexity of eukaryotic cells mean that they generally
require the most highly powered sources of energy, such as
aerobic respiration and oxygenic photosynthesis, although

some protists conduct fermentation. By contrast, the prokaryotes (bacteria and archaea) employ a wider range of
metabolic alternatives, including lithotrophy and anaerobic respiration. Finally, eukaryotic plants and animals have
attained a degree of multicellular complexity unknown in
the prokaryotic domains.
On the other hand, eukaryotes share key traits with
archaea that distinguish both from bacteria. The core
information machinery of eukaryotes more closely resembles that of archaea. The two domains share closely related
components of the central DNA-RNA-protein machine:
RNA polymerase, ribosomes, and transcription factors.
Even such hallmarks of eukaryotes as intragenic introns,
the splicing machinery, and the “RNA interference” regulatory complexes are found in archaea. All this explains
why rRNA trees place archaea closer to eukaryotes than to
bacteria.
Nevertheless, eukaryotes share fundamental structures
with bacteria that differ from those in archaea. Archaea
possess unique cell membrane components, such as their
ether-linked lipids (see Chapter 19). Outside the archaea,
ether-linked membrane lipids are found only in deepbranching bacterial species that share habitat (and exchange
genes) with hyperthermophilic archaea. Only the domain
Archaea includes species capable of growth in the most
“extreme” environments of temperature (above 110°C or
below –20°C) and pH (below pH 1). At the same time,
many other archaeal species grow well at mesophilic temperatures in soil or water. Perhaps the most striking distinction of archaea is the complete absence of archaeal
pathogens of animals or plants. Even the many methanogens that live within animal digestive tracts have never
been shown to cause disease.
Overall, the three-domain phylogeny divides life usefully
into three distinctive groups. Yet the tree also shows signs
of gene flow unaccounted for by monophyletic descent. The
eukaryotes contain mitochondria derived from assimilated
bacteria whose genomes persist within the organelle. And
pathogenic bacteria such as Agrobacterium species transfer DNA into the genomes of plants. Moreover, sequenced
genomes reveal evidence of gene transfer between bacteria
and archaea sharing high-temperature habitats. What if the
tree of life is not strictly monophyletic?

Horizontal Gene Transfer

In retrospect, the very first demonstration of the molecular basis of heredity—the transformation of avirulent Pneumococcus to virulence in 1928—involved horizontal gene
transfer (or lateral gene transfer). Horizontal gene transfer is the acquisition of a piece of DNA from another cell,
as distinguished from vertical gene transfer, the transmission of an entire genome from parent to offspring.

CHAPTER 17

■

ORIGINS AND EVOLUTION

■

TABLE 17.2,Three Domains of Life
Characteristic

Traits of living organisms
All cells on Earth resemble each other in these traits:

Chromosomal material

Double-stranded DNA

RNA transcription

Common ancestral RNA polymerase

Translation

Universal genetic code; common ancestral rRNAs and elongation
factors

Protein

Common ancestral functional domains

Cell structure

Aqueous cell compartment enclosed by a membrane
COMPARISON OF DOMAINS

Bacteria

Archaea

Eukarya

Archaea resemble bacteria in these traits:
Cell volume

1–100 µm3 (usually)

1–106 µm3

DNA chromosome

Circular (usually)

Linear

DNA organization

Nucleoid

Nucleus with membrane

Gene organization

Multigene operons

Single genes

Metabolism

Denitrification, N2 fixation, lithotrophy, respiration, and
fermentation

Respiration and fermentation

Multicellularity

Simple

Simple or complex
Archaea resemble eukaryotes in these traits:

Intron splicing

Introns are rare

Introns are common

RNA polymerase

Bacterial homologs

Eukaryotic homologs

Transcription factors

Bacterial homologs

Eukaryotic homologs

Ribosome sensitivity to
chloramphenicol, kanamycin,
and streptomycin

Sensitive

Resistant

Translation initiator

Formylmethionine

Methionine (except mitochondria use formylmethionine)

Bacteria resemble eukaryotes and differ from archaea in these traits:
Methanogenesis

No

Yes

No

Thermophilic growth

Up to 90°C

Up to 120°C

Up to 80°C

Photosynthesis

Many species;
bacteriochlorophyll
(proteorhodopsin)

Haloarchaea only;
bacteriorhodopsin (shares
homology with proteorhodopsin)

Many species; chlorophyll
(bacterial origin)

Light absorption

Red and blue (chlorophyll
absorption)

Green (central range of solar
spectrum; no chlorophyll)

Red and blue (chloroplasts of
bacterial origin)

Membrane lipids (major)

Ester-linked fatty acids

Ether-linked isoprenoids

Ester-linked fatty acids

Pathogens infecting
animals or plants

Many pathogens

No pathogens

Many pathogens

667

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY
A. Monophyletic tree: limited horizontal transfer

Crenarchaeota

Euryarchaeota

Plantae

Archaea

ts

Fungi

Eukarya
Animalia

Bacteria

ro
C hlo

pl a

s

nd
cho
o
t
i
M

ri a

Last common ancestor
B. Horizontal transfer obscures phylogeny

Crenarchaeota

ts

Euryarchaeota

Archaea
Plantae

Eukarya
Fungi

Bacteria

Animalia

Among bacteria and archaea, DNA is transferred horizontally by plasmids, transposable elements, and bacteriophages, as well as through the process of transformation,
as discussed in Chapter 9. For example, drug resistance
genes are transferred from harmless human-associated bacteria to pathogens. Another example is the transfer of genes
encoding light-driven proton pumps (bacteriorhodopsin)
from halophilic archaea into marine bacteria. Such transfer
events are relatively rare, occurring perhaps once in a million generations. But over time, the number of such “rare”
events can accumulate.
How can we tell when a genome contains DNA sequence
“transferred” from a distant relative? One sign of horizontal transfer is a DNA sequence whose GC/AT ratio (proportion of GC and AT base pairs) differs from the rest of
the genome. A surprising proportion of genomic DNA can
show “spikes” of GC content that differ from the GC/AT
ratio of neighboring sequences. These regions of anomalous GC/AT ratio indicate origin elsewhere, even from
species of a different domain. In some archaea, particularly the hyperthermophiles Pyrococcus and Aeropyrum,
10%–20% of the genes appear to come from bacteria that
share their high-temperature environment. On the other
hand, the thermophilic bacterium Thermotoga maritima
shows a number of genes transferred from archaea.
Between more closely related taxa, genes migrate even
faster. For example, the Escherichia coli genome acquired
about 18% of its genes from closely related species after its
relatively recent divergence from the close relative Salmonella enterica. Some medically important genera, such as
Neisseria (which causes gonorrhea and meningitis), are particularly “recombinogenic.” Rapid gene exchange enables
pathogens to avoid the host immune system by expressing novel proteins not recognized by host antibodies. Furthermore, the genomes of eukaryotes include many genes
acquired from bacteria, most of them from the endosymbiotic ancestors of their mitochondria and chloroplasts (discussed in Section 17.6).
How does horizontal gene transfer affect microbial phylogeny? In 1999, Ford Doolittle, at Dalhousie University,
redrew the standard tree of life with a bewildering array of
cross-cutting lineages to show how actual phylogeny combines horizontal and vertical transfer (Fig. 17.22). Perhaps
the “last common ancestor” was actually a last common
community of diverse life-forms that contributed different
parts of our genetic legacy.

Cyanobacteria

■

Cyanobacteria

PART 4

Proteobacteria

■

Proteobacteria

668

r
C hlo

op

la s

nd
cho
M it o

ri a

Last common community

FIGURE 17.22

■

Vertical and horizontal gene transfer.

A. The traditional view of phylogeny: Most gene transfer is vertical,
and horizontal transfer is limited to rare cases such as transfer of
mitochondria and chloroplasts from bacteria into eukaryotes.
B. An alternative view: Horizontal gene transfer occurs so often that
it obscures monophyletic distinctions between taxa. Source: Modified
from W. Ford Doolittle. 1999. Science 284:2124.

Thought Question

17.7 What are the limits of evidence for horizontal gene

transfer in ancestral genomes? What alternative interpretation might be offered?

Reconciling Vertical and
Horizontal Gene Transfer

One approach to sorting out vertical and horizontal gene
transfer was proposed by James Lake and colleagues at
UCLA and developed further by Doolittle. Lake’s approach

CHAPTER 17

Escherichia
coli

■

Phylogeny is the divergence of related organisms.
Organisms diverge through random mutation, natural
selection, and reductive evolution.
Molecular clocks are based on mutation rate. Given a
constant mutation rate and generation time, the degree

Recent
loss of
gene

■

669

Salmonella
enterica
Lost

Gained
Lost

Gained

Gained
Gained

Lost
Recent
gain of
gene

Gained

Gained

Lost

Lost from
S. enterica

Lost from
E. coli
Gained by
S. enterica

Gained by
E. coli

Ancestor

FIGURE 17.23 ■ Genes enter and leave genomes. Both rRNA
trees and whole-genome trees consistently reflect monophyletic
descent (black lineages) down to the genus level. Below the genus
level, monophyletic descent may be obscured by high rates of horizontal transfer (colored lines entering, gray lines departing). White
spaces indicate genes lost by reductive evolution.

of difference between two DNA sequences correlates
with the time since the two sequences diverged from a
common ancestor.
■

■

■

To Summarize
■

ORIGINS AND EVOLUTION

Gene flow model for two diverging species

Generations over time

assumes that some classes of genes nearly always transmit vertically—particularly “informational genes,” which
specify products essential for transcription and translation. Informational genes include RNA polymerase, as
well as ribosomal RNAs such as SSU rRNA, and elongation factors. Informational genes need to interact directly
in complex ways with large numbers of cellular components; thus, their capacity for horizontal transfer is limited.
On the other hand, “operational genes” are those whose
products govern metabolism, stress response, and pathogenicity. Operational genes function with relative independence from other cell components and consequently move
more easily among distantly related organisms, particularly
organisms that share the same habitat. An important category of such movable genes is virulence factors. Pathogens
show extensive horizontal transfer of virulence genes and
genes encoding resistance to host defenses and antibiotics.
Groups of such genes are often transferred together on
plasmids or on genomic islands, regions of DNA of foreign origin that confer special properties, such as virulence
or nitrogen fixation (discussed in Section 9.6). Examples of
a virulence plasmid and a genomic island are found in the
deadly pathogen E. coli O157:H7 (eTopic 17.3). But in some
cases, the group of genes transferred is so large that it makes
up a substantial chunk of an organism’s genome. For example, the Aquificales group of thermophilic bacteria includes a
large section derived from Proteobacteria similar to E. coli—
so large that the Aquificales phylogeny remains unclear.
A balanced view of vertical and horizontal gene transfer is shown in Figure 17.23. The row of arrows designates vertical transfer of the bulk of the genomes of the two
diverging species. Black lines represent vertically transferred
genes, such as ribosomal RNA; gray lines indicate genes
with more flexible function. At various levels, colored lines
indicate horizontal transfer, where genes enter each lineage
by processes such as conjugation or transformation. Gray
lines peel out, indicating loss of a gene by mutation. Overall, the vertical lineage persists for most of the core informational genes (black lines), while horizontally acquired genes
enter the genome. The persistence of genes showing vertical
inheritance in nearly all life (such as SSU rRNA) may reflect
the phylogeny of the organism as a whole, despite the other
genes that are transferred horizontally. But to fully assess
phylogeny, we must sequence entire genomes.

■

■

Different sequences diverge at different rates.
Under selection pressure, the actual divergence rates
of sequences depend on structure and function of the
RNA or protein products.
Phylogenetic trees are based on sequence analysis.
The more different the two sequences are, the longer is
the branch representing time since divergence from the
common ancestor. Rooting a tree requires comparison
with an outgroup.
The tree of life diverges to three domains: Bacteria,
Archaea, and Eukarya. Eukaryotes are distinguished
by the nucleus, which is lacking in archaea and bacteria. Archaea possess ether-linked isoprenoid lipids that
are rare or absent in bacteria and eukaryotes, and they
are never pathogens. The machinery of archaeal gene
expression resembles that of eukaryotes.
Genes transfer between different species. Horizontal
transfer is most frequent between closely related species
or between distantly related species that share a common habitat. Informational genes with many molecular interactions transfer vertically, whereas operational

670

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

genes that function independently of other components
are more likely to transfer horizontally.
■

Horizontal gene transfer is important for adaptation to new environments and for pathogenesis. Gene
transfer among pathogenic and nonpathogenic strains
leads to emergence of new pathogens.

17.4

Adaptive Evolution

In discussing phylogeny, we focused on the accumulation of random mutations that cause genome sequences to
diverge at a steady rate. The rate of nonselected sequence
changes enables us to measure evolutionary time. But how
does evolution help life survive in a new environment?
Adaptive evolution requires natural selection. In natural
selection, the genetic variants that arise by random mutation differ in their chance of survival. Those variants that
survive to leave more offspring undergo “selection”; that is,
their traits are overrepresented in the next generation. Over
many generations, the descendants develop traits very different from those of their ancestors.
How can we study adaptive evolution—especially the
evolution of different species, which takes place over millions of years? We have several kinds of evidence:
■

Genomic analysis. Comparing gene sequences, both
within and between genomes, enables us to track how
organisms adapted in the past.

■

Strongly selective environments. Environments under
intensive selective pressure, such as high-temperature
habitats or exposure to antibiotics, lead to rapid evolution.

■

Experimental evolution. Experimental strategies reveal
evolution in the laboratory, enabling us to test predictive
models.

Genomic Analysis

As discussed in Section 17.3, the sequence of genomes
reveals descent over time based on steady accumulation of
mutations. But other mutations undergo selection that provides a cell with new functions. A common way this happens is by gene duplication.
As cells replicate their DNA over many generations (discussed in Chapter 9), occasionally the DNA polymerase will
make a duplicate copy of a gene. With duplicate copies of a
gene, one copy may acquire mutations that change its function without detriment to the organism because the “backup”
copy still functions. Now, suppose the mutated copy gains
additional mutations that further alter its function, providing
a new function to the cell. For example, a gene encoding a
transporter for one sugar may now encode a transporter that

better “fits” a different sugar. The two paralogous genes,
or paralogs, have evolved to serve different functions. Paralogs are a major source of raw material that contributes to
new functions arising through evolution. We can detect paralogs in a genome, through sequence relatedness; for example,
the genome of the hyperthermophilic bacterium Thermotoga
maritima shows paralogous ABC transporters for lactose,
cellobiose, mannose, and xylose, among others. Evolution of
paralogs provides an important way for organisms to enhance
fitness in a complex environment.
Does a population ever lose some of its paralogs? Certain environments select for loss of many genes—a phenomenon called degenerative, or reductive, evolution.
The selection for loss is “positive” because organisms save
energy by avoiding replication and expression of unneeded
genes. Intracellular pathogens and obligate symbionts
often lose large chunks of their genome, by processes such
as intracellular recombination of the chromosome. The lost
genes typically encoded functions supplied by the host,
such as capture of nutrients and generation of energy. Lost
genes can be identified by comparison with free-living species. For example, Treponema pallidum, the cause of syphilis, has a genome of 1.1 million base pairs, which is about
a quarter the size of the E. coli genome. T. pallidum has
lost all of its enzymes used in the TCA cycle, respiration,
and amino acid biosynthesis. These genes remain in the
genomes of free-living treponemes.
In other species, dilute, nutrient-poor natural environments select for gene reduction. Marine cyanobacteria, a
major source of global photosynthesis, have lost numerous genes that confer little advantage in the open ocean.
Missing genes encode transporters for sugars and amino
acids (which are scarce in the ocean) as well as proteins for
flagellar motility and pili. More surprising, Prochlorococcus species have lost catalase, an enzyme that destroys the
hydrogen peroxide they produce. Their hydrogen peroxide
is detoxified by catalase-positive bacteria that share their
marine habitat. Erik Zinser at the University of Tennessee–
Knoxville showed that Prochlorococcus could be cultured on
agar only in the presence of partner bacteria that supply
catalase. Given that catalase is an expensive enzyme to produce, Prochlorococcus may have gained an advantage when
this enzyme was deleted during its evolution in the nutrient-poor open ocean.

Strongly Selective Environments

Evolution requires many generations, but certain microbes
may produce 40 generations in a day. When such microbes
are under strong selection pressure, such as the presence of an
antibiotic, evolution may occur surprisingly fast. In the case
shown in Figure 17.24, a hospitalized patient was infected
by MRSA, a deadly strain of Staphylococcus aureus that had
already evolved resistance to drugs such as methicillin. The

CHAPTER 17

Vancomycin
Rifampin
Ciprofloxacin
Linezolid

ORIGINS AND EVOLUTION

■

671

The MRSA example illustrates two
key points:

MRSA bacteria isolated from patient

Antibiotics

■

Before antibiotics

After antibiotics

Original MRSA isolate

Small-colony variant

Partly resistant
Sensitive
Sensitive
Sensitive

Resistant
Resistant
Resistant
Partly resistant

FIGURE 17.24

■ Evolution of antibiotic resistance in MRSA. Left: The initial MRSA
isolate infecting the patient showed partial resistance to vancomycin but was sensitive to
rifampin, ciprofloxacin, and linezolid. Right: Following exposure to these antibiotics, a new
strain was isolated that grew more slowly (the small-colony variant) but was at least partly
resistant to all the antibiotics. Source: Wei Gao et al. 2010. PLoS Pathog. 6:e1000944.

The “fittest” trait depends on the
environment in which selection
occurs. The presence of an antibiotic
selects individuals that are resistant,
despite slower growth (small-colony
size). Without the antibiotic, the
faster-growing individuals prevail.

■

Rapid adaptive evolution may be
enhanced by disabling regulation.
In this case, the ppGpp stress regulon was derepressed, enabling stress
responses that normally would be
turned off because they inhibit cell
growth.

Experimental Evolution
in the Laboratory

The process of evolution can be studied in the laboratory—an approach known as experimental evolution or
laboratory evolution. A landmark experiment on evolution in the laboratory was performed by Richard Lenski
at Michigan State University (Fig. 17.25 and eTopic 17.4).

PHOTO COURTESY OF BRIAN BAER

PHOTO COURTESY OF BRUCE FOX, MSU

patient was an elderly man with a weakened immune system,
unable to eliminate even small populations of an opportunistic pathogen such as MRSA. The original culture from
the patient’s blood showed bacteria sensitive to four antibiotics. But prolonged exposure resulted in natural selection for
resistance. Ultimately, following a total of 12 weeks’ exposure to linezolid (one of the last antibiotics effective against
MRSA), the bacteria isolated showed resistance to three
other antibiotics plus partial resistance to linezolid.
In Figure 17.24, note that the latest drug-resistant strain
actually made smaller colonies with or without the drug—
the “small-colony variant.” In other words, natural selection
yielded a population that was the “fittest” under a particular environmental condition—the presence of linezolid in
an immunocompromised host—where even a slow-growing
strain could persist. In the absence of the drug, the original
strain would outcompete the small-colony variant.
In the case just described, what was the molecular basis
of the multidrug resistance? Researchers obtained DNA
from the patient’s original MRSA, as well as the later
small-colony variant. They sequenced the two genomes
and compared them. Just three point mutations in the
small-colony variant accounted for the drug resistance, as
well as the retarded growth. One of these mutations derepressed a stress regulon (group of genes under one regulator), causing accumulation of the stress signal ppGpp
(guanosine tetraphosphate). The ppGpp stress regulon
includes expression of many protective genes that enable a
cell to survive in the presence of antibiotics. But the cost
to the cell of expressing this regulon is a slower growth
rate; like a community under “terror alert,” the cell’s normal everyday processes are slowed by the demands of the
stress response.

■

FIGURE 17.25

■ Rich Lenski and Zack Blount conduct the
Long-Term Evolution Experiment (LTEE). At Michigan State,

Lenski (inset) opens a box of evolved clones stored in the –80°C
freezer. Blount meditates before a tower of petri plates that represent
20 years of competition assays for relative fitness of evolved clones.

672

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

(Fig. 17.26). In this one population, many of the bacteria had
1:100
1:100
1:100
1:100
1:100
1:100
evolved a new phenotype: They
were able to grow aerobically on
citrate—a trait found in other species but rare in E. coli. The bacteria
are called citrate plus, or Cit+.
Since citrate has been available
in
the medium from the begin0.30
ning, why did the Cit+ mutation
0.25
take so long to evolve? By testing
0.20
E. coli from earlier generations that
he had stored in a freezer, Blount
0.15
was able to show that over the first
0.10
31,000 generations, no bacteria
0.05
could metabolize citrate, but then a
0.00
rare mutation occurred that enabled
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
citrate uptake and catabolism. Over
Generations
a few generations, the Cit+ cells had
increased their proportion of the
FIGURE 17.26 ■ Evolution of an aerobic, citrate-utilizing strain of E. coli. The bacteria
were diluted daily in a glucose-limited growth medium. The medium also contained citrate to alpopulation, until they became the
low the bacteria to take up iron. After 33,000 generations (estimated cell doublings), the bactepredominant strain.
rial population suddenly grew to a much greater density because of the rise to high frequency of
But was the overall phenoa strain that had evolved the ability to catabolize the citrate at about 31,000 generations. Source:
type
really so sudden? Could any
Adapted from Zachary Blount et al. 2008. PNAS 105:7899.
E. coli cell mutate to catabolize
citrate? Lenski proposed that the
earlier generations had acquired some kind of “potentiatIn 1988, Lenski began the Long-Term Evolution Experiing” mutations that somehow enabled E. coli to gain the
ment (LTEE) by founding 12 populations of E. coli from
Cit+ mutation. He called this the “historical contingency”
a single clone. The 12 populations were cultured in a
hypothesis—that evolution of a new trait may require
medium in which growth was limited by a small amount
some other unknown trait to appear first. In support of
of glucose (Fig. 17.26). Every 24 hours, 1% of each popthe hypothesis, Lenski noted that the Cit+ strains were
ulation was transferred to fresh medium and then grew
extremely rare, arising in only one of the 12 populations.
for about 6.6 generations per day. Every 500 generations,
Therefore, mathematically it was likely that Cit+ required
samples of each population were frozen for later study. The
the presence of some other rare mutation.
populations have now evolved for more than 60,000 genTo test the hypothesis, Blount delved into the fossil
erations, and students continue the daily dilutions, led by
record of the evolving populations and isolated clones from
postdoctoral fellow Zachary Blount.
various time points. He and Lenski then tested the ability of
The bacteria in Lenski’s frozen populations remain
these clones, as well as of the ancestral strain, to mutate to
alive and can be revived at any time for analysis and use
Cit+. They found that only clones isolated from time points
in experiments. Experiments include the sequencing of
after 20,000 generations reevolved the new Cit+ phenogenomic DNA of clones isolated from these frozen time
type; the original strain did not. This result supported the
points. With laboratory evolution experiments, we can
hypothesis that some other mutation was needed first. To
test predictions of how new traits appear and use genome
gain additional information about the early and late mutasequences to examine the mutations that led to the new
tions, Blount sequenced the genomes of 29 clones isolated
traits. Evolution experiments can also include many replifrom the population’s frozen fossil record at numerous
cate populations, making it possible to examine the repeattime points through 40,000 generations (Fig. 17.27). The
ability of evolution.
strains were measured for citrate utilization, and for ability
During the LTEE, Blount and Lenski have seen many
to evolve Cit+. The data fit the following model of stages of
changes, such as the evolution of bacteria that can grow
evolving a new trait: (1) potentiation to achieve useful mutafaster than the ancestor and form larger cells. After gentions; (2) actualization of a novel mutant phenotype; and
eration 33,000, Blount found the most striking change:
(3) refinement, or increasing the degree of the phenotype.
One of the 12 populations suddenly became much denser
Optical density

Serial passage: Daily dilution 1:100 (6.6 generations per day)

CHAPTER 17
A. Evolution of Cit+ (citrate catabolism)

■

673

tions, early mutations occurred in some cells that did not
confer citrate catabolism but somehow “potentiated” the
ability of cells to gain a Cit+ mutation later.
These mutations led to the appearance of
Cit+ cells (Fig. 17.27A) and to the appear3. Refinement.
+
Strong Cit evolves.
ance of similar mutations in “replayed”
evolution from late-generation strains.
One potentiating mutation was shown to
be gltA, a gene encoding citrate synthase,
2. Actualization.
which synthesizes citrate in the TCA cycle.
Weak Cit+ evolves.
This mutation allowed growth on acetate,
which is excreted during growth on glu1. Potentiation.
cose (discussed in Chapter 13).
Early gltA mutation

New clade of Cit+
clones catabolizes
citrate.

35,000

30,000

Generations

ORIGINS AND EVOLUTION

Potentiating mutations. During the fi rst 31,000 genera-

40,000

25,000

20,000

allows later Cit+ to grow.

Actualization of the novel phenotype.

15,000

10,000

5,000

0
B. Tandem duplication fuses rnk promoter upstream of citT
Segment duplicated in Cit +
0
citG

citT

0
rna

rnk
rnk promoter

0
citG

■

citT

0
rna

rnk promoter drives
citT expression.

FIGURE 17.27

■

Citrate/succinate
antiporter
0
citT

0
rna

rnk

Citrate/succinate
antiporter

Evolution of citrate utilization in E. coli.

A. One or more of the mutations accumulated over 30,000
generations potentiated evolution of the Cit+ trait. The Cit+ trait
first appeared in about generation 31,000. Subsequent mutations
refined the phenotype, increasing the rate of citrate utilization.
Ball symbols indicate genomes from the population’s history that
were sequenced for analysis. B. The Cit+ mutation. After 31,000
generations, a tandem duplication event placed a copy of the
rnk promoter, which directs expression when oxygen is present,
upstream of the citT gene encoding a citrate/succinate antiporter
that is normally repressed by oxygen. This new rnk-citT module
now expresses CitT, which takes up citrate, allowing bacteria to
respire on citrate from the medium. Source: Adapted from Zachary Blount
et al. 2012. Nature 489:513.

The Cit+ mutation arose initially as a
weak ability to transport citrate in the presence of oxygen, and therefore to respire on citrate. The genetic basis
of this mutation was found to be a tandem duplication
of a gene encoding a citrate/succinate antiporter, citT
(Fig. 17.27B). Because the antiporter excretes succinate,
the Cit+ phenotype causes a metabolic imbalance—but
this imbalance gets corrected by the potentiating mutation
for acetate utilization, gltA. The duplicated citT (upstream
of the first copy) happens to include a promoter for an
adjacent gene, rnk, which encodes a regulator of nucleic acid
metabolism, expressed in the presence of oxygen. Thus, the
duplication places citT expression under control of the copied rnk promoter. The rnk promoter now expresses citT in
the presence of oxygen, enabling the cell to respire on citrate.
The history of the initial Cit+ clone thus required two
rare events: the potentiating mutation, gltA; and the tandem duplication of citT-rnk, which placed citT expression
under control of a promoter active in the presence of oxygen.
Refinement of the phenotype. The earliest Cit+ clones

were very poor at growing on the citrate. But later clones
evolved as a result of mutations that increased the rate of
citrate utilization—that is, by evolutionary refi nement of
the Cit+ trait. The researchers showed that this improvement was due to an increase in the copy number of the
duplicated segment that produces the rnk-citT module,
which increased the number of expressed copies of citT.
This improved growth on citrate eventually led the Cit+
clones to dominate the population. Interestingly, though,
even the “refi ned” Cit+ cells never fully took over the cultures. Some cells always remained that had adapted to
limiting glucose by other means. We saw the example of
Caroline Turner’s mutant (Current Research Highlight),
which evolved to metabolize the succinate and other fourcarbon acids excreted by Cit+ clones.

674

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

Thought Question

17.8 The evolution of clones requiring nutrients from other

clones may be more common than expected. How might the
mechanisms of evolution favor the emergence of dependent clones?

The results of Lenski’s Long-Term Evolution Experiment raise this question: If E. coli is evolving new traits,
is it in the process of evolving a new species? We address
the species concept next (Section 17.5). Meanwhile,
beyond the philosophical debates, industrial laboratories now use advanced forms of experimental evolution.
Evolution can improve commercial enzymes—and even
develop new products. For example, Bernhard Palsson
and colleagues at UC San Diego used laboratory evolution to evolve a strain of Streptomyces to produce high
concentrations of a novel antibiotic against MRSA. Others take evolution to an extreme: Could we generate in
vitro all the possible mutants of an organism, and set
them against each other all at once? Such an approach is
called directed evolution. An example of directed evolution is the development of hyperthermophilic forms of a
xylanase enzyme used for paper production (discussed in
Special Topic 17.1).

To Summarize
■
■

■

■

■

■

Adaptive evolution requires natural selection.
Genomic analysis tracks how organisms adapted in
the past. Gene duplications provide the opportunity to
evolve paralogous genes with different functions.
Degenerative (reductive) evolution happens when
unneeded genes are lost from the genome. The organism saves energy by avoiding their replication and
expression.
Strongly selective environments, such as antibiotic
exposure, reveal rapid evolution.
Selective pressure depends on the particular environment. A trait favored in one environment may be disadvantageous in another.
Experimental evolution in the laboratory enables us to
test hypotheses about natural selection. Richard Lenski’s
Long-Term Evolution Experiment shows potentiation to
achieve useful mutations; actualization of a novel mutant
phenotype; and refinement, or increasing the degree of
the phenotype. Laboratory evolution is used widely in
industrial development.

17.5

Microbial Species
and Taxonomy

What is a species? Among eukaryotes, a species is defined
by the principle that members of different species do not
normally interbreed. Thus, the failure to interbreed is the
traditional property that distinguishes species. Bacteria
and archaea, however, transfer genes horizontally between
distantly related clades. So the definition of bacterial species is complex, subject to heated debate among microbiologists. Also much debated is the classifying of life-forms
into different kinds (classification) and the naming of
species (taxonomy).

Note:

Distinguish these terms:

Classification is the sorting of life-forms into bins (categories)
based on genetic relatedness and traits of the organisms.
Nomenclature is the naming of categories, including species.
Taxonomy is the classification and naming of organisms.

Defining a Species

As genome sequence data became available for microbes,
scientists hoped that quantitative measures of divergence
could provide a consistent basis for defining microbial species. But for some organisms, such as Helicobacter pylori,
the genomes of different strains that cause the same disease (gastritis) differ by as much as 7%. On the other
hand, strains of Bacillus with nearly identical genomes
cause completely different diseases, such as anthrax
(B. anthracis) and caterpillar infection (the biological pesticide B. thuringiensis). Even more puzzling, hyperthermophilic bacteria such as Aquifex aeolicus show a high
proportion of genes from the domain Archaea! Some
researchers argue that the species concept lacks meaning
for microbes.
Amid the debates, microbiologists generally agree on
the importance of two perspectives: phylogeny (based on
DNA relatedness) and ecology (based on shared traits and
ecological niche).
Phylogenetic relatedness. A species is a group of individuals that share relatedness of a key set of “housekeeping
genes,” typically informational genes such as ribosomal and
transcriptional components. Ideally, these genes should all
be orthologs (genes with a common origin and function),
not paralogs (which diverged from a common ancestor but
now differ in function). Within a genus, species that cannot
be distinguished by SSU rRNA alone may be defi ned by
analysis of multiple genes. For example, analysis of multiple gene loci effectively distinguishes Neisseria meningitidis

CHAPTER 17

(the cause of meningitis) from Neisseria lactamica, a harmless resident of the nasopharynx. The multigene approach
has proved successful even in the case of highly “recombinogenic” organisms known to acquire and rearrange
genes readily.

genomic relatedness, a species should include individuals
that share common traits and an ecological niche, or “ecotype.” Shared traits should include cell shape and nutritional requirements, and there should be a common habitat
and life history (for example, causing the same disease). By
these criteria, highly divergent strains of Helicobacter pylori
causing gastritis make up one species, whereas Bacillus
anthracis (anthrax) and Bacillus thuringiensis (caterpillar
infection) are different species despite their highly similar
genomes.
A working definition of species. While the debate goes

on, many microbiologists accept the following criteria for a
working defi nition of a microbial species:
■

SSU rRNA identity ≥95%. Two organisms with 95% or
greater similarity in SSU rRNA sequence generally are
considered to share the same genus. Beyond the genus
level, rRNA sequence lacks resolution.

■

Whole-genome similarity: average nucleotide identity (ANI) of orthologs ≥95%. Within whole genomes,
we can define all the orthologous genes (orthologs,
genes of the same function) that two strains share. If
the strains share 95% or greater ANI for their orthologs,
they may be considered the same species.

■

Shared ecotype. If two organisms with 95% or greater
identity share a common habitat and metabolism, or
cause the same disease, they are considered the same
species.

This working definition classifies most known bacteria in a way that reconciles phylogeny with ecotype. For
example, Helicobacter pylori genomes with a common gastric pathology show exceptional variation due to horizontal
gene transfer, even including their SSU rRNA genes. Nevertheless, a set of orthologs can be defined that share 95%
ANI.
At the same time, new questions arise from the availability of multiple sequenced genomes for a single species.
Suppose that every time we sequence a new isolate from
nature, or from a clinical specimen, we find that every new
genome sequenced has a few new genes absent from previously sequenced isolates. How, then, do we define the
gene map? This situation would be unheard of for animals
and plants, in which the gene map is fixed by Mendelian
recombination. It is common, however, for bacteria such

ORIGINS AND EVOLUTION

■

675

11,000
10,000
9,000
Number of genes

Ecological niche (ecotype). Besides a high degree of

■

8,000
7,000
6,000

Medians
Power-law fit

5,000
0

2

4
6
8
10 12 14
Number of genomes sequenced

16

18

FIGURE 17.28

■ Pan-genome of Bacillus cereus. The median
number of genes found is shown as a function of the number of B.
cereus genomes sequenced. Error bars indicate the range of gene
number found upon sequencing different combinations of genomes.

Source: Modified from Hervé Tettelin et al. 2008. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 12:472.

as Bacillus cereus, a Gram-positive soil bacterium and food
pathogen (Fig. 17.28). For each new genome sequenced,
several hundred new genes are identified that are absent
from all the other genomes so far. In a pathogen, some of
these new genes could be involved in pathogenesis, with
profound implications for medical therapy and vaccine
development.
Should we now attempt to define bacterial and archaeal
genomes not just by a single sequenced genome, but by
the sum total of all expected genes in all possible isolates?
This theoretical total is called the pan-genome. The pangenome includes genes present in all sequenced genomes
of a species (known as its core genome) plus “accessory
genes” present in one or more sequenced isolates. But how
do we estimate the size of a pan-genome for a given species? A statistical model can predict the chance of finding
new genes every time we sequence another genome. A few
species, such as the anthrax agent Bacillus anthracis, have
a “closed” pan-genome that appears to be defined by a relatively small number of natural isolates. But for Bacillus
cereus (Fig. 17.28), after the first ten genomes, each new
genome still reveals another 250 genes. Amazingly, the B.
cereus pan-genome appears to be infinite in size! This is
called an “open” pan-genome. Other species with open
pan-genomes include the pneumonia pathogen Streptococcus pneumoniae, the marine cyanobacterium Prochlorococcus
marinus, and the halophilic archaeon Haloquadratum walsbyi. Open pan-genomes may well predominate in nature;

676

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

SPECIAL TOPIC 17.1, , Jump-Starting Evolution of a Hyperthermophilic Enzyme
What commercial product is used to make chicken feed more
digestible, to improve the texture of cotton fabric, to bake better bread, and to make paper using less bleach? The answer is
xylanase, an enzyme that cleaves plant polysaccharides containing a variety of sugar monomers, such as the five-carbon
sugar xylose. Xylanases are made by many different types
of bacteria and fungi, and different xylanases have evolved
naturally to function best under different conditions. But for
commercial use, we need to fine-tune evolution to optimize
the enzyme for particular uses: a xylanase for animal feed,
another xylanase for baking, and yet another for treatment of
paper pulp. The paper pulp application imposes particularly
demanding conditions of high pH and high temperature, and
requires an enzyme that is stable above 100°C.
To design types of xylanases and other enzymes for industrial conditions, scientists at Verenium Corporation (now
BASF) in San Diego developed a technology of directed evolution. As introduced in Chapter 12, directed evolution “jumpstarts” the evolution process by generating a large number of
possible mutations—in some cases, the entire collection of

single mutations possible in a given gene. Large-scale screening then “selects” for the mutant strains that have optimal
activity. While directed evolution may involve more than one
round of mutation and screening, it avoids the need for hundreds or thousands of rounds of growth and selection.
To generate a hyperthermophilic xylanase, Verenium scientists first undertook “discovery,” a process of collecting and
testing genes encoding xylanase from many naturally occurring bacteria and fungi from all over the world. The most
promising xylanase producers were collected from an alkaline hot spring of the Russian Kamchatka Peninsula, including
bacteria such as Bacillus species and fungi such as Trichoderma. The scientists identified 200 different xylanases
having promising levels of activity and stability. Both bacterial and fungal xylanases showed homology—members of a
group called “family 11,” which shares a common ancestor and
related peptide structure.
From the hot-spring collection, several genes were
selected that encoded the best thermophilic xylanases active
at high pH. The top genes were used for “gene assembly,” in
which parental genes are recombined to form a highly diverse
set of daughter genes (Fig. 1). In effect,
the gene assembly process jump-starts
evolution by forming in one generation
A. Gene reassembly
B. Gene site saturation mutagenesis
a collection of recombinations that in
Enzyme genes from best sources:
Best blend from gene reassembly:
nature would require many generations
to occur by chance.
Make all possible amino
acid substitutions
In gene assembly, the parental genes
were cleaved by restriction endonucleases into several fragments (using methCleave into
ods described in Chapters 7 and 12). The
fragments
gene fragments were then shuffled like
a deck of cards by recombination in the
test tube, generating a library of many
different daughter genes (Fig. 1A). For
Blend fragments
example, six parental genes cleaved into
and assemble
five fragments could recombine (assumExpress enzymes:
screen for best
ing one fragment of each type) into 56 =
activity
15,625 different recombinants. The library
was then screened in E. coli for activity of all the expressed enzymes, using a
robotic screening system. Verenium sciExpress enzymes;
entists selected the gene encoding the
screen for best
xylanase that was most active at the highCombine selected
activity
mutations
est temperatures, up to 76°C.
The product of gene assembly was
then subjected to a secondary method of
FIGURE 1 ■ Directed evolution by gene reassembly and in vitro mutagenedirected evolution, called gene site satusis. A. Candidate genes are cleaved, and then the fragments are blended and assemration mutagenesis (GSSM). GSSM was
bled (gene reassembly). B. The best product of gene reassembly is subjected to gene
performed in collaboration with another
site saturation mutagenesis (GSSM), in which all possible amino acid substitutions are
lab—that of Claire Dumon and Harry
made. The mutants are screened and subjected to a combinatorial process that generGilbert at Newcastle University, England.
ates all possible mutant combinations.

CHAPTER 17

The GSSM method also imitates nature, but it yields in one
“generation” a pool of all possible single-codon mutations
that, in nature, might occur, but only over many generations.
For GSSM, the evolved thermophilic xylanase gene was copied
by PCR using primers with 64-fold degeneracy—that is, short
DNA sequences that replace each codon in the gene sequence
with all 64 possible codons (Fig. 1B). For example, in a gene of
300 codons, making all the codon substitutions with 20 different amino acids at each position results in 300 × 20 = 6,000
different single-substitution mutations. The mutant genes
were cloned in an expression vector and transformed into
bacteria. To ensure that greater than 95% of the library was
sampled, 70,000 different colonies were screened for xylanase activity and thermostability. Clones were selected that
increased enzyme stability at 76°C from 10% to 50%.
The thermostable mutant genes were then assembled
and combined by a multisite combinatorial assembly process
that generates all possible combinations of the single-codon
substitutions. Figure 2 shows a distribution of the number
of combined mutations in combinatorial library isolates with
enzyme activity at temperatures as high as 86°C. The combinatorial process ultimately yielded an enzyme (Fig. 3) that is
active at even higher temperatures, up to 101°C. A compelling
result is that none of the mutations found would have been
predicted from crystal structure to increase thermostability;
they arose only from the screen of all possible mutants and, in
combination, yield dramatic enhancement.

■

677

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

FIGURE 3 ■ Hyperthermophilic xylanase. The crystallographic model shows the position of mutations conferring
enhanced thermostability. Amino acid color represents the
proportion of the GSSM combinatorial library strains that include
a substitution at that position. The amino acid substitutions
that were combined in the best hyperthermophilic xylanase are
shown as space-filled atoms. Source: Modified from Claire Dumon et al.
2008. J. Biol. Chem. 283:22557–22564, fig. 5.

RESEARCH QUESTION

Distribution of
hyperthermophiles

0.3
Frequency

ORIGINS AND EVOLUTION

The hyperthermophilic xylanase is now used for paper pulp
manufacture, enabling the pulp to be processed with much
lower levels of bleach, which is toxic to the environment.
Thus, directed evolution in the test tube jump-started the
development of a product to enhance industrial sustainability.

0.4

0.2

Compare Claire Dumon’s approach of DNA shuffling and
gene site saturation mutagenesis with the new approaches
described by Packer and Liu (2015, Nat. Rev. Genet. 16:379–
394). How could directed evolution make an enzyme with an
activity not known to exist in nature?

Distribution of all
mutant strains

0.1

0.0

■

0

1

FIGURE 2

2

■

3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Number of mutations per strain

10

11

12

Distribution of mutants in the combinatorial

library. The frequencies of combination strains are plotted as a
function of number of mutations per strain. Blue bars represent the
frequencies of hyperthermophiles; red bars represent the distribution of all combination strains. Source: Modified from Claire Dumon et al.

2008. J. Biol. Chem. 283:22557–22564, fig. 2.

Dumon, Claire, Alexander Varvak, Mark A. Wall, James
E. Flint, Richard J. Lewis, et al. 2008. Engineering
hyperthermostability into a GH11 xylanase is mediated by
subtle changes to protein structure. Journal of Biological
Chemistry 283:22557–22564.
Packer, Michael S., and David R. Liu. 2015. Methods for
the directed evolution of proteins. Nature Reviews. Genetics
16:379–394.

678

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

thus, most bacterial and archaeal species have access to
their core genome plus an uncountable number of possible
accessory genes.

Classification and Nomenclature

Defining a species is part of the task of taxonomy, the classifying of life-forms into different categories with shared
traits. Taxonomy is critical for every microbiological pursuit, from diagnosing a patient’s illness to understanding
microbial ecosystems.
Classification generates a hierarchy of taxa (groups
of related organisms; singular, taxon) based on successively narrow criteria. The fundamental basis of modern taxonomy is DNA sequence similarity, but the use
of DNA arises within a long historical tradition of phenotypic description that shapes the views and practice of
microbial taxonomy. Historically, taxa have been defined
and named on the basis of a combination of genetic and
phenotypic traits. The nomenclature of microbes remains
surprisingly fluid: As new traits are identified and the
genetic sequence of a microbe is established, species are all
too frequently renamed. Current information on microbial names is available through online databases such as
the List of Prokaryotic Names with Standing in Nomenclature (LPSN).
Traditional classification designates levels of taxonomic
hierarchy, or rank, such as phylum, class, order, and family (Table 17.3). Some levels of rank are designated by certain suffixes—for example, “-ales” (order) and “-aceae”
(family). The ultimate designation of a type of organism
is that of species, which includes the capitalized name of
the genus (group of closely related species) followed by the

uncapitalized species name—for example, the well-known
species Streptomyces coelicolor. S. coelicolor is a member of
the Actinomycetales (informally called actinomycetes), filamentous Gram-positive bacteria that produce many kinds
of antibiotics. Actinomycetes are subdivided into families
and genera, such as the genus Streptomyces.
Microbiologists continually reveal previously unknown
taxa. In 2002 a group of uncultured marine bacteria, the
SAR11 cluster, was found to comprise a quarter of all
marine microbial cells. SAR11 was originally defined by
its SSU rRNA sequence. Surprisingly, the rRNA sequence
phylogeny places these marine oligotrophs in the order
Rickettsiales, most of whose known members are obligate intracellular parasites, such as Rickettsia, the cause of
Rocky Mountain spotted fever—and also the endosymbiont ancestor of our mitochondria. The SAR11 cluster has
since been classified as part of the order Pelagibacterales,
and a few species have been cultured, such as Pelagibacter
ubique (see Table 17.3).

Note:

Taxonomic categories generally have two forms: formal
and informal. The formal term is capitalized, with a latinized suffix:
Actinomycetales, Pseudomonas, Micrococcus. The informal term is
lowercase, in some cases with an anglicized ending; and informal
references to genera are not italicized: actinomycetes, pseudomonads, micrococci.

Emerging Clades: Unclassified
and Uncultured Bacteria

As we discover new microorganisms, how do we decide
what to call them? The term emerging is used to refer
to an organism recently discovered or described, such as

TABLE 17.3,Taxonomic Hierarchy of Classification
Taxon rank

A long-studied taxon

An emerging taxon

Domain

Bacteria

Bacteria

Division (phylum)

Actinobacteria
High-GC Gram-positive

Proteobacteria
Gram-negative purple bacteria and heterotrophs

Class

Actinobacteria

Alphaproteobacteria

Subclass

Actinobacteridae

Rickettsidae
Intracellular bacteria and mitochondria

Order

Actinomycetales
Filamentous; acid-fast stain

Pelagibacterales
Planktonic marine bacteria

Family

Streptomycetaceae
Hyphae produce spores

Pelagibacteraceae

Genus

Streptomyces

Pelagibacter

Species (date first described)

S. coelicolor (1908)

P. ubique (2002)

CHAPTER 17

Pelagibacter (Table 17.3). If the new organism causes a
disease, it is called an “emerging pathogen.” An emerging
organism that cannot be cultured may be known only by its
habitat and its small-subunit rRNA sequence. Such organisms require a culture method and a description of essential
cell structure and metabolism before designation as a new
species. “Incompletely described” emerging organisms are
designated as follows:
■

Unclassified/uncultured organism. An unclassified organism, or uncultured organism, is assigned to a
taxonomic rank based on SSU rRNA sequence but has
not yet been grown in pure culture—for example, an
“uncultured actinomycete.”

■

Environmental sample. An environmental sample is
designated by its habitat and assigned a rank based on
SSU rRNA. Examples of environmentally defined actinomycetes in the NCBI database include “oil-degrading
bacterium AOB1” and “glacier bacterium FJS11.”

■

Candidate species. A cultured organism with some
physiological characterization beyond DNA sequence
may be published with a provisional status of candidate
species, designated by the prefatory term “Candidatus.”
For example, “Candidatus Nostocoida limicola” was
published as “a filamentous bacterium from activated
sludge.”

Nongenetic Categories for
Medicine and Ecology

Genetic relatedness is the standard for classifying and naming organisms in all fields of biology. At the same time, several nongenetic systems of categorization serve a practical
purpose in certain fields. These systems include:
■

Phenotypic categories for identification. Categories
such as pigmentation or cell shape (rod or coccus) may
have minor genetic significance but are useful for practical identification of organisms isolated from field or
clinical sources.

■

Ecological categories. In ecology, the niche filled
by an organism may be more important than its phylogeny. For example, cyanobacteria and sequoia trees
both fill the role of photosynthetic producers of biomass. Both are primary producers—a trophic category
of organisms that feed other organisms in the food
web. Ecological categories are discussed further in
Chapter 21.

■

Disease categories. In medical microbiology, microorganisms are categorized according to the type of disease
they cause or the host organ system they inhabit. For
example, Mycoplasma pneumoniae (a cell wall-less bacte-

■

ORIGINS AND EVOLUTION

■

679

rium) and influenza virus are both pulmonary pathogens,
whereas Escherichia coli and Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron
are both normal members of the gut microbiome. Disease
categories are discussed further in Chapters 25 and 26.

Naming a Species

A commonly accepted set of names for species and higher
taxa is essential for research and communication. The
accepted rules for naming species and taxa have been determined by the International Committee on Systematics of
Prokaryotes (ICSP). The ICSP establishes minimal criteria for designating species, genera, classes, and other taxa
of bacteria and archaea. To establish a new species, a previously unknown form of microbe must be isolated and
grown in pure culture; this cultured organism is known
as an isolate. The isolate’s unique genetic and phenotypic
traits are published, with a proposed species name designated “Candidatus” for candidate species. An example of
a candidate species is “Candidatus Nitrosopumilus maritimus,” a marine archaeon that oxidizes ammonia, first isolated in 2005. The candidate species becomes accepted as
an official species upon publication in the International
Journal of Systematic and Evolutionary Microbiology, the
official journal of record for novel prokaryotic taxa.
Historically, the taxonomic categories and species
descriptions are compiled in Bergey’s Manual of Determinative Bacteriology, a multivolume reference work of prokaryotic taxonomy. Up-to-date taxonomy of bacteria and
archaea, as well as eukaryotes, is maintained in the “Taxonomy” browser of the interactive National Center for
Biotechnology Information (NCBI) online database, supported by the U.S. government.
In recent years, the standard practice for accepting and
naming species has been overwhelmed by the number of
new isolates, as well as uncultured microbes, reported in
the literature. Many uncultured microbes are known only
by their SSU rRNA sequences. Increasingly, however,
uncultured organisms have large portions of their genomes
sequenced and assembled using metagenomics (presented
in Chapters 7 and 21). Metagenomics is the sequencing of
multiple genomes in an environmental community. The
community can be sampled from any kind of habitat, such
as the human digestive tract or the Sargasso Sea.

Identification

Once a species has been described and classified, we need a
way to identify future members of the species isolated from
natural environments. Identification requires the recognition of the class of a given microbe isolated in pure culture. Identification poses special difficulties with microbes,

680

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY
A. Dichotomous key for wastewater bacteria
Gram-negative

1.0–3.0 µm
cell width

<1.0 µm
cell width

Filament coiled

Filament straight to
smoothly curved

Nostocoida limicola II
Sheath

No sheath

False
branching

No
branching

Sphaerotilus
natans

Thiothrix II

Motile

Rectangular
cells

Square cells
1.0–1.2 µm

Transparent
cells

0914

Barrel,
rectangular,
ovoid, discoid
cells

021N

0961

SANTA CRUZ DATABASE CENTRAL,
WASTEWATER ORGANISMS

10 µm

Sulfur
granules

No sulfur
granules

Beggiatoa

Flexibacter
10 µm

SANTA CRUZ DATABASE CENTRAL,
WASTEWATER ORGANISMS

C. Filament 021N

B. Thiothrix sp.

FIGURE 17.29

■ Dichotomous key for wastewater bacteria. A. A section of a dichotomous key for identifying Gram-negative bacteria from wastewater. The designations 0961, 0914, and 021N refer to unidentified species. B. Thiothrix is a filamentous wastewater bacterium. C. Filament 021N is an unclassified organism that forms starburst filaments. Source: Part A modified from Santa Cruz Database Central, Wastewater.

which, by definition, are invisible to the unaided eye. Even
under the electron microscope, thousands of divergent species may possess similar shape and form.
Because the definition of a species is based on its genetic
sequence, the most consistent and straightforward way to
identify an isolate is to sequence part or all of its genome or
to attempt hybridization of its DNA with a labeled sequence
probe (discussed in Section 7.6). In clinical practice, such
DNA-based methods are used increasingly. Nevertheless,
even in the clinical lab—as well as in field and environmental microbiology—it is convenient to narrow down the possibilities using various easily determined traits, such as cell
shape, staining properties, and metabolic reactions. Thus,

practical identification is based on a combination of phylogeny (relatedness based on DNA sequence divergence)
and phenetic, or phenotypic, traits.
A common strategy of practical identification is the
dichotomous key, in which a series of yes/no decisions
successively narrows down the possible categories of species. Figure 17.29 shows an example of a dichotomous key
used to identify filamentous bacteria isolated from a wastewater treatment facility. Filamentous bacteria are important
in wastewater because their entangled filaments interfere
with the settling of bacteria out of the treated water. Note
that in the key shown, most of the traits are phenotypic,
such as cell size and motility. Most of the branch decisions

CHAPTER 17

have two choices, although one juncture (cell motility and
shape) has four. The key identifies some organisms down to
the species level (Sphaerotilus natans), others to the genus
level (Flexibacter), and others only to numbered samples
whose characterization remains incomplete (0914, 021N).

Thought Question

17.9 Using Figure 17.29, how would you identify a straight,

nonsheathed, Gram-negative bacterium that has sulfur granules, is motile, and is 1.0 µm wide? What would happen if you
assigned the bacterium a width of 0.9 µm?

A disadvantage of the dichotomous key is that it requires
a series of steps, each of which takes time. In the clinical setting, time is critical in identifying a potential pathogen and
prescribing appropriate treatment. An alternative means of
identification is the probabilistic indicator. A probabilistic
indicator is a battery of biochemical tests performed simultaneously on an isolated strain. The indicator requires a
predefined database of known bacteria from a well-studied
habitat, such as Gram-negative bacteria from the human
intestinal tract. To build such a database, numerous strains
of each species must be isolated in pure culture and tested
for all the traits in the database. The fraction of isolates
that test positive for each trait, for each species, is noted
in the database as the probability of obtaining a positive
result. The database can be used to identify a specimen isolated from a patient (discussed in Chapter 28). But, like the
dichotomous key, the probabilistic indicator works only
if the isolate coincides with a member of the predefined
database.

To Summarize
■

■

■

■

Microbial species are defined by sequence similarity of vertically transmitted genes such as SSU rRNA
sequences and multiple orthologous genes. The species
definition should be consistent with the ecological niche
or pathogenicity.
A pan-genome includes core genes possessed by all isolates of a species plus accessory genes found in some isolates but not others. A pan-genome may be open (infinite
number of genes) or closed (finite set of available genes).
Taxonomy is the description and organization of lifeforms into classes (taxa). Taxonomy includes classification, nomenclature, and identification.
Classification is traditionally based on a hierarchy of
ranks. Groups of organisms long studied tend to have
many ranks, whereas recent isolates have few.

■

■

■

■

ORIGINS AND EVOLUTION

■

681

DNA sequence relatedness defines microbial taxa.
Below genus level, however, the definition of bacterial
species can be problematic.
Emerging taxa are types of organisms recently discovered or described. They may be uncultured, and their
phylogeny may be uncertain.
Practical identification is based on phenotypic and
genetic traits. Methods of identification include the
dichotomous key and the probabilistic test battery. Both
methods assume a predefined set of organisms.

17.6

Symbiosis and the
Origin of Mitochondria
and Chloroplasts

So far, we have largely considered single species in isolation.
In fact, however, all organisms evolve in the presence of
other kinds of species, with whom they share interactions,
both positive and negative. A major engine of evolution is
symbiosis, the intimate association of two unrelated species. The ecology and behavioral adaptations of microbial
symbiosis are discussed in Chapter 21; here we focus on the
role of symbiosis in the evolution of cells.

Evolution of Endosymbiosis

The word “symbiosis” is popularly understood to mean
mutualism, a relationship in which both partners benefit
and may absolutely require each other. Biologists, however,
recognize parasitism, in which one partner is harmed, as a
relationship equally as intimate as mutualism; both mutualism and parasitism are forms of symbiosis. Intimate relationships between species, either negative or positive, lead
to coevolution, the evolution of two species in response
to one another, showing parallel phylogeny. An important
bacterial mutualism is that of nitrogen fixation, in which
rhizobia form intracellular “bacteroids” within legume
plants that cannot fix nitrogen on their own. Both rhizobia
and their plant hosts are highly evolved to respond to each
other chemically and develop the nitrogen-fixing system.
Another remarkable example of coevolution is that of leafcutter ants, which cultivate both fungal and bacterial partners (discussed in eTopic 17.5).
The most intimate kind of symbiosis is endosymbiosis,
in which one partner population grows within the body
of another organism. Endosymbiosis includes communities of microbes within the digestive tracts of animals, such
as the human intestinal microbiome (discussed in Chapters 21 and 23). The internalized endosymbiont can also

682

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

FIGURE 17.30 ■ Endosymbiosis. Paramecium bursaria, a ciliate
protist with endosymbiotic Chlorella algae.

be intracellular, as in the case of rhizobial bacteroids within
legume tissues. Rhizobia retain the genetic capacity for
independence, growing readily in soil. Other intracellular endosymbionts, however, become wholly dependent on
their host cells. Pathogenic endosymbionts, such as chlamydias, evolve specialized traits enabling their growth at
the expense of the host and evasion of the host immune
system. But endosymbionts also undergo drastic reductive
evolution, evolving ever-deeper interdependence with their
host cells.
A simple example of intracellular endosymbiosis is that
of the alga Chlorella growing within Paramecium bursaria
(Fig. 17.30). The algae conduct photosynthesis and provide nutrients to the paramecium, which in turn shelters
the algae from predators and viruses. The relationship is
highly specific—only certain species of algae and paramecia participate—and the algal growth is limited to a population that avoids harming the host. This relationship may
give clues to how the bacterial ancestor of chloroplasts
began its intracellular existence.
Despite this intimate relationship, Chlorella retains its
ability to multiply outside the paramecium; thus this symbiosis is reversible. Moreover, under conditions of starvation in the absence of light, the paramecium may start
to digest its endosymbionts as prey. Thus, the nature of
the symbiosis (mutualistic or predatory) depends on the
environment.
Many invertebrate animals, often themselves parasites
of animals or plants, possess obligate bacterial endosymbionts. For example, the fruit fly, Drosophila, carries a
parasitic endosymbiont, the bacterium Wolbachia pipientis. The Wolbachia strains that infect Drosophila cells are
transmitted only through egg cells; they cannot exist outside the insect. Other invertebrate endosymbionts, however, are mutualists. In fact, 15% of insect species depend
on intracellular bacteria to produce essential nutrients, such

CDC

50 µm

WIM VAN EGMOND / VISUALS UNLIMITED

Chlorella

FIGURE 17.31

Filariasis. Patient suffering from a form of
filariasis known as elephantiasis.
■

as certain amino acids or vitamins. In these mutualisms,
both partners have lost essential traits by reductive evolution, and each now requires the partner species to provide
the lost function.
A surprising number of human invertebrate parasites,
such as filarial nematodes and Anopheles mosquitoes, carry
bacterial endosymbionts required for host growth. This
discovery has exciting implications for treatment of parasitic diseases. Invertebrate parasites such as filarial nematode worms invade human lymph nodes, causing forms
of disease (filariasis) that are notoriously difficult to treat.
Few anti-nematode compounds are sufficiently selective for
worm metabolism versus human metabolism, since both
are eukaryotic animals. A form of filariasis is elephantiasis, in which a limb expands with edema because the lymph
ducts are blocked by worms (Fig. 17.31). Filariasis afflicts
more than 120 million people worldwide, largely in the
Indian subcontinent and in Africa.
A filarial nematode, Brugia malayi, harbors endosymbiotic Wolbachia (a different strain from the one that infects
Drosophila) (Fig. 17.32). Wolbachia may have entered the
nematode originally as a pathogen or parasite, and then
persisted because of its metabolic contributions to the
host. The nematode’s Wolbachia are mutualists; the nematode needs them for embryonic development. The bacteria are found within tissue layers beneath the nematodes’
cuticle and within the uterine tubes of females, where they
enter the developing offspring (Fig. 17.32). When human
patients infected by the nematodes are treated with antibiotics such as tetracycline, the bacteria disappear from worm
tissues. The worm burden gradually decreases, and no offspring are produced. Antibacterial antibiotics eliminate the
worms sooner and more completely than does treatment
with anti-nematode agents.
The genome of a Wolbachia strain from a filarial nematode reveals extensive reductive evolution. With barely a

Wolbachia
clustered
cells

20 µm

PFARR K, HOERAUF A (2005) THE ANNOTATED GENOME OF WOLBACHIA. PLOS MED
2(4): E110 DOI:10.1371/JOURNAL.PMED.0020110

CHAPTER 17

FIGURE 17.32 ■ The filarial endosymbiont Wolbachia. Cross
section of the nematode Brugia malayi, showing Wolbachia bacteria
(stained pink) within the worm’s dermis and uterine tubes.

ORIGINS AND EVOLUTION

■

683

pathways to make purines, pyrimidines, and the coenzymes riboflavin and FAD—essential pathways lost by its
host nematode. Overall, Wolbachia appears to be evolving
into an organelle of its host, like the ancestors of mitochondria and chloroplasts.

Mitochondria and Chloroplasts

As Lynn Margulis and colleagues showed, the assimilation
of endosymbionts as mitochondria and chloroplasts played
a central role in the evolution of eukaryotes (Fig. 17.33).
Many similar endosymbioses are known today, such as the
free-living algae Chlorella acquired by the protist predator Paramecium bursaria (see Fig. 17.30). Like Wolbachia, mitochondria evolved from a bacterium related to
the rickettsias (intracellular pathogens). The mitochondrial
ancestor must have entered the eukaryotic lineage as, or
shortly after, the eukaryotes diverged from archaea, since
all known eukaryotes retain mitochondria or vestigial remnants of mitochondrial genomes (discussed in Chapter 20).
Mitochondria provide the cell with the essential functions
of electron transport and respiration. The electron transport system (ETS) is found in the mitochondrial inner

COURTESY OF LYNN MARGULIS

million base pairs, the Wolbachia genome has lost many
metabolic pathways. It retains glycolysis and the TCA
cycle but has lost the pathways for biosynthesis of all
amino acids and most vitamins. It nonetheless retains

■

Eukaryotic flagellum
([9(2)+2] microtubules)

Eukaryote

Chromosome
Nuclear
membrane
Endoplasmic
reticulum
Ribosomes
Mitochondrion
Cell membrane
Chloroplast

FIGURE 17.33

■

Cell wall

Endosymbiotic cells evolved into mitochondria and chloroplasts. Eukaryotic cells contain mitochondria and chlo-

roplasts, organellar remnants of ancient endosymbioses. Inset: Lynn Margulis (1938–2011).

684

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

A. Mitochondrial genome (human)

B. Chloroplast genome (liverwort)
tRNALeu

Parkinsonism

tRNAPhe
tRNAVal

tRNALeu

16S
rRNA

tRNAGlu
23S
rRNA
16S
rRNA

Cytochrome b

Subunits of NADH
dehydrogenase

tRNAfMet
Ataxia
Chorea

12S
rRNA

tRNA:

Leu
Ser
His

Chloroplast genome
in a liverwort (Bryophyta)

Dystonia
tRNA

Rubisco
(large subunit)

tRNAArg
tRNAHis

Motor neuron
disease

tRNATrp

Arg

Trp
Ala
Asn
Cys
Tyr

FIGURE 17.34

Subunits of RNA
polymerase

tRNA:

Subunits of
cytochrome c
oxidase

23S
rRNA
16S
rRNA

tRNAMet
Thr

tRNA

Subunits of
ATP synthase

Genomes of mitochondria and chloroplasts. A. The mitochondrial genome retains large- and small-subunit rRNAs,
five tRNA genes, plus subunits of the respiratory electron transport chain. Text bubbles indicate human diseases associated with mitochondrial defects. B. The chloroplast genome retains large- and small-subunit rRNAs (23S and 16S), several tRNA and RNA polymerase genes, plus
Rubisco (large subunit) and components of photosystems I and II (dispersed around the circle, not labeled in the figure).
■

membrane, believed to derive from the cell membrane of
the ancestral bacterium. The outer membrane may derive
from the invaginating membrane of the host cell that originally engulfed the endosymbiont.
Chloroplasts arose from cyanobacteria at some point
before the divergence of red and green algae (discussed
in Chapter 20). A model for cyanobacterial uptake can be
seen in the protist Glaucocystophyta, whose cyanobacterial endosymbionts retain cell walls and some metabolism.
Like mitochondria, chloroplasts possess inner and outer
membranes, believed to derive from the ancestral endosymbiont and host, respectively. Photosynthetic complexes
are located in the thylakoid membranes, similar to those of
modern cyanobacteria.
The genomes of mitochondria and chloroplasts both
show extreme reduction (Fig. 17.34)—even more
extreme than that of any known endosymbiotic bacteria. The few genes that remain in the organellar genome
include remnants of the central transcription-translation
apparatus, such as rRNA and tRNAs, as well as a handful of genes whose products are essential for survival of the
host cell: for respiration (mitochondria) or photosynthesis
(chloroplasts).
Mitochondrial genome. In human mitochondria, the mitochondrial genome encodes key parts of the respiratory

chain, including subunits of NADH dehydrogenase,
cytochrome oxidase, and ATP synthase (Fig. 17.34A).
Mutations in these key genes lead to serious diseases; for
example, damage to mitochondrial genes of respiration is
associated with motor neuron disease, parkinsonism, and
forms of ataxia.
But thousands of genes encoding ETS subunits, as well
as other essential parts of mitochondria, have migrated
from the mitochondrion to the nucleus. The nuclear
acquisition probably occurred through accidental copying
of mitochondrial genes into the nuclear genome. Reductive evolution then occurred, faster in the mitochondrial
copy because of the faster mutation rate. Some of these
nuclear-acquired mitochondrial genes show tissue-specific
expression, resulting in different mitochondrial types
associated with different tissues. Thus, some mitochondrial defects are actually inherited through the nuclear
genome. The mitochondria have evolved as integral parts
of the host cell.
Chloroplast genome. In chloroplasts, the organellar genome
encodes essential products for photosynthesis, including
photosystems I and II and the ATP synthase. The chloroplast genome shown in Figure 17.34B retains the large
subunit of Rubisco, whereas the gene encoding the small
subunit has migrated to the nucleus.

CHAPTER 17

Remarkably, the process of symbiogenesis, the generation of new symbiotic associations, continues in many
protists. Protist-algae, also known as “secondary symbiont” algae, result from symbiogenesis in which an alga
(containing a chloroplast) was engulfed by an ancestral
protist. The protist cell contains the degenerate remains
of the algal endosymbiont (Fig. 17.35). The algal mitochondrion was lost through reductive evolution, and the
nucleus shrank to a nucleomorph, the vestigial remains
of a nucleus containing a small amount of the chromosomal DNA of the original algal nucleus. But the algal
chloroplast was maintained, “enslaved” by its new host.
The result is a new protist-alga species, Guillardia theta,
capable of both phototrophy and heterotrophy. Its chloroplast has a double membrane derived from the original
cyanobacterial ancestor of the chloroplast and from the
algal ancestor, surrounded by another double membrane
derived from the cell membranes of the alga and a secondary host.
Other secondary endosymbiont algae, such as kelps, diatoms, and dinoflagellates, are discussed in Chapter 20. In
some species, tertiary symbiosis has been documented, in
which a secondary-endosymbiont alga has been swallowed
in turn by another protist.

Starch

Primary algal
Primary algal
cytoplasm
nucleomorph

ORIGINS AND EVOLUTION

■

685

Thought Question

17.10 Besides mitochondria and chloroplasts, what other
kinds of entities within cells might have evolved from
endosymbionts?

To Summarize
■

■

■

■

■

Cryptomonad

■

■

Symbiosis is the intimate association of two unrelated species. A symbiosis in which both partners benefit is called mutualism. If one partner benefits while
harming the other, the symbiosis is called parasitism.
Symbiotic partners undergo coevolution, the evolution of two species in response to one another. Coevolution involves reductive (degenerative) evolution, in
which each partner species loses some functions that the
other partner provides.
An endosymbiont lives inside a much larger host
species. Many microbial cells harbor endosymbiotic
bacteria whose metabolism yields energy for their hosts.
Many invertebrates harbor endosymbiotic bacteria.
The bacteria are required for host survival and, in some
cases, for pathology caused by a parasitic invertebrate.
Mitochondria evolved from endosymbionts. The
ancestor of mitochondria was an alphaproteobacterium
related to rickettsias.
Chloroplasts evolved from endosymbionts. The chloroplast ancestor was a cyanobacterium.

Concluding
Conclud
C
di Thoughts
The
Th
he Antarcticc microbial landscape provides a glimpse of
Earth
what Eart
h might have looked like 3.4 billion years
ago, aass the first microbial communities evolved,
theirr mats
m building rock layers that persist today.
From
Fro
om those early microbes, all subsequent life
o
Nucleus
Chloroplast
evolved.
ev
vvo
It is hard to say which is more astonSecondary
ishing:
is
ssh
the overall commonalities of all living
protist cytoplasm
cells, including membrane-enclosed support
ccel
systems for genomes of shared ancestry, or the
ssys
subsequent evolution of organisms with vastly
ssub
different adaptations to exploit every possible
dif
d
niche of our planet. Our next three chapters
nic
n
FIGURE 17.35 ■ A protist-alga results from secondary
explore
ex
xp
these diverse adaptations: Chapter 18,
endosymbiosis. The protist Guillardia theta contains the primary
bacterial
diversity; Chapter 19, archaeal diverbac
b
t
algal chromosome surrounded by the remains of the primary algal
sity;
and
Chapter
20, diversity among microbial
cytoplasm and nucleus, which has shrunk to a nucleomorph. Source:
eukaryotes, including fungi, algae, and protozoa.
Modified from Paul R. Gilson. 2001. Genome Biol. 2:1022.

CHAPTER 18

■

BACTERIAL DIVERSITY

■

689

CHAPTER 18
Bacterial Diversity

18.2 Cyanobacteria: Oxygenic Phototrophs
18.3 Firmicutes and Actinobacteria (Gram-Positive)
18.4 Proteobacteria (Gram-Negative)
18.5 Deep-Branching Gram-Negative Phyla
18.6 Spirochetes: Sheathed Spiral Cells with

Internalized Flagella
18.7 Chlamydiae, Planctomycetes, and

Verrucomicrobia: Irregular Cells

C U R R E N T R E S E A RC H

highlight

Multibacterial biofilm invades colorectal tumor. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) of specific DNA probes
shows surprisingly diverse bacteria growing upon a tumor
of the right ascending colon. Three different DNA probes
hybridize with 16S rRNA of distinct bacterial taxa: Bacteroidetes (green), Lachnospiraceae (magenta), Fusobacteria
(cyan). By contrast, the lining of a noncancerous colon shows
a thicker layer of protective mucus, colonized by thinner
biofilms with a healthy distribution of commensal bacteria.
Source: Christine M. Dejea et al. 2014. PNAS 111:18321.

Lachnospiraceae

Fusobacteria

Bacteroidetes

B

acteria vary tremendously in their cell structure and metabolism. They include heterotrophs, phototrophs, and lithotrophs—and
some species can be classified as all three. There are
obligate aerobes, anaerobes, and microaerophiles.
Their cell shapes include rods, cocci, spirals, and budding forms. Ecologically, bacteria include mutualists,
pathogens, and organisms that cannot be cultured in
our laboratories. Every day we discover new species,
ranging from metal metabolizers buried beneath
Antarctic mountains to filamentous mutualists clinging to our intestinal epithelium.

A N I N T E RV I E W W I T H
CYNTHIA SEARS, MEDICAL MICROBIOLOGIST, JOHNS
HOPKINS UNIVERSITY

JOHNS HOPKINS UNIVERSITY

18.1 Bacterial Diversity at a Glance

What different kinds of bacteria do
you find associated with colorectal
tumors?

We find that the biofilms that are
associated with sporadic colon cancer are composed of a diverse array of
bacteria. One set of biofilm tumors is
associated predominantly with Bacteroidetes and Lachnospiraceae; a second subset has at least 25% of the sequences mapping to
Fusobacterium species; and a third subset, so far seen in
only one tumor, was dominated by Proteobacteria.
What surprised you most about the bacterial biofilms
found with tumors?
The big surprise was the geographic localization of biofilm-positive tumors to the right colon. As the work was
being done, we noted some tumors were biofilm-positive,
some not so. The day we decided to plot them on a cartoon
of the colon based on the location of the tumor is the day
the pattern revealed itself. As yet, we have not fully unraveled why this dramatic, nearly categorical difference exists
for biofilm formation between right-colon and left-colon
cancers.
689

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

Bacteria evolve a bewildering array of life-forms that colonize every habitat on Earth, from the ocean depths to our
own skin and digestive tract. You might think that, by now,
we would know at least all the major phyla of bacteria, just
as we know the major kinds of vertebrate animals and vascular plants. Yet we are constantly discovering new clades
of bacteria never seen before. At the Johns Hopkins School
of Medicine, Cynthia Sears discovers new bacteria that colonize our colonic epithelium (see the Current Research
Highlight). In Chapter 13 we learned that many colonic
bacteria are normal residents that aid our digestion. But
other bacteria, including members of the Lachnospiraceae,
Bacteroidetes, and Fusobacteria, act as pathogens. Some
take advantage of cancer pathology to invade the tissue of
colon tumors.
Elsewhere, microbe hunters discover bacteria in remote,
pristine sites such as the frozen brine of Antarctic Lake
Vida (Fig. 18.1). The deepest hypersaline layer of Lake
Vida remains trapped without light or oxygen, at –13°C.
From this deep anoxic layer, Alison Murray and colleagues
from the Desert Research Institute recovered growing bacteria that are ultrasmall—some less than 200 nm in diameter. We now predict that all water and soil habitats, as well
as parts of the human body, might also host ultrasmall
microbes, perhaps showing yet other unique traits to be
discovered.
How do we begin to describe bacterial diversity, when
even in familiar habitats the vast majority of species remain
unknown? Chapter 18 surveys the bacteria that we do
know something about. For instance, many kinds of Gramnegative Proteobacteria inhabit our digestive tract, or
grow in ponds by photosynthesis, or colonize legumes as

nitrogen-fixing mutualists. Well-known bacteria are generally those cultured in the laboratory, subject to experiments
under controlled conditions. At the same time, comparing
genome sequences clarifies the relatedness of major groups
of bacteria.
Chapter 18 emphasizes major taxa that are of physiological, ecological, and medical importance. We organize
our discussion by phylogeny (evolutionary relatedness of
taxa), as well as key traits of a taxon, such as the Grampositive cell wall of Firmicutes and the oxygenic photosynthesis of cyanobacteria. We show how diverse bacteria
contribute to communities. Microbial communities and
ecology are explored further in Chapter 21, and their
roles in global biogeochemical cycles are discussed in
Chapter 22.
For each major taxonomic group, we describe a few key
species to represent the spectrum of diversity. Additional
genera and species are referenced in an expanded table
found in Appendix 2 and eAppendix 4.

A.

B.

Bacterial Diversity
at a Glance

To survey bacterial diversity in one chapter is like touring all the countries of a continent in a single day. Like
countries, bacterial taxa have complex traits and histories, and often contested borders. But overall, bacteria
share major traits in common. We review these common traits of bacteria and then go on to explore their
differences.

BERND WAGNER/UNIVERSITY OF COLOGNE

–13˚C

FIGURE 18.1

18.1

200 nm

Small bacterial cells in an Antarctic brine lake. A. Lake Vida, Antarctica. Below the ice is concentrated salt. B. Bacterial
cells connected by filaments, dehydrated on 0.2-μm-pore-size filter (SEM). These cells were obtained by Alison Murray and colleagues from
the Desert Research Institute, Reno. Source: Emanuele Kuhn et al. 2014. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 80:3687.
■

KUHN, ET AL. 2014. APPL. ENV. MICRO. 80: 3687. FIG 2C.

690

CHAPTER 18

Bacteria: Common Traits
and Diverging Phylogeny

Chapter 17 summarized the differences and similarities of
the three major domains—Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya
(see Table 17.2). A common feature of bacteria is their central apparatus for gene expression, particularly their RNA
polymerases, ribosomal RNAs, and translation factors.
Bacterial gene expression complexes differ more from those
of Archaea or Eukarya than the complexes of Archaea or
Eukarya differ from each other. This subtle point of molecular biology has a profound consequence for human medicine and agriculture: It underlies the selective activity of
many antibiotics, such as streptomycin, that attack only
bacteria, without affecting animals or plants.
Another trait distinguishing bacteria from archaea and
eukaryotes is that most bacterial cells possess a cell wall
of peptidoglycan (discussed in Chapter 3). Peptidoglycan
is composed of disaccharide-peptide chains that can crosslink in three dimensions; key enzymes that build the peptide links are blocked by antibiotics such as penicillin and

■

BACTERIAL DIVERSITY

■

691

vancomycin. Some archaea possess analogous sugar-peptide structures called “pseudopeptidoglycan” (discussed
in Chapter 19), but their structural details and antibiotic
sensitivity differ fundamentally from those of bacterial peptidoglycan. Eukaryotes such as fungi and plants have cell
walls of polysaccharides such as cellulose and chitin (discussed in Chapter 20).
In bacteria, variant forms of peptidoglycan distinguish
different species. For instance, the Gram-positive pathogen
Staphylococcus aureus has cell wall peptides cross-linked by
pentaglycine (a chain of five glycine residues). Some species, such as mycoplasmas, lack peptidoglycan altogether,
although they arose by reductive evolution from bacteria
that possess it.
The phylogeny of known bacteria is presented in Figure 18.2. The names of well-studied phyla are lettered in
blue. A phylum (plural, phyla) is defined as a group of
organisms sharing a common ancestor that diverged early
from other bacteria, based on small-subunit rRNA (SSU
rRNA) sequence (discussed in Chapter 17). Increasingly,

Archaea
Eukarya
>35 candidate phyla of bacteria
100–200 nm in diameter
Aquificae
Thermotogae

Aquifex
Thermotoga
Root of
bacterial tree

Deinococcus-Thermus
Chloroflexi

Deinococcus
Chloroflexus
Synechococcus
Chloroplast

Deep-branching
thermophiles

Cyanobacteria

Bacillus
Mycoplasma
Clostridium
Streptomyces
Micrococcus
Mycobacterium
Rhodospirillum
Rickettsia
Mitochondria
Neisseria
Escherichia
Pseudomonas
Helicobacter

“Gram-positive”
Actinobacteria

Alpha
Beta

Proteobacteria

Gamma
Delta/
Epsilon

Nitrospira
Acidobacterium
Bacteroides
Chlorobium
Treponema
0.1
100 mutations/1,000 nt

Firmicutes

Chlamydia
Planctomyces
Verrucomicrobium

“Gram-negative”
Nitrospirae
Acidobacteria
Bacteroidetes
Chlorobi
Spirochetes
Chlamydiae
Planctomycetes
Verrucomicrobia

FIGURE 18.2 ■ Bacterial phylogeny. A phylogenetic tree of representative Bacteria based on 16S rRNA sequence comparison. The tree
is rooted with respect to Archaea and Eukarya. Bold labels correspond to major groups in Table 18.1. Phylum names are lettered blue.

692

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

whole-genome data reveal new kinds of bacteria faster
than we can figure out how to culture or characterize
them. We continually discover very different new kinds
of bacteria, known as emerging clades (see Chapter 17).
Some microbiologists estimate that there exist 1,500
phyla, many as yet undiscovered. Apart from their genome
sequences, we know little about those newly discovered
bacteria. Lineages whose genome sequences diverged
early, at or before the well-known phyla, are called deepbranching taxa. In addition, other environmental DNA
sequences of uncultivated bacteria (not shown) branch
from all parts of this tree.
Phyla and other major divisions are also defined on the
basis of historical convention and consensus of the research
community. Generally, a well-studied bacterial phylum
comprises species that share key traits as well as ancestry.
While sharing key traits, the member species often show
remarkable diversity in other ways. Some phyla, such as
Cyanobacteria, share a unique form of metabolism (oxygenic photosynthesis), yet have evolved many diverse cell
shapes and grow in diverse habitats. Other phyla, such as
Spirochetes, share a unique cell structure while diverging
in habitat and metabolism.
Table 18.1 introduces seven major groups of bacteria that appear most frequently in the literature. An
expanded version of this table, including many
important species, appears in Appendix 2.2 and
eAppendix 4.2.

Well-Studied Bacterial Phyla

Certain groups of bacteria have been studied for a century
or more, and their traits are known in detail. A major group
that serves all ecosystems is the Cyanobacteria (see Section
18.2). Cyanobacteria conduct photosynthesis by splitting
water and releasing oxygen (O2). Some species adapt to use
H 2S when available. Oxygenic photosystems evolved from
ancestral sulfide photosystems (discussed in Chapter 14).
Cyanobacteria and chloroplasts (eukaryotic organelles
that evolved from Cyanobacteria) are the only life-forms
that produce oxygen gas. These bacteria have a unique
two-photosystem apparatus for oxygenic photosynthesis
arranged in lamellar arrays of membranes called thylakoids
(discussed in Chapter 14). Unique to Cyanobacteria and
chloroplasts are the chlorophylls, most notably chlorophylls
a and b; these molecules are distinct from the bacteriochlorophylls used by non-oxygenic bacterial phototrophs.
Cyanobacteria share a common metabolism, yet the cell
shape and organization of cyanobacterial species show an
immense range of different forms, including chains of cells,
square arrays, and globular colonies.
For soil and sediment, major phyla include the Firmicutes and Actinobacteria, which stain Gram-positive

(see Section 18.3). A few Firmicutes (the mycoplasmas) fail
to stain Gram-positive because they lack cell walls, and some
Actinobacteria possess a thick waxy coat that excludes the
Gram stain. Most Firmicutes and Actinobacteria have an
exceptionally thick cell wall, with several layers of peptidoglycan threaded by supporting molecules such as teichoic acids
or mycolic acids. The thick, reinforced cell wall is what retains
the Gram stain (discussed in Chapter 2). In addition, most
Gram-positive species possess a well-developed S-layer of protein with glycan strands. By contrast, in other bacterial phyla
the S-layer is either absent or present in diminished form.
Firmicutes and Actinobacteria differ genetically in their
GC content—that is, the proportion of their genomes consisting of guanine-cytosine base pairs (as opposed to adenine-thymine). Firmicutes (low GC) generally grow as
well-defined rods or cocci, isolated or in simple filaments
consisting of cells that divide but remain attached end to
end. Many Firmicutes form endospores, inert heat-resistant
spores that can remain viable for thousands of years. Endospores are the most durable type of spore formed by bacteria.
Actinobacteria have a relatively high GC content and
are known as the “high-GC Firmicutes.” These bacteria
include the actinomycetes (order Actinomycetales), which
undergo complex life cycles, forming filamentous hyphae
and arthrospores. Other groups closely related to actinomycetes grow as isolated rods and cocci, often with variable
shape, such as the corynebacteria. Actinomycete relatives
include the well-known causative agents of tuberculosis
(Mycobacterium tuberculosis) and leprosy (M. leprae).
Proteobacteria are called “Gram-negative” because
their single layer of peptidoglycan fails to retain the Gram
stain (see Section 18.4). All Proteobacteria have an outer
membrane consisting of lipopolysaccharides (LPS) and
porins. All species of Proteobacteria have an LPS outer
membrane, but their cell shape may be rods, cocci, or spiral rods. In contrast to Cyanobacteria, the Proteobacteria
show an immense range of diverse metabolism (heterotrophy, lithotrophy, and anaerobic phototrophy). Most species
are aerobic, facultative, or microaerophilic (requiring a low
level of O2; inhibited at higher levels).
Proteobacteria include five major classes, named Alphaproteobacteria, Betaproteobacteria, Gammaproteobacteria,
Deltaproteobacteria, and Epsilonproteobacteria. (Some sources
separate the Greek letter from the name “Proteobacteria”—
for example, “Alpha Proteobacteria,” “Beta Proteobacteria,”
and so on.) Proteobacteria include famous model organisms and pathogens, such as Escherichia coli, Salmonella
enterica, and Yersinia pestis. Others are human or animal
symbionts, either as mutualists or as pathogens—including
Rickettsia, the genus most closely related to mitochondria.
The Spirochetes (see Section 18.6) have evolved a
unique and complex cellular form of a flexible, extended spiral, resembling an old-style telephone cord. The cytoplasm

CHAPTER 18

■

BACTERIAL DIVERSITY

■

693

TABLE 18.1-Bacterial Diversity* (Expanded Table Appears in Appendix 2.2 and eAppendix 4.2)
Deep-branching thermophiles. Thermophilic bacteria that diverged
early from archaea and eukaryotes. Many genes transferred laterally
from archaea.
Aquificae. Hyperthermophiles (70°C–95°C). Oxidize H2. Aquifex.
Chloroflexi. Filamentous phototrophs, often with chlorosomes.
Chloroflexus aurantiacus.

Deinococcus-Thermus. Radiation-resistant species and thermophiles.
Deinococcus radiodurans.
Thermotogae. Thermophiles (55°C–100°C). Anaerobic heterotrophs.
Thermotoga sp.
Cyanobacteria. Oxygenic photoautotrophs with thylakoid
membranes. Share ancestry with chloroplasts.
• Chroococcales. Square colonies based on two division planes.
• Gloeobacterales. Lack thylakoids; conduct photosynthesis in cell
membrane.
• Nostocales. Filamentous chains with N2-fixing heterocysts. Some
grow symbiotically with corals or plants. Nostoc sp.
• Oscillatoriales. Filamentous chains with motile hormogonia
(short chains). Oscillatoria sp.
• Pleurocapsales. Globular colonies; reproduce through baeocytes.
• Prochlorales. Tiny single cells, elliptical or spherical (0.5 μm).
Prochlorococcus sp.
Firmicutes and Actinobacteria (Gram-positive). Peptidoglycan
multiple layers, cross-linked by teichoic acids.
Firmicutes. Low-GC, Gram-positive rods and cocci.
• Bacillales. Aerobic or facultative anaerobes. Bacillus subtilis.
• Clostridiales. Anaerobic rods. Clostridium botulinum and C. tetani.
• Lactobacillales. Non–spore formers. Facultative anaerobes.
Ferment, producing lactic acid. Lactobacillus lactis.
• Tenericutes (Mollicutes). Lack cell wall; require animal host.
Mycoplasma pneumoniae.
Actinobacteria. High-GC, Gram-positive bacteria with moderate salt
tolerance.
• Actinomycetales.
Actinomycetaceae. Filamentous, producing aerial hyphae and
spores. Actinomycetes such as Streptomyces coelicolor.
Corynebacteriaceae. Irregularly shaped rods. Corynebacterium
diphtheriae.
Micrococcaceae. Small airborne cocci. Micrococcus luteus.
Mycobacteriaceae. Exceptionally complex cell walls.
Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
Propionibacteriaceae. Propionic acid fermentation.
Propionibacterium shermanii.
• Bifidobacteriaceae. Ferment without gas. Bifidobacterium sp.
Proteobacteria. Gram-negative bacteria with diverse cell forms and
metabolism.
Alphaproteobacteria (class)
• Caulobacterales. Aquatic oligotrophs; alternate stalk and
flagellum. Caulobacter crescentus.
• Rhizobiales. Plant mutualists and pathogens. Sinorhizobium
meliloti.
• Rhodobacterales, Rhodospirillales. Flagellated
photoheterotrophs.
• Rickettsiales. Includes intracellular parasites; related to
mitochondria. Rickettsia rickettsii causes Rocky Mountain spotted
fever.
• Sphingomonadales. Heterotrophs and photoheterotrophs; some
opportunistic pathogens. Sphingomonas sp.
*Bulleted terms are representative orders within the phylum (unless stated otherwise).

Betaproteobacteria (class)
• Burkholderiales. Burkholderia pseudomallei causes melioidosis.
• Neisseriales. Diplococci. Neisseria gonorrhoeae causes
gonorrhea; N. meningitidis causes meningitis.
Gammaproteobacteria (class)
• Acidithiobacillales. Lithotrophs. Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans
oxidizes iron and sulfur.
• Aeromonadales. Aquatic heterotrophs such as Aeromonas
hydrophila.
• Enterobacteriales. Facultative anaerobes; colonize the human
colon.
• Legionellales. Legionella pneumophila causes legionellosis
pneumonia.
• Pseudomonadales. Rods; aerobic or respire on nitrate; catabolize
aromatics. Pseudomonas aeruginosa infects lungs in cystic
fibrosis patients.
• Thiotrichales. Lithotrophs and heterotrophs.
• Vibrionales. Marine heterotrophs. Vibrio cholerae causes cholera.
Deltaproteobacteria (class)
• Bdellovibrionales. Periplasmic predators.
• Desulfobacterales. Reduce sulfate.
• Myxococcales. Gliding bacteria that form fruiting bodies.
Epsilonproteobacteria (class)
• Campylobacterales. Spirillar pathogens. Campylobacter jejuni
causes gastroenteritis. Helicobacter pylori causes gastritis.
Deep-branching Gram-negative phyla.
Acidobacteria. Acidophiles and thermophiles. “Candidatus
Chloracidobacterium” species.
Bacteroidetes. Obligate anaerobes. Heterotrophs that feed on diverse
carbon sources. Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron.
Chlorobi. Green sulfur-oxidizing phototrophs. Chlorobium tepidum.
Fusobacteria. Gram-negative anaerobic bacteria found in septicemia
and in skin ulcers. Fusobacterium nucleatum.
Nitrospirae. Oxidize nitrite; aerobic or facultative. Nitrospira marina.
Spirochetes (Spirochaeta). Narrow, coiled cells with axial filaments,
encased by sheath. Polar flagella beneath sheath double back
around cell.
• Spirochaetales. Aquatic free-living; endosymbionts and pathogens
(width <0.5 µm; length 10–20 µm).
Borrelia. B. burgdorferi causes Lyme disease, transmitted by ticks.
Hollandina. Termite gut endosymbionts.
Leptospira. L-shaped animal pathogens; cause leptospirosis.
Spirochaeta. Aquatic, free-living heterotrophs.
Treponema. T. pallidum causes syphilis.
Chlamydiae, Planctomycetes, and Verrucomicrobia. Irregular
cells lacking peptidoglycan, with subcellular structures
analogous to those of eukaryotes.
Chlamydiae. Intracellular cell wall–less pathogens of animals or
protists. Chlamydia trachomatis causes sexually transmitted disease
and trachoma (eye infection).
Planctomycetes. Nucleoid has double membrane analogous
to eukaryotic nuclear membrane and other intracytoplasmic
subcellular membrane compartments. Brocadia species
anaerobically oxidize ammonium and release N2 (anammox
reaction). Pirellula species inhabit marine sediment.
Verrucomicrobia. Stalk-like appendages contain actin filaments.
Aquatic oligotrophs. Prosthecobacter sp.

694

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

and cell membrane are contained within an outer membrane called the sheath. Between the sheath and the cell
membrane extend flagella doubled back from each pole.
The rotation of these flagella is coordinated so as to twist
and flex the helical body, generating motility and chemotaxis. Spirochetes include many free-living forms in aquatic
systems, as well as digestive endosymbionts and pathogens.
Three phyla of bacteria have unusual cell shapes: Chlamydiae, Planctomycetes, and Verrucomicrobia (see Section 18.7). Most members of these groups have lost their
peptidoglycan cell walls, but they show complex structural
adaptations and developmental forms. The Chlamydiae
(best-known genus Chlamydia) are intracellular parasites
that lose most of their cell envelope during intracellular
growth. The replicating parasites generate multiple sporelike “elementary bodies” that escape to infect the next host.
Planctomycetes, by contrast, are free-living aquatic bacteria, with stalked cells that reproduce by budding. Each
planctomycete cell contains an extra double membrane surrounding its nucleoid, analogous to a eukaryotic nuclear
membrane, though it evolved independently. Verrucomicrobia, also free-living, are bacteria with wart-like protruding structures containing actin.

Deep-Branching Thermophiles

Deep-branching thermophiles show unusually large
genetic divergence from other bacterial clades. This large
divergence makes the thermophiles appear to have separated earlier from other kinds of bacteria. Other evidence,
however, implicates high mutation rates and gene transfer between distant relatives as the source of genetic divergence of thermophiles.
The deep-branching taxa include extremophiles such as
Aquifex aeolicus (growing at up to 95ºC at marine thermal
vents). These organisms also show rapid growth and high
mutation rates, which may have accelerated their molecular clock. These hyperthermophilic bacteria also share their
high-temperature habitats with Archaea—and show surprising archaeal traits. For example, Aquifex species have
archaeal ether-linked membrane lipids (discussed in Chapters 3 and 19). The genes encoding these “archaeal” lipids
appear to have entered bacteria by horizontal transfer from
archaea to bacteria sharing the high-temperature habitat.
Aquificae and Thermotogae. Most members of the ther-

mophilic phyla Aquificae and Thermotogae are hydrogenotrophs, oxidizing hydrogen gas with molecular oxygen
to make water. Aquifex pyrophilus, a flagellated rod, was
fi rst discovered by extremophile microbiologist Karl
Stetter at the University of Regensburg in a submarine
hydrothermal vent north of Iceland (for an interview, see
eTopic 18.1). Stetter named the bacterium Aquifex, Latin

for “water maker,” because it oxidizes hydrogen to form
water. Aquifex species are obligate autotrophs, fi xing CO2
into biomass using the reverse TCA cycle. Other genera
of the phylum Aquificae oxidize small organic molecules
or sulfides, and form fi lamentous mats in hydrothermal
springs. Thermocrinis ruber grows at 82°C–88°C as a
mat of pink fi lamentous streamers in the outflow channel of Octopus Spring, in Yellowstone National Park. A
related phylum of thermophiles (growing at 50°C–80°C)
is Thermotogae. Thermotoga maritima is a sulfur-reducing respirer, originally isolated from a geothermal vent in
Vulcano, Italy. The cells have a loosely bound sheath, or
“toga,” for which the genus is named.
Both Aquificae and Thermotogae show remarkable
mosaic genomes. Nearly a quarter of the T. maritima
genome derives from archaea. The Aquificae, too, show
large proportions of archaeal DNA sequence and traits,
which are ascribed to the sharing of the high-temperature habitat. But Aquificae also possess large portions of
sequence related to clostridia and to Epsilonproteobacteria (discussed shortly). This degree of mosaicism leads
some researchers to argue that Aquificae cannot be said to
branch from one clade; or if they do, that we can never
know, statistically, which clade that is.
Thought Question

18.1 What taxonomic questions are raised by the apparent

high rate of gene transfer between archaea and thermophilic
bacteria?

Chloroflexi. Chloroflexi bacteria are fi lamentous photo-

heterotrophs, supplementing heterotrophy with photosystem II (PS II) to generate ATP (discussed in Chapter 14).
Together with other thermophiles, Chloroflexi species
form massive microbial mats in the hot springs of Yellowstone (Fig. 18.3). Most species of Chloroflexus contain their
photosynthetic apparatus within membranous organelles
called chlorosomes. The process of photosynthesis by chlorosomes is presented in Chapter 14. Chloroflexi are informally called “green nonsulfur bacteria” to distinguish them
from Chlorobi, a phylum of green phototrophs that are
strict anaerobes (presented shortly, with the deep-branching
Gram-negative phyla). However, Chloroflexus species may
appear red or yellow, owing to accessory pigments.
Deinococcus-Thermus. The phylum Deinococcus-Thermus possesses a unique structural trait: the substitution of
L -ornithine for diaminopimelic acid in the peptidoglycan
cross-bridge. Thermus species (growing at 70°C–75°C) are
heterotrophs commonly isolated from hot tap water. Deinococcus species, however, are not thermophilic. D. radiodurans bacteria resist extremely high doses of ionizing
radiation (discussed in Chapters 5 and 9). A heterotroph,

CHAPTER 18

■

BACTERIAL DIVERSITY

■

695

A.

D. radiodurans was originally isolated from cans of meat
supposedly sterilized with a radiation dose of several megarads. Deinococcus bacteria are found suspended in air, both
indoors and high in the atmosphere; they resist drought.

Deep-Branching Gram-Negatives

BOB LINDSTROM

Several deep-branching phyla stain Gram-negative but
diverge distantly from the Proteobacteria. They show
diverse metabolism and morphology (see Section 18.5).
Most members of the phyla Bacteroidetes and Chlorobi are obligate anaerobes. Within Bacteroidetes, Bacteroides species ferment complex carbohydrates, serving as
the major mutualists of the human gut. By contrast, the
closely related Chlorobi species are anaerobic “green sulfur” phototrophs that photolyze sulfides or hydrogen. The
Nitrospirae largely resemble proteobacteria in form. Most
oxidize nitrite (NO2 –) to nitrate (NO3 –). Nitrite oxidation
is a lithotrophic conversion essential for ecosystems (see
Chapter 22). Other Gram-negative clades include Acidobacteria, an important phylum of soil bacteria; and the
phylum Fusobacteria, which includes human pathogens.

B.

COURTESY OF L.L. JAHNKE

Emerging Clades

Clades of microbes that are recently defined or characterized
are referred to as emerging. Emerging clades are discovered
by field microbiologists who devise ever-more-creative screens,
finding new bacteria with unexpected traits. For instance,
in 2015 Jill Banfield’s group at UC Berkeley discovered
ultrasmall bacteria from the Rifle, Colorado, aquifer. These
bacteria passed through a 0.2-μm filter—barely big enough
for ribosomes. Cryo-TEM shows tiny cells that contain about
fifty ribosomes, with a cell wall enclosed by an S-layer and
long pili (Fig. 18.4). The cells’ genomes are smaller than
those of most known bacteria. Their DNA sequences show
deeply branching phylogeny—that is, very distant relatedness
to all the bacteria known. Some of their 16S rRNA sequences
are so distant from those of other taxa that they cannot be
amplified by so-called universal bacterial primers for PCR. We
know little about these microbes—or others yet unknown,
which future microbe hunters may discover.

YELLOWSTONE NATIONAL PARK

C.

Thought Questions

10 µm

FIGURE 18.3

■

A deep-branching thermophile: Chloroflexus.

A. This hot-spring bacterial mat in Yellowstone National Park
contains Chloroflexus species and other thermophilic bacteria.
B. Bacterial mat section showing layers of Chloroflexus. C. Chloroflexus bacteria (LM).

18.2 Which taxonomic groups in Table 18.1 stain Grampositive, and which stain Gram-negative? Which group
contains both Gram-positive and Gram-negative species?
For which groups is the Gram stain undefined, and why?
18.3 Which groups of bacterial species share common
structure and physiology within the group? Which groups
show extreme structural and physiological diversity?

696

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

■

Pilus

S-layer

100 nm

FIGURE 18.4

■ Ultrasmall bacteria. Bacteria capable of passing through a 0.2-μm filter were discovered in 2015 by Jill Banfield
and her colleagues in an aquifer in Rifle, Colorado. The tiny cells
possess approximately fifty ribosomes, a cell wall surrounded by an
S-layer, and long pili (cryo-TEM).

Note:

Formal names for taxa such as phyla, orders, and genera are capitalized (phylum Cyanobacteria, genus Streptococcus).
Informal forms are lowercase roman (cyanobacteria, streptococci),
as are adjectival forms (cyanobacterial, streptococcal).

Following our brief tour of the bacterial domain, we now
explore some of the diverse species within well-studied phyla
of Table 18.1. For reference, additional species of interest
are compiled in Appendix 2 and eAppendix 4.

To Summarize
■

■

■

■

■

Cyanobacteria conduct oxygenic photosynthesis and
interact closely with heterotrophs. Species vary widely in
their cell shape and ecological niche.
Firmicutes and Actinobacteria have a thick cell wall
and generally stain Gram-positive.
Proteobacteria and deep-branching Gram-negative
phyla have a thin cell wall and an LPS-containing outer
membrane. They show diverse metabolism and ecological
adaptations.
Spirochetes have flexible, spiral-shaped cells with complex intracellular architecture.
Chlamydiae, Planctomycetes, and Verrucomicrobia
have irregularly shaped cells with complex intracellular
form and development.

BIRGIT LUEF, ET AL. 2015. NATURE COMMUNICATIONS 6: 6372.

■

Deep-branching thermophiles such as Aquifex and
Thermotoga species share traits and habitats with thermophilic archaea. Their genomes are highly mosaic,
including many archaeal genes. Deinococcus species
are highly resistant to ionizing radiation. Chloroflexus
species are thermophilic photoheterotrophs.
Emerging organisms continually reveal previously
unknown clades of bacteria.

Note:

The main organizing principle used in Chapters 18–20 is
that of phylogeny based on DNA relatedness. Characteristic traits
described for each branch apply to the majority of its known species, though many exceptions have evolved, such as members of
Spirochetes that lack spiral form.

18.2

Cyanobacteria: Oxygenic
Phototrophs

All of the oxygen gas in Earth’s atmosphere comes from Cyanobacteria, and from plant chloroplasts that evolved from an
ancient cyanobacterium. The phylum Cyanobacteria (also
called Cyanophyta) is named for the blue phycocyanin accessory pigments possessed by some genera, giving them a bluish tint. Cyanobacteria commonly appear green because of the
predominant blue and red absorption by chlorophylls a and b
(see Table 18.2). Essentially the same chlorophylls are found in
plant chloroplasts, which evolved from internalized cyanobacteria (discussed in Chapter 17). Some cyanobacteria, however,
appear red because of the accessory pigment phycoerythrin,
which absorbs blue-green light in a range missed by cyanobacterial chlorophylls. Cyanobacteria are the only prokaryotes that use both photosystems I and II, photolyzing water
to produce oxygen, as explained in Chapter 14. Under anoxic
conditions, most cyanobacteria can also photolyze hydrogen,
reduced sulfur compounds, and organic compounds. Use of
H2S allows flexibility in habitats such as wetlands that alternate between aerobic and anoxic conditions.
The success of oxygenic phototrophy is shown by its
fundamental similarity across all members of Cyanobacteria, despite their amazing variety of cell form, behavior,
and genetics. Even two cyanobacterial genera such as Synechococcus and Anabaena share only 37% of their genes.
Cyanobacteria are found in all habitats, from tropical soils
to Antarctica. Some kinds are eaten by humans, such as in
Spirulina salad or Nostoc soup.
How does the oxygenic photosynthesis of cyanobacteria
compare with the non-oxygenic photosynthesis of thermophilic Chloroflexi, or of sulfur-based phototrophs among
the Proteobacteria? Table 18.2 summarizes key features

698

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

of phototrophy in clades throughout the bacterial domain,
including those presented in this chapter. All light-harvesting complexes descend from one of two ancestral sources:
the chlorophyll/bacteriochlorophyll with electron transport
(PS I, PS II) or the proteorhodopsin proton pump. These
photosystems have diverged through vertical inheritance, as
well as by horizontal transfer between different clades.

Cyanobacterial Cell Structure

The photosynthetic apparatus of cyanobacteria is organized
within thylakoids, pockets of membrane resembling flattened spheres packed with reaction centers. The thylakoids
may be distributed through the cell, as in filamentous genera such as Nostoc (Fig. 18.5A), or they may encircle the
cell in concentric layers, as in the single-celled marine species Prochlorococcus marinus (Fig. 18.5B). Prochlorococcus
is one of the smallest and most abundant oxygen producers in the biosphere, accounting for 40%–50% of all marine
A.
Carboxysome body

Lipid body

1 µm

Cell envelope

Carboxysomes

Thylakoids

0.5 µm

FIGURE 18.5

■

Formation of specialized nitrogen-fixing cells called
heterocysts. Heterocysts exclude oxygen, which associated heterotrophic bacteria consume.

■

Temporal separation, alternating between photosynthesis during daylight and nitrogen fixation at night.

■

Accumulation of large aggregates of cells in which the interior becomes sufficiently anaerobic for nitrogenase to function, while the exterior continues oxygenic photosynthesis.

■

Symbiosis with fungi (as in lichens) or plants that consume oxygen or otherwise maintain anoxic conditions.

Single-Celled, Filamentous, and
Colonial Cyanobacteria

COURTESY OF FRÉDERIC PARTENSKY

B.

DENNIS KUNKEL/PHOTOTAKE

Thylakoid

phototrophic biomass. In both large cells and small, the
thylakoids are completely separate from the plasma membrane, unlike the attached chlorosomes of Chloroflexi and
the plasma membrane extensions of “purple” Proteobacteria (see Table 18.2). Cyanobacterial thylakoids resemble
the thylakoids of eukaryotic chloroplasts; they are the most
complex and specialized form of photosynthetic apparatus.
Cyanobacteria have several other subcellular structures
(Fig. 18.5). Carboxysomes (also known as polyhedral
bodies) are rich in the enzyme Rubisco, and they fix CO2
(discussed in Chapter 15). Cyanobacteria store energy-rich
compounds in lipid bodies. To maintain height in the water
column and thus access to sunlight, cyanobacteria have gas
vesicles, whose buoyancy enables cells to float. Their external structures include a thick peptidoglycan cell wall, similar
to that of Gram-positive cells, plus several external layers that
vary with different species. Many species move by “gliding,”
a form of motility whose mechanism is poorly understood.
Besides fixing CO2, most cyanobacteria fix N2. Because
nitrogen fixation requires the absence of oxygen, cyanobacteria have to solve the problem of maintaining anaerobic biochemistry while producing huge quantities of highly toxic
O2. Different species solve this problem in different ways:

■ Cyanobacterial cell structure. A. Intracellular
organelles of Nostoc, a typical filamentous cyanobacterium (colorized TEM). B. Intracellular organelles of Prochlorococcus, a prochlorophyte cyanobacterium, the smallest known phototroph. Prochlorococcus accounts for 40%–50% of marine phototrophic biomass.

Single-celled species include Synechococcus and Prochlorococcus, the most abundant phototrophs in the oceans.
Another single-celled cyanobacterium is Microcystis, a
colonial microbe found in freshwater that produces dangerous toxins (microcystins). Blooms of Microcystis form
in the spring and summer when nitrogen and phosphorus
runoff from agricultural fertilizer and animal waste enters
lakes and rivers. A Microcystis bloom in Lake Erie in 2014
resulted in microcystin levels great enough that the water
supply of Toledo was contaminated. Since cyanobacterial
species can have positive or negative impacts on their habitat, environmental scientists survey the cyanobacterial communities of lakes and ponds in order to assess their health.
Figure 18.6C shows undergraduate Alex Schaal sampling a

CHAPTER 18

699

10 μm

30 μm

JOAN SLONCZEWSKI, KENYON COLLEGE

Cell

FIGURE 18.6

■

C.

B. Oscillatoria

Heterocysts

BACTERIAL DIVERSITY

ANN HEMATOL, 2002. MAR; 81(3): 170–3 EPUB 2002 Jan 26.

BERND WAGNER/UNIVERSITY OF COLOGNE

A. Nostoc

■

Pond cyanobacteria. A. Nostoc filamentous cyanobacteria form heterocysts that fix nitrogen. B. Oscillatoria filaments
consist of platelike cells. C. Alex Schaal, undergraduate at Kenyon College, samples water from a pond in Knox County, Ohio. Cyanobacteria
and algae are filtered to obtain DNA for sequencing and identification.
■

pond in Ohio to obtain cyanobacteria and eukaryotic algae.
From these samples, she will sequence DNA to identify the
species, and measure the concentration of microcystins to
determine whether the water is safe for human use.
Other cyanobacterial genera, such as Oscillatoria and
Nostoc, form multicellular filaments. Such filaments may
contain hundreds or even thousands of cells (Fig. 18.6A and
B). Oscillatoria cells are stacked like plates, wider than they
are long. To disseminate their cells beyond the biofilm, the
filaments produce hormogonia (singular, hormogonium),

short motile chains of three to five cells. Many filamentous
species, such as Nostoc, develop heterocysts to fix nitrogen
(Fig. 18.6A) (discussed in Chapter 15).
Under environmental stress, such as light limitation or
phosphate starvation, filamentous cyanobacteria such as
Anabaena form specialized spore cells called akinetes. An
akinete forms as a long, oval cell adjacent to a heterocyst,
where it stores nitrogen and develops a thickened envelope. Like other types of spores, akinetes resist desiccation
and remain viable for long periods. Table 18.3 compares

TABLE 18.3-Spore Types in Bacteria
Bacteria that
produce the spore

Initiation of spore
formation

Formation of the spore

Properties
of the spore

Akinete

Filamentous
cyanobacteria

Light limitation
Cold temperature
Phosphate starvation

An akinete develops next to a
heterocyst, as a large oval cell with a
multilayered envelope.

Desiccation and cold
resistant
Viable for decades

Arthrospore

Actinomycetes

Carbon starvation
Phosphate starvation

At the tip of an aerial mycelium, cells
undergo vegetative division and pinch
off as arthrospores.

Desiccation resistant
Heat resistant

Elementary body

Chlamydias

Completion of
intracellular life cycle

Intracellular chlamydia reticular
bodies replicate and then develop into
elementary bodies with cross-linked
outer membrane proteins. Elementary
bodies survive outside the host cell.

Survives outside host
Desiccation resistant

Endospore

Firmicutes

Carbon starvation
Nitrogen starvation
Phosphate starvation
Low pH
Peptide antibiotics

Individual cell develops mother
cell and forespore. The forespore
develops into an endospore with a
spore coat reinforced by keratin and
calcium dipicolinate.

Highly heat and
desiccation resistant
Viable for centuries

Myxospore

Myxobacteria

Nutrient starvation
Heat shock
Glycerol
Dimethyl sulfoxide

Myxobacteria aggregate to form a
fruiting body in which vegetative cell
division forms a mass of myxospores.

Desiccation resistant
UV resistant

Spore type

700

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY
B. Merismopedia

C. Pleurocapsa

Multicellularity

INSTITUTO BIOQUIMICA VEGETAL Y FOTOSINTESIS

Cyanobacterial filaments and
colonies, in effect, represent
multicellular organisms. Different bacteria have evolved
diverse means of generating
multicellularity (Fig. 18.8).
As we have seen, filamentous cyanobacteria such as
Anabaena or Nostoc form
20 μm
10 μm
20 μm
chains by serial cell division.
At intervals, a cell differentiFIGURE 18.7 ■ Colonial cyanobacteria. A. Gloeocapsa is surrounded by mucus. Cells grow
ates into a heterocyst, which
as single cells, doublets, or quartets. B. Merismopedia forms extended quartets, octets, and so on.
performs nitrogen fixation—
C. Pleurocapsa forms enormous aggregates that release baeocytes.
a specific function for the
filament as a whole. In other
clades, we will see very different mechanisms. Firmicute
the properties of akinetes with those of other spore types
Bacillus cells (discussed in Section 18.3) assemble by attach(which are discussed along with Firmicutes and other taxa).
ment to a substrate. The cells grow forming a biofilm that
Akinetes lie dormant but viable until improved conditions
releases endospores. Actinomycetes (see Section 18.3) form
permit germination and growth of new vegetative filabranching filaments, aerial and into the soil, where they
ments. In lake water, akinete germination may cause toxic
produce antibiotics. The older cells undergo programmed
blooms of Anabaena.
cell death, while aerial filaments generate exospores. GramSome filamentous cyanobacteria, such as Lyngbya and
negative myxobacteria (Section 18.4) assemble by cheTrichodesmium, form algal blooms in the ocean. Trichomotaxis and differentiate into a fruiting body to release
desmium can form giant blooms visible from outer space,
myxospores.
covering many square kilometers of ocean surface. Such a
bloom can be triggered by an influx of iron carried by wind
from a dust storm blowing off the Sahara desert (discussed
in Chapter 22).
Cyanobacterial Communities
Yet other species, called colonial cyanobacteria, divide
Cyanobacteria share many kinds of mutualistic associations
to form small groups or larger colonies (Fig. 18.7).
with animals, plants, fungi, and protists. Sponges growing
Gloeocapsa and Chroococcus form doublets or quartets,
on coral reefs may harbor communities of cyanobacteria
encased in a thick protective mucous slime (Fig. 18.7A).
that provide the sponges with nutrients from photosyntheOthers, such as Merismopedia, continue cell division
sis. The products of photosynthesis supplement the nutriin two planes, extending to form long, square sheets
ents obtained by the sponges from their filter feeding,
of attached cells (Fig. 18.7B). Colonial genera such as
and these extra nutrients greatly augment the sponge
Myxosarcina and Pleurocapsa reproduce by multiple fisgrowth rate within the competitive coral reef environment.
sion, forming large cell aggregates (Fig. 18.7C). As the
Sponge symbionts produce many pharmaceutically active
aggregate matures, some cells continue to divide and
compounds.
release single cells called baeocytes. Each baeocyte reproIn salt marshes and sand f lats, cyanobacteria particduces and develops into a new cell aggregate. The aggreipate
in multilayered microbial mats, such as the secgate group maintains anoxic conditions at the center for
tion shown in Figure 18.9, cut from the sand f lats of
nitrogen fixation.
Great Sippewissett Salt Marsh, on Cape Cod, Massachusetts. The high concentration of sulfides in the
sediment supports growth of high populations of sulfur phototrophs. Typically, cyanobacteria and eukaryThought Questions
otic algae such as diatoms form the upper green layer.
18.4 What are the relative advantages and disadvanBelow, the purple layer consists of “purple sulfur” protages of propagation by hormogonia, as compared with
teobacteria, whose photopigments (primarily BChl a)
akinetes?
absorb at longer wavelengths (discussed in Section 18.5).
18.5 What are the relative advantages and disadvantages of
The pale-colored layer below the purple layer consists of
the different strategies for maintaining separation of nitrogen
proteobacteria with BChl b, which absorbs farther into
fixation and photosynthesis?
the infrared.
DR. PETER SIVER/VISUALS UNLIMITED

ALLA ASTER & TAMAR ZOHARY, IMAGES USED UNDER
LICENSE TO MBL (MICRO*SCOPE)

A. Gloeocapsa

A. Anabaena spp.
Hormogonia
With nitrogen

FIGURE 18.8

■ Bacterial
multicellularity. Multicellularity

arises by various means. A. Filamentous
cyanobacteria form chains by serial cell
division. At intervals, a cell differentiates
into a heterocyst. B. Bacillus species
assemble by attachment to a substrate.
They grow as a biofilm that produces
antibiotics, then releases endospores.
C. Actinomycetes form branching
filaments that produce antibiotics,
then undergo programmed cell
death. Aerial filaments generate
exospores. D. Myxobacteria assemble
by chemotaxis of swarmer cells. They
differentiate into a fruiting body and
release myxospores.

Without nitrogen

Akinetes

Heterocyst fixes N2

B. Bacillus subtilis
Spore

Matrix

Attachment,
differentiation, and
matrix synthesis

Motile cells

Biofilm growth
and cannibalism

Maturation and
sporulation

C. Streptomyces spp.
Exospores

Air

Soil
Antibiotic
Vegetative growth
Programmed cell death
and aerial growth

Sporulation

D. Myxococcus xanthus
Myxospore

Swarmer cell

Prey cell

Cooperative feeding

Fruiting-body formation

To Summarize
■

Cyanobacteria and diatoms
Purple sulfur proteobacteria

3 cm

JORG OVERMANN AND FERRAU GARCIA-PICHEL

Long-wavelength purple
sulfur bacteria
■

■

■

FIGURE 18.9

■ Cyanobacteria in microbial mats. Cutaway
through a multilayered microbial mat from the sand flats of Great
Sippewissett Salt Marsh (Cape Cod, Massachusetts). Cyanobacteria and diatoms form the upper green layer, above layers of purple
sulfur proteobacteria.

■

Cyanobacteria are the only oxygenic prokaryotes. They
conduct photosynthesis in thylakoids, fix CO2 in carboxysomes, and maintain buoyancy using gas vesicles.
They exhibit gliding motility.
Single-celled cyanobacteria such as Prochlorococcus are
among the smallest and most abundant phototrophic producers in the oceans. Microcystis species produce microcystins that poison lakes polluted by agricultural runoff.
Filamentous cyanobacteria such as Nostoc and Oscillatoria
are common in freshwater lakes. They form heterocysts to
fix nitrogen, and reproduce by hormogonia or by akinetes.
Colonial cyanobacteria such as Myxosarcina produce
large cell aggregates with an anaerobic core for nitrogen
fixation. The colonies reproduce through baeocytes.
Symbiotic associations of cyanobacteria occur with animals, fungi, and plants.

702

■

PART 4

18.3

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

Firmicutes and
Actinobacteria
(Gram-Positive)

Which bacteria have the toughest, thickest cell walls? Most
bacteria of the phylum Firmicutes, meaning “tough skin”
bacteria, have thick peptidoglycan cell walls that retain the
Gram stain (discussed in Chapter 3). The thick cell wall
helps exclude antibiotics and antibacterial agents from
competitors in the environment. Members of a related phylum, Actinobacteria, also stain Gram-positive. As shown in
Table 18.1, we define Firmicutes as the phylum of Grampositive bacteria that contains “low-GC” species (having
a low ratio of GC/AT base pairs), whereas Actinobacteria are the “high-GC” species. Species in both phyla have
thick cell walls reinforced by teichoic acids, cross-threading
phosphodiester chains of glycerol and ribitol (discussed in
Chapter 3).
A.

PNAS COVER, DEC. 1999/MARC SHARP AND KIT
POGLIANO, U. OF CALIFORNIA, SAN DIEGO

CDC/COURTESY OF LARRY STAUFFER, OREGON STATE PUBLIC HEALTH LABORATORY

Endospore

Many firmicutes, such as Bacillus and Clostridium species, survive unfavorable environmental conditions by
forming durable endospores. Non–spore formers such as
Lactobacillus and Streptococcus may have evolved from a
common Firmicutes ancestor that formed endospores. In
many cases, the machinery to form endospores is discovered in the genomes of firmicutes previously thought to be
non–spore formers, such as Carboxydothermus, soil bacteria
that oxidize CO (carbon monoxide) to CO2. On the other
hand, actinobacteria of the order Actinomycetales (actinomycetes), such as Streptomyces, do not form endospores,
but they develop filaments that disperse arthrospores (see
Table 18.3).

Firmicutes Include EndosporeForming Rods

Endospore-forming bacteria are common in soil and air
because their spore forms resist desiccation and can remain
viable in a dormant state for thousands of years. The bestknown orders are Bacillales (mainly aerobic respirers) and
Clostridiales (obligate anaerobes). Both groups include species of environmental and economic importance, as well as
causative agents of well-known diseases.
Bacillales. The genus Bacillus was one of the fi rst bac-

Counterstain

terial genera to be classified, in the nineteenth century
(Fig. 18.10). Colonies soon appear on a nutrient agar plate
exposed to air. Bacillus species can be isolated from soil or
food by suspending a sample in water and heating at 80°C
for half an hour. Vegetative cells (that is, cells undergoing binary fission) and non–spore formers are killed at that
temperature. The remaining endospores will germinate
and grow on a beef broth agar plate at 25°C–30°C. Bacillus
species isolated in this way include over a thousand characterized strains, all but a few of them harmless to humans.

Empty capsule
after spore released
5 μm

B.
DNA

SpoIIIE

Forespore

Mature
endospore

Empty cell after
release

Membrane

FIGURE 18.10

1 µm

■ Bacillus species: Gram-positive endospore formers. A. Gram-stained Bacillus species, sporulating culture. Endospores stain green with malachite green. B. Correlated fluorescence imaging of membrane migration, protein translocation, and chromosome
localization during B. subtilis sporulation. Membranes were stained with red fluorescent FM4-64. Chromosomes were localized with the blue
fluorescent nuclear counterstain DAPI. The small, green fluorescent patches indicate the localization of a green fluorescent protein (GFP)
gene fusion to Spo III E, a protein essential for both initial membrane fusion and forespore engulfment. Progression of the engulfment is
shown from left to right.

CHAPTER 18

BACTERIAL DIVERSITY

■

703

GEORGE CHAPMAN/VISUALS UNLIMITED

DENNIS KUNKEL/VISUALS UNLIMITED

SCIMAT/SCIENCE SOURCE

B.

The large, rod-shaped vegetative
Endospore
Crystalline inclusion
cells (growing and replicating form) of
Bacillus species are easily stained and
visualized. A species of particular scientific importance is Bacillus subtilis, the
best-studied Gram-positive organism,
a “model system” for Firmicutes. The
B. subtilis genome sequence reveals a
large number of transporters for carbon
sources and many secretory complexes
for industrially important enzymes and
1 μm
1 μm
drug resistance proteins. It also reveals
FIGURE 18.11 ■ Bacillus thuringiensis: the biological insecticide. A. Sporulating
several integrated prophages (integrated
cell of B. thuringiensis, showing crystalline inclusion of insecticidal toxin (colorized TEM).
phage genomes). Phage genomes conB. Toxin crystals (colorized blue) embedded in B. thuringiensis colony.
tribute to bacterial evolution by transferring genes between different strains
the digestive tracts of insect larvae; thus, it is safe for aniand species, as discussed in Chapter 17.
mals with acidic digestive tracts.
B. subtilis is used as a model system to study stress
Many Bacillus species are extremophiles, growing at
response. Enormous changes in protein expression accomhigh pH (B. alkalophilus), at high temperature (B. therpany starvation and general stress conditions. As the vegmophilus), or in high salt (B. halodurans). Some species
etative cells run short of nutrients on an agar plate, they
combine alkaliphily with thermophily, as in the case of the
begin a program to “sporulate”—that is, develop inert
“alkalithermophile” B. alkalophilus. Genomic research has
endospores (Fig. 18.10A). The life cycle of endospore profocused on the surprisingly subtle differences that distinduction (see Chapter 4) involves a coordinated developmenguish an extremophile from a closely related mesophile.
tal plan, in which the cell divides near the pole instead of
For example, thermostability of proteins can be determined
at the cell equator (Fig. 18.10B). The polar compartment
by comparing the protein sequences of a thermophile with
develops as the forespore, directed by unique regulatory
those of a related mesophile. The thermophilic sequence
proteins such as SpoIIIE. The larger compartment, called
shows specific patterns of amino acid residues that confer
the mother cell, provides DNA and nutrients to the growthermostability. Such amino acid substitutions provide useing forespore and disintegrates after release of the mature
ful information for industrial engineering of enzymes.
endospore. When the released endospore encounters favorable conditions of moisture and nutrients, it germinates
Clostridiales. This anaerobic family of spore formers
and restarts vegetative growth. The sporulation cycle can
includes the genus Clostridium, species of which cause botproceed out of a biofilm (see Fig. 18.8B).
ulism (C. botulinum) and tetanus (C. tetani) (Fig. 18.12A).
A Bacillus species of great economic importance is
The botulism toxin (botulinum, or “Botox”) is famous
B. thuringiensis, the most successful biological control
for its therapeutic use to relax muscle spasms and smooth
agent yet produced (Fig. 18.11).
B. thuringiensis was originally disA. Clostridium sp.
B. Botox treatment
covered in 1901 by Japanese bacteriBefore
After
ologist Shigetane Ishiwata as a cause
of disease in silkworms. The organism proved easy to culture on agarbased medium, and its spores are
now applied as an insecticide against
the gypsy moth caterpillar. During
sporulation, B. thuringiensis generates a diamond-shaped crystal adjacent to its endospore (Fig. 18.11A).
2 μm
The crystal contains an insecticidal
FIGURE 18.12 ■ Clostridium species: spore-forming anaerobes. A. As Clostridium
protein known as delta endotoxin.
cells sporulate, the endospore swells, forming a characteristic “drumstick” appearance.
The crystals are ultimately released
B. The deadly botulinum toxin (Botox) from C. botulinum is used to relax muscle spasms.
from the cells (Fig. 18.11B). The
This woman was unable to open her eyelids fully (left frame)—a condition that was cured by
toxin is activated only at high pH in
injection of Botox (right frame).

JOHN M. HILINSKI, M.D.

A.

■

704

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

wrinkles in skin (Fig. 18.12B) (discussed in Chapter 26).
Other species, such as C. acetobutylicum, have economic
importance as producers of industrial solvents such as butanol and acetone (for industrial microbiology, see Chapter 16). The butanol pathway is an example of the diverse
fermentative strategies found among clostridia. Unlike
Bacillus (a monophyletic clade with a common ancestor),
the Clostridium group is polyphyletic, representing many
clades that branch among different genera.
The best-known Clostridium species, such as C. botulinum and C. tetani, sporulate in a form distinct from that
of Bacillus (see Fig. 18.12A). The growing Clostridium
endospore swells the end of the cell, forming a “drumstick”
appearance. Mature clostridial spores are generally less heat
resistant than the spores of Bacillus and thus more difficult to isolate in pure culture from natural environments.
Nevertheless, Clostridium spores are found in soil and
water, ready to germinate and grow when the environment
becomes anoxic. Many harmless species are found in the
human colon, particularly in infants. Pathogenic C. botulinum can grow within the colon of very young infants, and
infant botulism has been implicated in some cases of sudden infant death syndrome.
Another species, Clostridium difficile, is a life-threatening intestinal pathogen, resistant to most antibiotics.
C. difficile grows in patients treated with antibiotics that
eliminate normal enteric bacteria, allowing growth of the

A.

pathogen. The pathogen can be so hard to eradicate that
patients require fecal bacteriotherapy, or “fecal transplant”
from a healthy person’s colon. The healthy colon residents
recolonize the gut and outcompete the pathogen.
Related to Clostridium are the Heliobacteriaceae, or “Sun
bacteria,” the only known phototrophs in Firmicutes (see
Table 18.2). Their name derives from their yellowish color,
caused by the shift of their red-peak absorbance into the
infrared, which allows transmission of red light plus green
light (perceived as yellow). The heliobacteria are photoheterotrophs, with a PS I reaction center providing a modest boost
of energy to supplement heterotrophic metabolism of simple
organic compounds. Most heliobacterial cells are elongated
rods with peritrichous flagella, and they form endospores—
the only known endospore-forming phototrophs.

Note:

Distinguish Heliobacterium from Helicobacter, a helical
species of the Gammaproteobacteria.

Variant sporulation and “live birth.” The order Clostridia-

les includes species of exceptionally large bacteria that grow
only within the digestive tract of specific animal hosts.
These species have evolved intriguing variations of the
endospore former life cycle, as revealed by Esther Angert
and colleagues at Cornell University (Fig. 18.13A). Metabacterium polyspora (size 15–20 μm) grows throughout the

C. Multiple endospore formation; limited binary fission

ESTHER ANGERT, CORNELL UNIVERSITY

2. Bipolar forespores
form.
Binary
fission

1. Endospore
germinates and
cell grows.

B.

ESTHER ANGERT, CORNELL UNIVERSITY

5. Mother cell
disintegrates.

FIGURE 18.13

Mother
cell

3. Forespores
fission.

Endospores

10 μm

4. Forespores multiply
within mother cell.

■ Multiple endospore formation. A. Esther Angert characterized unusual forms of sporulation and reproduction in
exceptionally large firmicute bacteria. B. Metabacterium polyspora forms multiple endospores (phase-contrast LM). C. A forespore forms at
each pole. Forespores fission and multiply within the mother cell and then are released. Germinated cells undergo limited or no binary fission.

CHAPTER 18
A.

■

BACTERIAL DIVERSITY

■

705

B. “Live birth” of offspring; no binary fission
Bipolar division
Mother
cell

ESTHER ANGERT, CORNELL UNIVERSITY

Mother cell
disintegrates.

Offspring
Emerging
offspring

Offspring
50 µm

FIGURE 18.14

■

“Live birth” in Epulopiscium. A. E. fishelsoni forms

Offspring grow through
length of the mother cell.

offspring cells that grow internally. B. An offspring cell forms by fission at each
pole. The cells grow internally until released. No binary fission occurs outside the
mother cell.

digestive tract of guinea pigs (Fig. 18.13B). Endospores
ingested from feces germinate in the upper intestine but
rarely undergo binary fission. Instead, the growing cell
forms forespores at both poles (Fig. 18.13C). The forespores actually multiply within the mother cell to form
several endospores, which are released in the colon before
defecation.
An even larger enteric endosymbiont is Epulopiscium
fishelsoni, found in the digestive tract of surgeonfish
(Fig. 18.14). These bacteria are large enough to be seen
by eye—about the size of the period at the end of this sentence. As in M. polyspora, Angert showed that E. fishelsoni
reproduction is synchronized with the digestive cycle of its
host, but it has gone even further in transformation of the
sporulation cycle. Binary fission is eliminated; the cell must
fission at both poles. Each polar fission generates an intracellular daughter cell that grows to nearly the full length of
the mother cell. From two to seven intracellular offspring
ultimately emerge in “live birth” from the mother cell,
which then disintegrates.
An even more bizarre “live birth” species related to clostridia was discovered in the mammalian intestine. These
bacteria, provisionally named “Candidatus Savagella,”
grow as filaments attached to the intestinal epithelial cells
(Special Topic 18.1).

Non-Spore-Forming Firmicutes

Many Firmicute species do not form spores. These non–
spore formers include species of Bacillales and Clostridiales,
as well as other Gram-positive orders such as Lactobacillales. In these taxa, the endospore-forming system was
probably lost by reductive evolution. Non-spore-forming
firmicutes include human pathogens such as Listeria and
Streptococcus species, as well as lactic acid bacteria that are
important for food production.

Listeria species are facultative anaerobic bacilli, named
for the British surgeon Joseph Lister (1827–1912), who
was the first to promote antisepsis during surgery. They
include enteric pathogens, such as L. monocytogenes, that
contaminate cheese and sauerkraut (discussed in Chapter 16). Unlike other food-associated organisms, Listeria
grows at temperatures as low as 4°C. Under preindustrial
conditions of food preparation, L. monocytogenes was generally outcompeted by other flora. The era of refrigeration
led to the emergence of Listeria as the cause of listeriosis, a
severe gastrointestinal illness that can progress to the nervous system. L. monocytogenes cells are taken up by macrophages into phagocytic vesicles, but they avoid digestion
and escape the vesicles. The bacteria then multiply as they
travel through the host cytoplasm, generating “tails” of
actin (Fig. 18.15
). The actin tails eventually project
the cells of Listeria out of the original host cell and enable
it to penetrate a neighboring host cell.
Lactic acid bacteria. The lactic acid bacteria (order Lacto-

bacillales) are aerotolerant (capable of growth in the presence of oxygen), though they do not use oxygen to respire.
Most lactic acid bacteria are obligate fermenters; that is,
they generate ATP by substrate-level phosphorylation (discussed in Chapter 13). They ferment primarily by converting sugars to lactic acid (a fermentation pathway discussed
in Chapter 13). As the acid builds up, the pH decreases
until it halts bacterial growth; thus, the carbon source
retains much of its food value for human consumption.
This is the basis of yogurt and cheese production. Lactococcus and Lactobacillus species are extremely important
for the dairy industry (discussed in Chapter 16). Other
common genera of lactic acid bacteria include Leuconostoc,
which often spoils meat, and Pediococcus, found in sauerkraut and fermented bean products, as well as meat products such as sausage.

706

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

LACAYO, VANDUIJN, AND RAFELSKI. STANFORD UNIVERSITY.

A.

Lactobacillus acidophilus, are believed to play a positive role
in human health by inhibiting the growth of pathogens.
For this reason L. acidophilus may be ingested as a probiotic therapy.

Staphylococcus and Streptococcus. The staphylococci are facultative aerobic cocci that grow in clusters
(Fig. 18.16A), often packed in hexagonal arrays (see
panel A). They include common skin flora such as Staphylococcus epidermidis. The staphylococci are generally salt
tolerant,
to
tol
and their fermentation generates short-chain
fatty aacids that inhibit growth of skin pathogens.
Cee
Certain
species, however, are themselves serious
o pathogens. Staphylococcus aureus causes
10 μm
impetigo and toxic shock syndrome, as
well as pneumonia, mastitis, osteomyB.
elitis, and other diseases (discussed in
Bacterium
Chapter 26). It is a major cause of nos1. Phag
Phagocytosis
gocytosis
y
7. Replication
ocomial (hospital-acquired) infections,
in cytoplasm
especially contamination of surgical
wounds. The most dangerous strains,
now resistant to most known antibiotics, are termed MRSA (methicillinPhagosome
6. Penetration of
resistant S. aureus).
neighboring cell
Streptococcus species generally form
chains instead of clusters, because
2. Phagosome
their
cells divide in a single plane
lysis
(Fig. 18.16B). They are aerotolerant (grow
5. Formation of
in the presence of oxygen) but metabolize by fermentalong actin tail
tion. Many live on oral or dental surfaces, where they
3. Replication
cause caries (tooth decay). Their fermentation of sugars
in cytoplasm
produces such high concentrations of lactic acid that the
pH at the tooth surface can fall to pH 4. Streptococcus
species cause many serious diseases, including pneumonia
4. Encapsulation
by host actin
(S. pneumoniae), strep throat, erysipelas, and scarlet fever
filaments
Macrophage or
(S. pyogenes or group A streptococci).
parenchymal cell
The streptococci are less salt tolerant than Staphylococcus
FIGURE 18.15 ■ Listeria monocytogenes: intracellular
species, which tolerate as much as 5%–15% NaCl. Another
pathogen travels on tails of actin. A. Fluorescent antibodies
genus whose size and fermentative metabolism resembles
mark the tails of polymerized actin (green) behind the Listeria cell
that of streptococci is Enterococcus. E. faecalis is a combodies (red) traveling within an infected macrophage. B. Invading
mon member of the intestinal flora, and related strains are
bacteria encapsulate themselves in actin. Actin tails propel the bacteria through the host cytoplasm and out through the cell mementeric pathogens.
brane to invade a neighboring cell. Source: Part B from U. South Carolina,
Microbiology and Immunology On Line.

The shape of lactate-producing bacteria varies among
species, from long, thin rods to curved rods and cocci.
Most lactic acid bacteria have fastidious growth requirements and need many amino acids and vitamins. They can
be isolated from pasture grasses incubated anaerobically in
moderate acid (pH 5). The human intestinal flora include
species of lactic acid bacteria. Certain species, particularly

Anaerobic dechlorinators. Some fi rmicutes from the soil
show promising abilities to degrade chlorinated pollutants, such as dry-cleaning solvents that are biodegraded
very slowly in the environment. The chlorinated molecules
are reduced as alternative electron acceptors. Dehalobacter
restrictus, a flagellated rod, was isolated as an anaerobe
capable of respiring by donating electrons to chlorine atoms
in tetrachloroethene (Fig. 18.17). Thus, the discovery of
D. restrictus has promising potential for bioremediation of
chlorinated pollutants.

CHAPTER 18

■

0.5 μm

DAVID SCHARF/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY/SCIENCE SOURCE

DAVID SCHARF PHOTOGRAPHY

15 μm

FIGURE 18.16

BACTERIAL DIVERSITY

■

707

B. Streptococcus

DAVID SCHARF PHOTOGRAPHY

EYE OF SCIENCE/SCIENCE SOURCE

A. Staphylococcus

■

10 μm

2 μm

Staphylococci and streptococci. A. Staphylococcus species: Gram stain (left); colorized SEM (right). B. Streptococcus

species: Gram stain (left); colorized SEM (right).

While genetic analysis places D. restrictus among the
clostridia, the bacterium actually stains Gram-negative,
perhaps because its peptidoglycan layer is relatively thin.
Nevertheless, the species shows no Gram-negative outer
membrane. It does possess a thick S-layer of hexagonally
tiled proteins, typical of Gram-positive bacteria.

host environment. The Mollicutes comprise many genera
of flexible wall-less cells that maintain a shape through
some kind of cytoskeleton (Fig. 18.18A and B). On agar
they form colonies of a characteristic “fried-egg” appearance (Fig. 18.18C).
The best-known genus of Mollicutes is Mycoplasma,
although its species now appear to fall in several distantly
related branches. Mycoplasmas are found as parasites of
every known class of multicellular organism, including vertebrates, insects, and vascular plants; in humans,
they cause pneumonia and meningitis. Another medically important mycoplasma is Ureaplasma urealyticum,
an opportunistic pathogen inhabiting the genital tracts
of men and women. Most individuals are unaware they
harbor the organism, but U. urealyticum has been associated with urethritis, amniotic infections, and pulmonary
infections.
Some Mycoplasma species remain adherent to the host
cell, whereas others penetrate and grow intracellularly.
Most mycoplasma cells have a rounded cell shape with

Mycoplasmas lack a cell wall. The mycoplasmas are cell

wall–less bacteria, classified as Tenericutes or Mollicutes (Latin for “soft skin”). Mycoplasmas have completely lost their cell wall and S-layer through reductive
evolution, retaining only their cell membrane. Presumably, the loss of these energy-expensive structures
enhanced the reproductive rate of cells in a protected

C. HOLLIGER ET AL. 1998 ARCH. MICROBIOLOGY 169:313

A.

FIGURE 18.17

■ Dehalobacter restrictus conducts anaerobic respiration by dechlorination.

A. Dehalobacter restrictus, a flagellated rod related to
clostridia. B. D. restrictus donates electrons to remove
chlorine from tetrachloroethene, a major industrial
pollutant.

1 µm

B. Dechlorination of tetrachloroethene by Dehalobacter restrictus
Cl

Cl

2H HCl

Cl

H

Cl

Cl

C C

C C
Cl

H 2H HCl

Cl

Cl

H 2H HCl

H

Cl

H

C C

H 2H HCl

H

Cl

H

C C

H
C C
H

CHAPTER 18

■

BACTERIAL DIVERSITY

■

709

PAMELA SCHNUPF, ET AL. 2015. NATURE 520: 99–103.

The in vitro system
A.
enabled Schnupf to observe
Initiating
the bacteria’s unique proSymmetrical
Asymmetrical
Intracellular-offspring
intracellular
division
division
formation
offspring
cess of differentiation and
production of intracellular offspring (Fig. 2). Electron microscopy showed
that each filament begins
Primary
Secondary
Engulfment of
Intracellularwith a single “newborn” cell
segments
segments
daughter cell
offspring
release
whose holdfast attaches
to the surface of the host
epithelial cell. The cell then
B.
grows and divides, forming a multicellular filament
(primary segment cells).
When the filament length
5 m
exceeds 50 μm, the distalsegment cells start to differentiate into mother and
FIGURE 2 ■ Savagella growth and reproduction. A. Primary segments divide and
differentiate until offspring bacteria develop within each cell. Offspring are released, to attach
daughter cells. Each daughto an epithelial cell at a new position and grow a new filament. B. Intracellular offspring develop
ter cell becomes engulfed by
within cells of the filament (Gram stain).
a mother cell. The engulfed
daughter cell then divides
and differentiates into two intracellular offspring. Finally,
RESEARCH QUESTION
the mother cell breaks open, releasing the two offspring.
How do you think Savagella filaments communicate with the
Each offspring cell possesses a holdfast to attach a new site
host immune system? Can you design an experiment to test
on the gut epithelium.
your hypothesis?
How do the attached bacterial filaments influence our gut
epithelium? Schnupf has shown that the filament-attached
Schnupf, Pamela, Valérie Gaboriau-Routhiau, Marine Gros,
epithelial cells have elevated transcription of genes that
Robin Friedman, Maryse Moya-Nilges, et al. 2015. Growth
govern innate immune responses (discussed in Chapter 23).
and host interaction of mouse segmented filamentous bacteThus, this bacterium’s unusual life cycle plays a key role in the
ria in vitro. Nature 520:99–103.
function of its mammalian host.

one or two extended tips. In M. penetrans, an opportunistic pathogen infecting AIDS patients, the cell’s
attachment tip is coated with adhesion molecules that
enable attachment to a host cell surface (Fig. 18.18A).
The attachment tip penetrates deep into epithelial tissues. By contrast, the fish pathogen M. mobile has no
attachment tip, but glides along a surface at a rate of
seven cell lengths per second (Fig. 18.18B). The basis
of mycoplasma motility is not understood, although it
may involve gliding or cytoskeletal contraction. In some
species, motility involves a specialized cell tip called the
“terminal organelle,” but species that lack this organelle
are equally motile. Species of Spiroplasma have a spiral

shape and undergo corkscrew motion; the basis for this
motion is also unknown.
Mycoplasma genomes are among the smallest in known
cellular organisms. They also lack biosynthetic pathways
for amino acids and phospholipids, which instead must be
acquired from the host. Mycoplasmas have unique nutritional requirements, such as cholesterol, a membrane component typical of eukaryotes but rare for prokaryotes. For
these reasons, mycoplasmas are difficult to grow in pure
culture, although they readily infect tissue cultures. In
fact, mycoplasma contamination of tissue culture is so
prevalent that it has compromised major studies of cancer
and AIDS.

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY
B.

C.

J. P. MARTIN ET AL. SOIL MICROBIOLOGY AND
BIOCHEMISTRY SLIDE SET. 1976.

COURTESY OF TOBIAS KIESER, CELIA BRUTON AND
JENNIFER TENOR

A.

K FURIHATA, UNIVERSITY OF TOKYO

710

D. Telomere (end of chromosome)
G
G
C
C
T
T
A
A
C
A
A
A
T

G
G
C
C
T
T
A
A
G

……. A C C C G T C T T T T

A
G
G
A
A
T
T
C

FIGURE 18.19

■ Streptomyces
bacteria. A. Colonies of S. coelicolor

A
G
G
A
A
T
T
G
T
T
T
A

A

T

T
G
C
C
C
G
A
A
A

A
G
G
G
C
T
T

G
C
C
C
G
G
C
A

T G T CG T C T T T

Actinomycetes Form
Multicellular Filaments

The phylum Actinobacteria, the “high-GC Gram-positives,” comprises several orders, including Actinomycetales
and Bifidobacteriales. Members of the order Actinomycetales are “actinomycetes.” Actinomycetes include filamentous spore formers such as Streptomyces and Frankia,
as well as short-chain organisms such as Mycobacterium,
and irregularly shaped cells such as Corynebacterium.
Members of an emerging group of marine actinomycetes,
such as Salinispora, are isolated from sediment and from
sponges. Salinispora species form numerous exotic secondary products that show promise as pharmaceutical
agents.
The actinomycetes form complex multicellular filaments superficially resembling the branched “fuzzy”
form of fungi (fungi are discussed in Chapter 20). Profoundly important for medicine, actinomycetes and fungi
produce most of our antibiotics. Researchers mine the
soil of remote environments to find actinomycetes producing antibiotics for which resistance genes are not yet
widespread.
Streptomyces: filamentous spore formers. The best-

studied actinomycetes are Streptomyces bacteria, which
form multicellular fi laments that generate dispersible spores. Streptomycetes play a major role in the ecosystems of soil (discussed in Chapter 21). Decaying

A
G
G
G
C
C
G
T

G
G
C
C
C
C
C
T

G CG T CG T

A
G
G
G
G
G
A

show sky-blue mycelia. B. Streptomyces cells form coiled filaments
(filament width approx. 0.5 μm) (SEM).
C. Close-up of a coiled filament, showing individual cells (SEM). D. Hairpinlooped telomere end of the linear
3′ end
chromosome of S. griseus. Source:

G CGCGC

Part D from Prokaryotes, Springer.

Streptomyces cells produce the compound geosmin, which
causes the characteristic odor of soil and can affect the
taste of drinking water. In culture, the best-known species, S. coelicolor (Latin, “sky color”), forms strikingly blue
colonies (Fig. 18.19A). The blue color derives from several pigments, including actinorhodin, a polyketide antibiotic. Other species produce fi laments that are red, orange,
green, or gray, depending on their distinctive products,
many of which are antibiotics.
Thought Question

18.6 Why would Streptomyces produce antibiotics targeting
other bacteria?

Streptomyces species are obligate aerobes, requiring
access to air to complete their multicellular life cycle (see
earlier, Fig. 18.8C). When a Streptomyces spore germinates, it extends vegetative mycelia, branched filaments
that grow into the substrate. Some of the filaments then
grow upward into the air, where they develop into aerial mycelia. The aerial mycelia in some species grow in
tightly coiled spirals (Fig. 18.19B and C). As the mycelial colony runs out of nutrients, older cells of the filament age and lyse, releasing nutrients that are absorbed
by the younger cells. The nutrients also attract other
scavengers, which may be killed by antibiotics produced

by the aging streptomycete cells. The dead scavengers,
too, release nutrients that feed the growing tip of the
mycelium.
As mycelia mature, they fragment into smaller cells
called exospores (also called arthrospores). Exospores are
vegetative cells, not dormant like Bacillus endospores (see
Table 18.3). The exospores separate and are dispersed
by the wind, enabling them to colonize a new location.
Streptomycete mycelia can be obtained from natural habitats by burying a glass slide in soil and then waiting several days for spores to germinate, covering the slide with
mycelia. They are challenging to isolate in pure culture,
however, because their coiled filaments trap cells of other
bacteria.
The S. coelicolor genome contains over 8 million base
pairs—one of the largest prokaryotic genomes. Streptomycete chromosomes are linear with special “telomeres,”
single-stranded end sequences that double back to form
hairpin loops (Fig. 18.19D). Much of the lengthy genome
of a streptomycete encodes catabolism of a rich array of
diverse organic components of decaying plant and animal
matter, including even lignin. Other genes encode extensive operons for production of diverse secondary products
(see Chapter 15), including antibiotics. More than half
of the antibiotics currently used in medicine derive from
Streptomyces species.

Note: Distinguish Streptomyces, filamentous rod-shaped actinomycetes, from nonactinomycete Streptococcus, Gram-positive
cocci that form short, unbranched chains.
Actinomycetes associated with animals and plants. Many

marine actinomycetes associate with sponges, where
they produce antibiotics that may help the sponge resist
pathogens. Pharmaceutical companies now investigate
these sponge symbionts for new drugs. Some Streptomyces species maintain a mutualism with leaf-cutter ants.
The ants culture the bacteria on special organs to produce antibiotics against parasites of their fungal gardens
(discussed in eTopic 17.5). A few actinomycetes are animal pathogens; for example, Actinomyces species cause
actinomycosis, a form of skin abscesses in humans and
cattle.
Actinomycetes have many mutually beneficial associations with plants. For example, Frankia associates with
the alder tree, which develops orange-yellow-colored
nodules on its roots to fix nitrogen (Fig. 18.20). Frankia species live as endophytes, endosymbionts of vascular
plants. This nitrogen fixation mutualism is analogous to
the better-known symbiosis between legumes and rhizobia (discussed along with Alphaproteobacteria, in Section
18.4). Other Frankia species benefit wheat by conferring

■

BACTERIAL DIVERSITY

■

711

Nodule of
Frankia

HARDWOOD SILVICULTURE COOPERATIVE, OREGON STATE
UNIVERSITY

CHAPTER 18

FIGURE 18.20 ■ Frankia species associate endophytically
with plants. Root of alder tree (Alnus glutinosa) bears the
orange-yellow-colored nodules (arrowhead) containing Frankia.

resistance to major fungal pathogens, such as the fungus
that causes “take-all” disease, as well as to certain parasites and insects. Still other Frankia species grow as saprophytes, consuming dead leaf litter. A few actinomycetes
cause plant diseases. For example, potato scab disease is
caused by Streptomyces scabies.
Nonmycelial Actinobacteria: Mycobacterium and Corynebacterium. These actinobacteria share the thick acid-

fast cell wall of Streptomyces but lack the mycelial lifestyle.
Two genera that cause dreaded diseases are Mycobacterium (Fig. 18.21) and Corynebacterium. Both genera
have thick cell envelopes containing mycolic acids and
phenolic glycolipids. The mycolic acids of M. tuberculosis
are extremely diverse and include some of the longestchain acids known, up to 90 carbons (Fig. 18.21C). The
mycolic acids are linked to arabinogalactan, a polymer
of arabinose and galactose built on the peptidoglycan
(discussed in Chapter 3). The mycolyl-arabinogalactanpeptidoglycan complex forms a waxy coat that impedes
the entry of nutrients through porins and thus limits
growth rate, but it also protects the bacterium from host
defenses and antibiotics. For this reason, to cure tuberculosis requires an exceptionally long course of antibiotic
therapy.
Mycobacterium includes the species M. tuberculosis
and M. leprae, as well as lesser-known pathogens such as
M. ulcerans. Cells of M. tuberculosis can be detected by the
acid-fast stain as tiny rods associated with sloughed cells
in sputum (Fig. 18.21A). In the acid-fast stain, cells are
penetrated with a dye that is retained under treatment with
acid alcohol (discussed in Chapter 2). The acid-fast property
is associated with unusual cell wall lipids, such as mycolic
acids. M. tuberculosis bacteria are challenging to culture;
they form crinkled colonies after 2 weeks of growth on
agar-based media (Fig. 18.21B).

712

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

A.

C.
H
HO
H

H
O
H
H

CDC/DR. GEORGE P. KUBICA

10 μm

B.

H

OH
CH3
H
O
H
H

H3C

Mycolic acid
CH3
H3C

Phenolic glycolipids

OH
CH3

O

O
O

H
H

Phenol
derivative

(CH2)17
O

Ketone

(CH2)15
cis

Cyclopropane
Long chain with
cyclopropanes,
ketones, and
methoxyl
branches

HC
HC

O
C O

O
C O

cis

H3CO

CDC

Short
chain

FIGURE 18.21 ■ Mycobacterium tuberculosis causes tuberculosis. A. Acid-fast stain of tissue sample containing M. tuberculosis

(chains of pink rods). B. Crinkled appearance of M. tuberculosis colonies. C. Mycolic acids coat the cell wall of M. tuberculosis.

The closely related species M. leprae causes the disfiguring
disease leprosy (Fig. 18.22A). The species has one of the longest known doubling times of any pathogen (about 14 days),
and it can take a year to grow enough cells in the laboratory
for observation. Growth of M. leprae requires lower temperature; for this reason, leprosy attacks the extremities (hands
and feet) whose temperature is lower than that of the body
core. Culture on artificial media is impossible; the bacteria
can be grown only within low-temperature animals, such as
armadillos, or within genetically immunodeficient mice.
The genomes have been sequenced for both M. tuberculosis and M. leprae. M. tuberculosis has surprisingly few
recognizable pathogenicity genes but a large number of
environmental stress components, including 16 environmental sigma factors (discussed in Chapter 8), as well as
250 genes for its complex lipid metabolism. Over half of
the M. leprae genome consists of pseudogenes, homologs of M. tuberculosis genes undergoing reductive evolution (Fig. 18.22B). Thus, M. leprae appears to be an

HO
HOOC

evolving pathogen “caught in the act” of losing many genes
no longer needed in its sheltered host environment. How
it lost the need for so many genes preserved in M. tuberculosis remains a mystery. M. leprae causes disease worldwide, including 250 cases of leprosy annually in the United
States. In 2013, a new test was approved that reveals leprosy
infection a year before symptoms appear—enabling it to be
cured with antibiotics before nerve damage is irreversible.
Mycobacteria also include a much larger number of
harmless commensals, such as M. smegmatis, isolated from
human skin. Species of mycobacteria can be isolated from
soil and water, as well as from various animal sources. Their
culture is difficult because of their slow growth rates, but
isolation can be enhanced by treatment with a base (NaOH
or KOH) at concentrations that kill most other bacteria.

Note: Distinguish Mycobacterium, rods whose cell walls contain mycolic acids, from Mycoplasma, firmicutes lacking cell walls,
related to Bacillus and Clostridium.

CHAPTER 18

■

BACTERIAL DIVERSITY

■

713

100 kb
200 kb

2 μm

300 kb

500 kb

diphtheriae divides by snapping off one side while remaining attached at the other; the result is a typical V shape or “Chinese
letter” arrangement (colorized SEM). B. Arthrobacter globiformis
cultures form coccoid cells in stationary phase. With added nutrients, the coccoid cells grow out as rods.

600 kb

Pseudogenes:
(–) strand
(+) strand

Micrococcaceae. Relatives of Arthrobacter are nonfilamen-

■

Mycobacterium leprae causes leprosy.

A. Hand disfigured by leprosy. B. The genome of M. leprae shows a
high content of decaying pseudogenes (gray bars), most of which
correspond to functional genes in the genome of M. tuberculosis.

Irregularly shaped actinomycetes. Several nonmycelial

tous cocci such as Micrococcus. M. luteus is one of the most
widespread of soil bacteria, appearing readily as yellow colonies on agar plates exposed to air. Historically, the genus
Micrococcus in the family Micrococcaceae was classified with
Staphylococcus, but its DNA sequence data now place Micrococcus and most of the Micrococcaceae within the actinomycetes.
Micrococci are aerobic heterotrophs, commonly isolated
from air and dust, although their habitat of choice is human
skin. Micrococci grow in square or cuboid formations, dividing in two or three planes (Fig. 18.24); cuboid clusters are
known as sarcinae (singular, sarcina). M. luteus is harmless
to humans and grows well at room temperature, so it makes
an excellent laboratory organism for observation by students.

GARY KAISER

actinomycetes show unusual cell shapes. Members of the
genus Corynebacterium include soil bacteria, as well as
pathogens such as C. diphtheriae, the cause of the lung disTo Summarize
ease diphtheria. Corynebacterium species grow as irregularly shaped rods, which may divide by a “half-snapping”
■ Firmicutes, the low-GC Gram-positive bacteria, include
mechanism in which one side of the cell remains attached
endospore-forming genera such as Bacillus and Closlike a hinge (Fig. 18.23A). Related soil bacteria include
tridium. The cycle of endospore formation was probably
the genera Nocardia and Rhodococcus.
present in the common ancestor of this phylum.
Soil bacteria of the genus Arthrobacter exhibit an
unusual cell cycle in which coccoid stationary-phase
cells sprout into rods, which eventuB.
A.
ally run out of nutrients and revert
to the coccoid form. The growing
rods form irregular branched filaments (Fig. 18.23B). An Arthrobacter species was discovered conducting
anaerobic respiration by reduction of
hexavalent chromium (Cr6+), a toxic
10 μm
1 μm
metal pollutant, to a less toxic oxidation state. Arthrobacter now shows
FIGURE 18.24 ■ Micrococcus species grow in tetrads, or sarcinae. A. M. luteus
potential as an agent of bioremediagrowing in tetrads (negative or indirect stain with nigrosin). B. M. luteus bacteria grow in
tion of hexavalent chromium.
clumps when cultured on a solid substrate (SEM).

CDC/BETSY CRANE

Mycobacterium leprae
Total: 3,268,203 bp

FIGURE 18.22

10 μm

FIGURE 18.23 ■ Irregularly shaped actinomycetes:
Corynebacterium and Arthrobacter. A. Corynebacterium

400 kb

Coding genes:
(–) strand
(+) strand

B. Arthrobacter globiformis

DR. GARY GAUGLER/SCIENCE SOURCE

B.
0

C. JAMES WEBB/PHOTOTAKE

A. Corynebacterium diphtheriae

J J GERMIDA AND L E CASIDA, JR, DEPARTMENT
OFMICROBIOLOGY, THE PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIVERSITY

A.

714

■

■

■

■

■

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

Nonsporulating firmicutes include pathogenic rods
such as Listeria, as well as food-producing bacteria such
as Lactobacillus and Lactococcus.

Diverse metabolism of Proteobacteria
BChl+

Photoheterotrophy

Staphylococcus and Streptococcus are Gram-positive
cocci that include normal human flora, as well as serious
pathogens causing toxic shock syndrome, pneumonia,
and scarlet fever.
Mycoplasmas belong phylogenetically to Firmicutes but
lack the cell wall and S-layer. They have flexible cytoskeletons and show ameboid motility. Mycoplasma species
cause diseases such as meningitis and pneumonia.
Actinobacteria (order Actinomycetales) include mycelial
spore-forming soil bacteria, such as the actinomycete Streptomyces. Other actinobacteria have irregularly shaped cells,
such as Corynebacterium species that cause diphtheria.
Mycobacteria are actinobacterial rods whose cell envelope contains a diverse assemblage of complex mycolic
acids. Mycobacterial species cause tuberculosis and
leprosy. They stain acid-fast.

18.4

Proteobacteria
(Gram-Negative)

Proteobacteria—the “protean,” or “many-formed,” bacteria—show more diverse metabolism than any other phylum.
Their lifestyles range from plant and animal pathogens to soil
lithotrophs that reduce nearly any oxidized metal. Nevertheless, all proteobacteria share a common structure: their Gramnegative cell envelope, which consists of an outer membrane,
peptidoglycan cell wall permeated by the periplasm, and inner
membrane (plasma membrane) (discussed in Chapter 3). The
outer membrane is packed with receptor proteins and porins,
comprising two-thirds of the mass of the membrane. Porins
evolve so as to admit nutrients while excluding antibiotics. The
outer membrane lipids contain long sugar polymer extensions
(lipopolysaccharide, or LPS). In pathogens, LPS repels phagocytosis and has toxic effects when released by dying cells.

The Protean Metabolism
of Proteobacteria

The phylum Proteobacteria is defined to include five
monophyletic classes, labeled Alpha through Epsilon (see
Table 18.1). Even within each closely related group, we see
nearly as wide a range of cell shape and metabolic strategies
as we see in Proteobacteria as a whole.
A closer look at proteobacterial metabolism shows that
processes that at first seem very different actually connect

NADPH

Bph
(bacteriopheophytin)

Electron donor
Sulfur (H2S) or
nonsulfur (RH)

Quinols
Electron
transport

Photosynthesis

Cyt bc1

ADP
ATP

Heterotrophy
or lithotrophy
Electron donor
Electron acceptor

Cyt bc2

Light

Oxygen or
other terminal
electron acceptor

BChl (bacteriochlorophyll)

FIGURE 18.25

■

The protean metabolism of Proteobacteria.

In many Gram-negative species, metabolic diversity arises through
minor “add-ons” of biochemical modules such as light absorption by
bacteriochlorophyll, use of sulfide or organic electron donors, and
use of oxygen or alternative (anaerobic) electron acceptors.

through linked biochemical modules (Fig. 18.25) (metabolism is discussed in detail in Chapter 14). Many proteobacteria can oxidize H 2 (hydrogenotrophy) and small organic
acids, as well as complex organic molecules with aromatic
rings. Some “photoheterolithotrophs” carry out nearly all
the fundamental classes of metabolism, depending on environmental conditions such as availability of light, oxygen,
and nutrients. An example is Rhodopseudomonas palustris, the species of Alphaproteobacteria characterized and
sequenced by Caroline Harwood at the University of Washington (see Fig. 14.39 and eTopic 14.2). In such a “protean”
organism, the core of all proteobacterial energy acquisition
is a respiratory chain of electron donors and acceptors. Electrons may enter the chain from a photoexcited chlorophyll,
from organic electron donors such as sugars or benzoates,
or from a mineral electron donor such as reduced sulfur or
iron (lithotrophy). In facultative anaerobes, the electron
acceptor may be a mineral such as nitrate or sulfate (anaerobic respiration). The capabilities of a given organism depend
on which oxidoreductases its genome encodes.
Photoheterotrophy: light-supplemented heterotrophy. In

the Alpha-, Beta-, and Gammaproteobacteria, diverse forms
of light absorption have evolved from a common ancestor
of photosystems I and II (see Table 18.2). The various bacteriochlorophylls of Proteobacteria peak in two ranges—in
the blue and in the red or infrared. Bacteriochlorophyll b, in
Blastochloris viridis, peaks well beyond 1,000 nm. Species

CHAPTER 18

with different photopigments often grow together in stratified layers of sediment or wetland—the infrared absorbers below, where they capture the longer wavelengths “left
over” from the shorter-wavelength absorbers above.
The prevalence of homologous photosystems suggests
that the common ancestor of the Gammaproteobacteria
was a photoheterotroph. At the same time, other evidence
supports horizontal transfer of photosystems among proteobacterial branches. The evidence is particularly strong
in the case of proteorhodopsin, a homolog of the retinal protein light-driven proton pump first characterized in
halophilic archaea (discussed in Chapters 14 and 19). The
proteorhodopsin light pump in Pelagibacter, a marine relative of Rickettsia, absorbs green and yellow (wavelength
500–600 nm), the midrange of solar radiation reaching
Earth’s surface. Different species have proteorhodopsins
with very different absorption ranges, apparently adapted
to different niches in the marine ecosystem.
In the literature, proteobacterial phototrophs are historically called “purple bacteria.” The actual colors of all the phototrophs range from purple-red through yellow and brown.
“Purple sulfur bacteria” are species that photolyze reduced
forms of sulfur, such as H2S, HS –, S0, or S2O32– (thiosulfate),

■

BACTERIAL DIVERSITY

■

715

whereas “purple nonsulfur bacteria” photolyze H2 or use
photosystem II for cyclic photophosphorylation (discussed in
Chapter 14). However, it turns out that many purple bacteria
also use photosystem II. Most proteobacterial phototrophs
conduct photosynthesis only in the absence of oxygen, reverting to aerobic heterotrophy when oxygen is present. Some,
however, are obligate anaerobes. Still others, found in marine
environments, surprisingly photolyze sulfide or organic compounds only in the presence of oxygen. Making sense of
this extraordinary diversity is the job of marine and aquatic
microbiologists, particularly those calculating global cycles of
carbon and oxygen (discussed in Chapters 21 and 22).

Thought Question

18.7 Why might genes for the proteorhodopsin light-powered proton pump be more likely to transfer horizontally than
the bacteriochlorophyll-based photosystems PS I and PS II?

Lithotrophy: inorganic electron donors. Many differ-

ent Proteobacteria oxidize inorganic electron donors
(Table 18.4). The ability to oxidize or reduce minerals

TABLE 18.4-Lithotrophy and Methylotrophy (Examples)
Class/phylum

Example species

Reaction

ΔG°′/2e– (kJ)

Class of reaction

Alphaproteobacteria

Nitrobacter
winogradskyi

NO2– + ½O2 → NO3–

–54

Nitrite oxidation
(nitrification to nitrate)

Paracoccus
pantotrophus

H2S + 2O2 → 2H+ + SO42–

Sulfide oxidation to
sulfate

Roseobacter litoralis

CO + H2O → CO2 + 2H+ + 2e–

CO oxidation

Hyphomicrobium

CH3OH + O2 → CO2 + H2O + 2H+ + 2e–

Betaproteobacteria

Gammaproteobacteria

Deltaproteobacteria

–

+

Methylotrophy

–

Nitrosomonas
europaea

NH3 + O2 → HNO2 + 3H + 2e

Ammonia oxidation
(nitrification to nitrite)

Ralstonia eutropha

2H2 + ½O2 → 2H2O

Thiobacillus
denitrificans

3S0 + 4NO3– → 3SO42– + 2N2

Acidithiobacillus
ferrooxidans

4FeS2 + 15O2 + 14H2O →
4Fe(OH)3 + 16H+ + 8SO42–

–164

Iron-sulfur oxidation

Acidithiobacillus
thiooxidans

2S0 + 3O2 + 2H2O → 2SO42– + 4H+

–196

Sulfur oxidation

Methylococcus
capsulatus

CH4 + 2O2 → HCO3– + H+ + H2O

–203

Methanotrophy

Beggiatoa alba

2H2S + O2 → 2S0 + 2H2O

–210

Sulfide oxidation

–237

2+

Chromatium

4Fe + CO2 + 11H2O + hν →
4Fe(OH)3 + [CH2O] + 8H+

Desulfovibrio

4S0 + 4H2O → SO42– + 3HS– + 5H+
–

–

Nitrospirae

Nitrospira

NO2 + ½O2 → NO3

Planctomycetes

Brocadia
anammoxidans

NH4+ + NO2– → N2 + 2H2O

Hydrogen oxidation
Anaerobic sulfur
oxidation

Iron phototrophy
(photoferrotrophy)
–11.3 (at pH 8)

Sulfur oxidation

–54

Nitrite oxidation
(nitrification to nitrate)

–238

Anaerobic ammonium
oxidation (anammox)

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

evolved multiple times in different clades by modification
of the electron transport chain. Many lithotrophic reactions
generate acid, which conveniently breaks down rock containing additional reduced minerals. Bacterial and archaeal
lithotrophy has tremendous significance for global cycling
of elements in the biosphere (discussed in Chapter 22).
Some lithotrophs are autotrophs, fi xing carbon dioxide
into biomolecules by the Calvin cycle (in carboxysomes) or
the reverse TCA cycle. Others have alternative pathways of
heterotrophy when organic foods are available. An interesting kind of lithotrophy performed by many Proteobacteria
is carbon monoxide (CO) oxidation (eTopic 18.2). Oxidizing CO is important because this toxic substance is a byproduct of animal and plant metabolism.
We now survey species of the major Greek-lettered
classes of Proteobacteria.

Alphaproteobacteria:
Photoheterotrophs, Methylotrophs,
and Endosymbionts

The class Alphaproteobacteria includes photoheterotrophs
and heterotrophs, as well as bacteria metabolizing singlecarbon compounds—along with intracellular mutualists
and pathogens.

FIGURE 18.26

Aquatic and soil oligotrophs. Alphaproteobacteria also

include many nonphototrophic heterotrophs of soil and
water. Many aquatic and soil heterotrophs are oligotrophs
adapted to extremely low nutrient concentrations; an example is Caulobacter crescentus, the stalk-to-flagellum organism discussed in Chapters 3 and 4. Oligotrophic bacteria

B.

A.

Photosynthetic
LPS membrane
vesicles
1 μm

N. PFENNING 1968. J. BACTERIOL. 2:597

DEPARTMENT OF MICROBIOLOGY AND CENTER FOR
SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY, SOUTHERN ILLINOIS UNIVERSITY

Photoheterotrophs. Most alphaproteobacterial photoheterotrophs are unicellular. Their cell shapes range from flagellated spirilla to rounded rods (Rhodobacter sphaeroides)
(Fig. 18.26A), wide spirals (Rhodospirillum rubrum), and
stalked cells (Rhodomicrobium) (Fig. 18.26B). The TEM
of R. sphaeroides in Figure 18.26A shows that the cell is
packed with photomembranes (membranes containing the
photosynthetic complex) arranged in folds or tubes invaginated from the cytoplasmic membrane. These intracellular
photomembranes expand the surface area for photon capture, but during growth with oxygen, the photomembranes

disappear. The outer surface of the cell shows LPS fi laments
extending from the outer membrane.
The metabolism of Rhodospirillum rubrum shifts drastically with oxygen. Anaerobically, R. rubrum bacteria grow
dark red because they synthesize membrane containing BChl
a, which absorbs green and infrared and reflects primarily red.
With oxygen, however, R. rubrum fails to synthesize BChl
a, and the cells grow white as their metabolism switches to
straight heterotrophy. Heterotrophy is supplemented by oxidizing small molecules such as carbon monoxide.
Alphaproteobacterial photoheterotrophs that require
oxygen (but do not photolyze water) were found unexpectedly in genomic surveys of marine bacteria. Originally thought to be straight heterotrophs, these organisms
revealed genes encoding bacteriochlorophyll. Their aerobic heterotrophy was shown to be driven by light absorption. The reason for the oxygen requirement is unclear,
since their photosystems do not involve oxygen. Examples
of O2-requiring phototrophs have since been found in most
of the proteobacterial clades, and species have been isolated
from all major habitats, including freshwater, marine, and
soil ecosystems. Some show unusual cell morphology, such
as the Y shape of Citromicrobium (Fig. 18.26C).
The aerobic photoheterotroph Erythromicrobium ramosum can reduce toxic metal compounds such as tellurite ion
(TeO32–). The cells generate tellurium crystals that take up
30% of their cell weight—a trait that we might use to remove
tellurite from liquid waste. Other toxic metals reduced by
aerobic photoheterotrophs include selenium and arsenic.
Thus, these obscure bacteria now have a promising future in
remediation of metal-contaminated industrial wastes.

C.

10 μm

YURKOV ET AL. 1969. J. BACTERIOL. 181:4517

716

0.5 μm

Alphaproteobacterial photoheterotrophs. A. Rhodobacter sphaeroides, showing intracellular photosynthetic membranes and outer membrane LPS filaments (TEM). B. Rhodomicrobium vannielii with stalked cells (phase contrast). C. Citromicrobium species,
an aerobic photoheterotroph, forms highly pleomorphic shapes, including this Y shape (TEM).
■

CHAPTER 18

S. AZRA MOOSVI ET AL. 2005. SYSTEMATIC AND APPLIED MICROBIOLOGY 28:541.

often have unusual extended shapes enhancing nutrient
uptake, such as the starlike cell aggregates of Seliberia stellata. In Seliberia species, the individual tightly coiled rods
generate oval or spherical reproductive cells by a budding
process. The budding reproductive cells germinate into
rods, which then form new aggregates.
Some heterotrophs common in soil are pathogens. Brucella species are intracellular pathogens of animals that
can also infect humans. The soil pathogen Granulibacter
bethesdensis is associated with chronic granulomatous disease, an inherited disorder of the phagocyte oxidase system that leaves patients susceptible to infection. Other
A.

B.
Hypha
forming

Swarmer cell with
subpolar to lateral
flagellum (one to three)

■

BACTERIAL DIVERSITY

■

717

pathogens are carried by insects or animal hosts; for example, Bartonella henselae causes cat scratch disease.
Methylotrophy and methanotrophy. Methylotrophy is

the ability of an organism to oxidize reduced single-carbon
compounds such as methanol, methylamine, or methane.
The Alphaproteobacteria include several genera of methylotrophs, which are found in all environments, including
soil, freshwater, and the ocean. Most methylotrophs can
grow on both single-carbon and organic compounds. One
such versatile genus, Methylobacterium, is equally at home
in soil and water, on plant surfaces, and as a contaminant
of facial creams and purified water for silicon chip manufacture. Other species are restricted to single-carbon compounds, incapable of metabolizing organic compounds
with carbon-carbon bonds. Methylotrophs that grow solely
on methane (CH4) are called methanotrophs.
Methane-oxidizing bacteria of both Alpha and Gamma
classes contribute to aquatic ecosystems, serving as major
food sources for zooplankton. They eliminate much of the
methane produced by methanogens before it reaches the
atmosphere, where it has a potent greenhouse effect (see
Chapter 22).
An interesting methylotroph is Hyphomicrobium, a bacterium with an unusual stalk-to-flagellum transition similar
to that of the alphaproteobacterium Caulobacter crescentus,
t , w
whose
wh
life cycle is described in Chapter 3. Hyphomi1 µm
crobium
croobbiiu species are found in environments as diverse as
wastewater sludge and Antarctic island soil. For
New nucleoid
example, the Antarctic soil species H. sulmoving into hypha
fonivorans metabolizes sulfur compounds
such as dimethyl sulfone (Fig. 18.27).
Like Caulobacter, a flagellated cell of
Hyphomicrobium species may lose
its flagellum to form a stalk. But
unlike Caulobacter, Hyphomicrobium then forms a daughter cell
Hypha lengthens
more and produces
fro
ffr
from
r
the opposite end of the
another bud.
sst
stalk!
ttaa
As the DNA replicates,
o
one
n daughter nucleoid must
mi
m
migrate
ig
all the way through the
Young bud
sst
stalk
ttaaall to reach the daughter cell.
T ed
Th
The
da
daughter
a
cell forms a flagellum
and
d septa
septate
septat
septates,
ate separating from the parent
(Fig. 18.27B).
Thought Question
Th

FIGURE 18.27 ■ Hyphomicrobium sulfonivorans from Signy
Island, Antarctica. A. These bacteria with coiled stalks catabolize

dimethyl sulfone. B. Life cycle of Hyphomicrobium species.

18.8 Can you hypothesize a mechanism for migration of the
daughter nucleoid of Hyphomicrobium through the stalk to the
daughter cell? For possibilities, see Chapter 3 and consider
the various molecular mechanisms of cell division and shape
formation.

718

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

Endosymbionts: mutualists and parasites. The Alpha-

proteobacteria include many highly evolved intracellular
symbionts—some mutualists, others parasites. As isolated
bacteria, they are generally rod-shaped with aerobic metabolism, but their shape is transformed within the host cell.
Intracellularly, they need to solve special problems, such as
the exclusion of oxygen from nitrogen fi xation (a process
requiring anaerobiosis) or, in the case of pathogens, the
need to resist host defenses.
Nitrogen-fixing endosymbionts of plants include genera
such as Rhizobium, Bradyrhizobium, and Sinorhizobium.
The nomenclature has undergone many changes, but the
species are generally referred to as rhizobia. Though they

B.

C. Rhizobium-legume symbiosis early steps
0h

Nucleus

20 h

Root hair
curl

Infection
thread

10 µm

FIGURE 18.28

■

NIGEL CATTLIN/SCIENCE SOURCE

PLANT PHYSIOLOGY 148:1985-1995 (2008). © 2008 AMERICAN SOCIETY OF PLANT BIOLOGISTS

DAVID T. WEBB, UNIV. OF HAWAII AT MANOA

C. H. WONG ET AL. 1983. J. CELL BIOL. 97:787-794

A.

can live freely in the soil, rhizobia prefer to colonize plants,
usually legumes such as peas or alfalfa, where they form
distinctive nodule structures. Each bacterial species colonizes and infects a particular host range. Complex chemosensory processes attract the bacteria to the surface of
the host root, where their presence induces root hairs to
form curls around the bacteria (Fig. 18.28). The curling of the root hairs enables the bacteria to form infection
threads, chains of rod-shaped bacteria that invade the root
cells. Within the host cells, the bacteria lose their cell wall
and become rounded bacteroids, specialized for nitrogen fixation. The host plant cells provide the bacteroids
with nutrients, as well as protective components such as
leghemoglobin, an oxygen-binding protein that maintains
anaerobiosis within infected cells.
Leghemoglobin turns the nodule
interior pink (Fig. 18.28A).
The
genus
Agrobacterium
includes plant pathogens closely
related to the rhizobia. A. tumefaciens is known for its ability to convert host cells to a form that produces
tumors called galls (Fig. 18.29).
The ability of A. tumefaciens to
insert its DNA into plant genomes
has made it a major tool for plant
biotechnology (see Chapter 16).
Rickettsias are famous intra1 µm
cellular pathogens. Short coccoid
rods, rickettsias lack flagella and
can grow only within a host cell. The best-known rickettsia
is Rickettsia rickettsii, the cause of Rocky Mountain spotted fever, a disease spread by ticks throughout the United
States. Rickettsia species parasitize human endothelial
cells (Fig. 18.30). The bacteria induce phagocytosis and
then dissolve the phagocytic vesicle and escape into the

Rhizobia: legume endosymbionts.

A. Legume nodules cut open to show pink regions where the plant
cells produce leghemoglobin to maintain anaerobic conditions for
bacteroid nitrogen fixation. B. Within the host cells, Sinorhizobium
meliloti cells form bacteroids (arrow) that fix nitrogen while receiving nutrients from the plant. C. Clover root hair curls around infecting S. meliloti. The bacteria enter the curl and grow down the root
hair as an infection thread that penetrates the legume cells, enabling
the bacteria to colonize in the form of bacteroids.

FIGURE 18.29

■ Plant gall induced by Agrobacterium
tumefaciens. Crown gall on chrysanthemum plant.

Rickettsias

BACTERIAL DIVERSITY

C.

2 μm

Actin tail

■

719

Rickettsia

SCIENCE VU/VISUALS UNLIMITED

B.
DR. JAMES L. CASTNER/VISUALS UNLIMITED

A.

■

2 μm

FIGURE 18.30

■ Rickettsias are obligate intracellular parasites. A. The Rocky Mountain tick carries Rickettsia rickettsii, the cause
of Rocky Mountain spotted fever. B. Rickettsia species parasitize human endothelial cells (TEM). C. The rickettsias propel themselves through
the host cell by polymerizing cytoplasmic actin behind them (TEM).

Betaproteobacteria:
Photoheterotrophs, Lithotrophs,
and Pathogens

The Betaproteobacteria include photoheterotrophs such as
Rhodocyclus, as well as a diverse range of lithotrophs (see
Table 18.4). Several are important pathogens that infect
humans and other animals.

A. Encapsulated nitrifiers
NH4+

YUICHI SUWA, ECOLOGICAL CONTROL AND MICROBIOLOGY RESEARCH GROUP

cytoplasm. Some rickettsias propel themselves through the
host cell by polymerizing cytoplasmic actin behind them—
a process similar to that of Listeria (described earlier, along
with Firmicutes). The actin tails eventually project outward
as filopodia, extensions of host cytoplasm and membrane
that protect the bacteria from host defenses while enabling
them to invade adjacent cells.
Genetic analysis shows that the rickettsia clade includes
mitochondria. All eukaryotic mitochondria appear to be
descendants of an ancient rickettsial parasite whose respiratory apparatus ultimately became essential to power
eukaryotic cells.

Filter

NO3–
Capsules containing
nitrifier bacteria

Bioreactor
B. Nitrosomonas europaea
YUICHI SUWA, ECOLOGICAL CONTROL AND MICROBIOLOGY
RESEARCH GROUP

Lithotrophs: nitrifiers and sulfur oxidizers. An important

group of nitrogen lithotrophs consists of the nitrifiers. Nitrifiers oxidize ammonia (NH3) to nitrite (NO2–), or nitrite to
nitrate (NO3–). Typically, different species conduct the two
reactions separately while coexisting in soil and water. Nitrifiers are of enormous economic and practical importance for
wastewater treatment because they decrease the reduced nitrogen content of sewage. Special systems have been developed
to retain nitrifier bacteria behind filters as one stage of water
treatment. In the system shown in Figure 18.31A, nitrifying
bacteria are encapsulated in pellets to retain them within the
bioreactor while the treated water flows through a filter.
The most commonly isolated ammonia oxidizers are Nitrosomonas species of the Beta class. Nitrosomonas cells conduct
electron transport through extensive internal membranes

Filter retains the
encapsulated bacteria
while the treated liquid
flows through.

Internal
membranes

200 nm

FIGURE 18.31 ■ Nitrifiers. A. Wastewater treatment uses nitrifier bacteria to remove ammonia. B. Nitrosomonas europaea, of
the Betaproteobacteria, oxidizes ammonia to nitrite (TEM). Internal
membranes contain the electron transport complexes.

VSEVOLOD POPOV AND DAVID H. WALKER,
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS MEDICAL BRANCH AND THE
MICROBELIBRARY

CHAPTER 18

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

that are either stacked or invaginated (Fig. 18.31B). Related
genera of ammonia oxidizers include Nitrosolobus and
Nitrosovibrio, some with peritrichous or polar flagella. One
ammonia-oxidizing genus of the Gamma group has been
found: Nitrosococcus. Major nitrite oxidizers include the
nonproteobacterial phylum Nitrospirae. Although genetically outside the Proteobacteria, the unusual spiral-shaped
cells of Nitrospirae have a Gram-negative cell envelope.
Pathogens. The Betaproteobacteria include aerobic hetero-

trophic cocci such as Neisseria. The cocci of Neisseria species
form distinctive pairs known as diplococci. Most Neisseria
species are harmless commensals of the nasal or oral mucosa,
but N. gonorrhoeae causes the sexually transmitted disease
gonorrhea. N. gonorrhoeae is actually a microaerophile,
requiring a narrow range of oxygen concentration; it has
fastidious growth requirements, necessitating cultivation on
a special blood-based medium. A related organism, N. meningitidis, may be carried asymptomatically by as much as a
quarter of the human population, but occasionally it causes
meningitis, which can be fatal. Other neisserias, such as
N. sicca, are easily isolated from skin and often presented to
undergraduates as an unknown for identification.
Other members of the Beta class are important animal
and plant pathogens, such as Burkholderia. B. cepacia was
originally isolated from onions as a cause of bulb rot; it
is now known to be a major opportunistic invader of the
lungs of cystic fibrosis patients.

Gammaproteobacteria:
Photolithotrophs, Enteric
Flora, and Pathogens

The Gammaproteobacteria include vast numbers of marine
organisms that catabolize complex organic pollutants such
as petroleum hydrocarbons. However, the best-known
Gammaproteobacteria are the Enterobacteriaceae family of
facultative anaerobes found in the human colon—the family that includes Escherichia coli. Gammaproteobacteria also
include unusual phototrophs that oxidize iron and nitrite.
Sulfur lithotrophs. The sulfur-oxidizing genus Beggiatoa

was one of the fi rst kinds of lithotrophs described by pioneer microbial ecologist Sergei Winogradsky (discussed in
Chapter 1). Beggiatoa species oxidize H 2S to elemental sulfur, which collects as sulfur granules within the periplasm.
Beggiatoa also stores carbon in cytoplasmic granules of
polyhydroxybutyrate—a common strategy among proteobacteria. The cells of Beggiatoa grow as extended fi laments
with visible sulfur granules, forming biofi lms on sulfiderich sediment. Another sulfur oxidizer, the genus Thioploca, forms thick biomats in aquatic sediment. The bacteria
grow as long fi laments that glide through hollow tubes full

20 µm

FIGURE 18.32

■

Thioploca filaments emerging from a sheath.

Thioploca species oxidize sulfur in marine sediment, using oxygen or
nitrate; this sample is from the northeastern Arabian Sea off Pakistan.

of mucous secretions. Figure 18.32 shows fi laments of
Thioploca species emerging from a sheath.
Bacteria of the genus Acidithiobacillus oxidize iron or
sulfur (Fig. 18.33A). Iron-oxidizing bacteria commonly
form the brown stains found inside plumbing. Most species
are short rods or vibrios (comma-shaped). Acidithiobacillus
and other sulfur-oxidizing genera can undergo a number
of different reactions oxidizing H 2S to S0 and S0 to SO42–
(see Table 18.4). Sulfate production makes an environment
acidic enough to erode stone monuments and the interior
surface of concrete sewer pipes. Sulfur oxidation is often
coupled to oxidation of iron, Fe2+ → Fe3+. The bacterium
A. ferrooxidans is known for its role in acidification of mine
water, which contributes to leaching of iron, copper, and
other minerals (Fig. 18.33B).
Sulfur and iron phototrophs. The Gamma group photo-

trophs, such as Chromatium species (Fig. 18.34A), mainly
utilize sulfide and produce sulfur, which is deposited as
intracellular granules visible within the cytoplasm. Their
phototrophy is entirely anaerobic. Some of the Gamma
group are true autotrophs and do not use organic substrates. Some of these actually conduct phototrophy using
iron (Fe2+) to donate electrons. Iron phototrophy, or “photoferrotrophy” (Fig. 18.34B), is considered an intriguing possibility for the metabolism of early life (discussed
in Chapter 17). Thiocapsa uses NO2 – and was the fi rst
nitrogen-based phototroph discovered.
Enterobacteriaceae: intestinal fermenters and respirers.

The family Enterobacteriaceae, facultative anaerobes of the

ROLF SCHMALJOHANN ET AL. 2001. MARINE ECOLOGY PROGRESS SERIES 211:27. CREATIVE COMMONS
BY ATTRIBUTION (CC-BY)

720

CHAPTER 18

■

BACTERIAL DIVERSITY

■

721

P. ROMANO ET AL. 2001. J. CHEM. TECH. BIOTECH 76:723

A.

all bacterial species—is the model organism Escherichia coli.
Some strains of E. coli grow normally in the human intestine,
feeding on our mucous secretions and producing vitamins,
such as vitamin K. They may grow in symbiosis with anaerobic fermenters such as Bacteroides species, which release
short-chain sugars that E. coli digests (discussed in Chapter 21). But other strains, such as E. coli O157:H7, cause serious illness. A large proportion of the world’s children die of
E. coli–related intestinal illness before the age of 5. Related
pathogens include Salmonella enterica and Shigella flexneri.
The Enterobacteriaceae are Gram-negative rods,
although as nutrients diminish, their size dwindles almost
to a coccoid form. They grow singly, in chains, or in biofilms. Many species are motile, with numerous flagella.
Most strains grow well with or without oxygen, by either
respiration (aerobic or anaerobic) or fermentation. They
ferment rapidly on carbohydrates, generating fermentation
acids, ethanol, and gases (CO2 plus H 2) in varying proportions, depending on the species. Their presence in the
intestine supports the growth of organisms utilizing these
gases, including methanogens (discussed in Chapter 19).
Many strains form biofilms. Biofilm formation explains the
persistence of drug-resistant infections, such as those associated with urinary catheters in long-term hospital patients.

5 µm

PHOTO COURTESY OF KENNECOTT UTAH COPPER

B.

FIGURE 18.33

Acidithiobacillus: iron oxidizers. A. A. ferrooxidans leaches copper and iron from molybdenite ore (SEM).
The hexagonal object is a molybdenite crystal. B. In a copper mine,
Acidithiobacillus species can oxidize copper ores, leaching the copper into solution for retrieval.
■

Thought Question

18.9 Why do you think it took many years of study to realize
that Escherichia coli and other Proteobacteria can grow as a
biofilm?

Gamma subdivision, include some of the most intensively
studied species of all bacteria. Species are readily isolated from
the contents of the human digestive tract and easily grown
on laboratory media based on human food. The best-known
species of Enterobacteriaceae—indeed, the most studied of
B.

10 μm

FIGURE 18.34 ■ Chromatium: sulfur
and iron phototrophs. A. Chromatium

COURTESY OF MAX-PLANCK-INSTITUT

H. G. SCHLEGEL AND N. PFENNIG, ARCH. MICROBIOL. 38[1], 1961.

A.

1
2
forms single-flagellated rods full of sulfur
granules. B. Photoferrotrophy. Under illumination, color develops
over time (1–5) as a Chromatium isolate oxidizes Fe2+ to Fe3+.

3

Because they are easy to cultivate and have been studied extensively in clinical laboratories, many genera of
Enterobacteriaceae are familiar to students in introductory
microbiology laboratory courses. A common laboratory
exercise is to distinguish Enterobacter and Klebsiella species from E. coli
by their fermentation to the pH-neutral product butanediol, which tests
positive in the Voges-Proskauer test.
(Fermentation is discussed in Chapter 13.) Enterobacter species occur
more frequently in freshwater streams
than in the human body, although a
few species colonize the intestine and
cause illness.
Proteus mirabilis and P. vulgaris
cause bladder and kidney infections,
particularly as a complication of surgical catheterization. Proteus spe4
5
cies are heavily flagellated and display
a remarkable swarming behavior

722

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

A.

FIGURE 18.35 ■ The
enteric rod Proteus
mirabilis: isolated
swimmer or cooperative swarmer.

Aerobic rods. Closely related to Enterobacteriaceae are sev-

ROBERT BELLAS/BELLA LAB

eral genera of rod-shaped bacteria that are obligate respirers. Many are obligate aerobic respirers (requiring O2 for
growth), although some can use alternative electron acceptors such as nitrate. These genera metabolize an extraorA. A thickly flagellated
dinary range of natural compounds, including aromatic
swarmer cell (TEM). Cell
length can reach 20 μm.
derivatives of lignin; thus, they have important roles in natB. Swarmer rafts of P.
ural recycling and soil turnover.
mirabilis migrate through
The Pseudomonadaceae are a large and amorphous group.
blood agar.
As the “pseudo-” prefix suggests, their taxonomic unit is
poorly defined and includes species whose DNA sequence
2 μm
has necessitated their reassignment to other groups. The
Gamma class pseudomonads, such as Pseudomonas aerugiB.
Cell division
Migration
nosa and P. fluorescens, respire on oxygen or nitrate
and are vigorous swimmers with single or multiple
polar flagella. P. aeruginosa can swim throughout
a standard agar plate (much to the chagrin of stuSwimmer cell
dents attempting to isolate colonies). Nevertheless,
under appropriate environmental conditions, pseudomonad cells give up their motility and develop bioDifferentiation
films (Fig. 18.36) (discussed in Chapter 4). Biofilms of
P. aeruginosa cause lethal infections of the pulmonary linSwarmer cell
ing of cystic fibrosis patients.
Some pseudomonad pathogens have the unusual ability
Lag period
to infect both plants and animals. For example, P. aeruginosa commonly infects plants as well as humans. P. fluorescens infects seedlings and causes rotting of citrus fruit,
(Fig. 18.35). In response to an environmental signal, the
while it also appears as an opportunistic pathogen of immuflagellated rods grow into long-chain swarmer cells. The
nocompromised cancer patients. Other pseudomonad speswarmers gather together, forming “rafts” that swim
cies, however, are harmless residents of soil or sewage.
together and grow into a complex biofilm.
Legionella pneumophila is a well-publicized pathogen
Besides symbionts of animals, Enterobacteriaceae include
related to the pseudomonads. Incapable of growth on sugars,
plant pathogens, such as Erwinia carotovora and related speL. pneumophila requires oxygen to respire on amino acids.
cies. Erwinia species cause wilts, galls, and necrosis of a wide
The organism exhibits an unusual dual lifestyle, alternating
variety of plants, including bananas, tomatoes, and orchids.
between intracellular growth within human macrophages and
Related facultative rods in soil and water conduct anaerintracellular growth within freshwater amebas (Fig. 18.37).
obic respiration by donating electrons from organic subGrowth within amebas facilitates transmission through
strates to a variety of metals, such as iron and magnesium.
Shewanella oneidensis and other metal
B.
reducers are used to make electricity in A.
fuel cells (discussed in Chapter 14).

FIGURE 18.36 ■ Pseudomonas
species form biofilms. P. fluorescens
biofilm on a plant surface.

2 μm

FIGURE 18.37 ■ Legionella pneumophila colonizes an ameba. A. L. pneumophila
cell caught by an ameba’s pseudopod (colorized SEM). B. L. pneumophila cells have colonized the ameba (TEM).

CDC

2 μm

CDC/DR. BARRY S. FIELDS

2 μm

COURTESY OF WORCESTER POLYTECHNIC INSTITUTE,
MA

Legionella

CHAPTER 18

■

BACTERIAL DIVERSITY

■

723

HTTP://WWW.HORT.UCONN.EDU/IPM/VEG/HTMS/TOMATO.HTM

resembles a rickettsia in some of its strategy of pathogenesis, but it is genetically closer to Legionella.
Plant pathogens. Gammaproteobacteria include impor-

tant plant pathogens, such as Xanthomonas species. Xanthomonas is a flagellate rod that colonizes a wide range of
agricultural plants, such as tomatoes, potatoes, onions, broccoli, and citrus fruits (Fig. 18.38). The disease may mottle
the leaves and fruit, and it may spread throughout the plant.

Deltaproteobacteria: Lithotrophs
and Multicellular Communities
FIGURE 18.38

Bacterial spot disease of orange fruit,
caused by Xanthomonas species.
■

aerosols into the human lung. L. pneumophila is an environmental pathogen that takes advantage of our lifestyle (the
prevalence of large-scale air-conditioning units that contain
unfiltered water).
A related bacterium, Coxiella burnetii, causes Q fever, a
respiratory illness of livestock and humans. C. burnetii converts to a spore-like form that persists in soil. C. burnetii

WOLGEMUTH ET AL.2002. CURR. MICROBIOL. 12:369

A.

The Deltaproteobacteria include important sulfur and iron
reducers, such as the fuel-cell bacterium Geobacter metallireducens (discussed in Chapter 14). Other species have
complex life cycles that include multicellular developmental forms. The best-studied example is the myxobacteria.
Myxobacteria have exceptionally large genomes, such as
that of Sorangium cellulosum (12.6 Mb).
Myxobacteria. The myxobacteria, such as Myxococcus xan-

thus, are free-living soil bacteria that can grow as isolated
cells but come together to form a multicellular structure
for the purpose of spore dispersal (Fig. 18.39; also see
Fig. 18.8D). When nutrients are plentiful, the myxobacteria grow and divide as individual cells. As nutrients run out,
the cells begin to attract each other, moving into parallel
formations. Myxobacteria have no flagella, but they move
along a surface by using a form of motility called gliding.
The formations develop into a bulging mass, and the
aggregating cells coalesce to develop a fruiting body. The
fruiting body may be branched with bulbous ends, as in
Stigmatella species (Fig. 18.40). Analogous fruiting bodies

Free-living
cells

10 μm

Starvation

Spore
dispersal

B.
50 μm

KUNER, ET AL. 1982. BACTERIOLOGY. 151:458.

Aggregation

Fruiting body

FIGURE 18.39

■ Myxobacteria. A. Myxococcus xanthus cells
glide while producing trails of slime (dark-field LM). B. Upon starvation, cells come together to generate a fruiting body packed with
spherical myxospores (SEM).

FIGURE 18.40

■ Life cycle of a myxobacterium (Stigmatella). Starving Stigmatella cells glide toward each other to aggregate.

The aggregation generates a fruiting body with bulges packed with
small, spherical myxospores.

724

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

also form in slime molds, a class of eukaryotic microbe (discussed in Chapter 20). The myxobacteria, however, have
evolved their process independently. Within the myxobacterial fruiting body, durable spherical cells called myxospores develop (Fig. 18.40). Ultimately, the fruiting body
releases the myxospores to be carried on the wind or by
insects to a more favorable location.

Note:

the inner membrane to degrade host macromolecules and
make their components available to the bdellovibrio. The
entire host cell loses its shape and becomes a protective incubator for the predator. This stage is called the bdelloplast.
Within the periplasm, the invading bdellovibrio elongates as a spiral filament while replicating several copies of
its DNA. When most nutrients have been exhausted, the
filament septates into multiple short cells. The cells develop
flagella, and the bdelloplast bursts, releasing the newly
formed attack cells (Fig. 18.41B).
Bdellovibrios can be isolated from sewage, soil, or
marine water—any environmental source of Gram-negative
prey bacteria. Different species infect E. coli and Pseudomonas, as well as Agrobacterium and Rhizobium in their freeliving state. They can be cultured as plaques on a top-agar
plate containing host bacteria—the same procedure used to
isolate bacteriophages (discussed in Chapter 6).

Bdellovibrios parasitize bacteria. Bacteria can be para-

Epsilonproteobacteria:
Microaerophilic Helical Pathogens

Thought Question

18.10 Compare and contrast the formation of cyanobacterial
akinetes, firmicute endospores, actinomycete arthrospores,
and myxococcal myxospores.

Distinguish myxobacteria from Mycobacterium, the
Gram-positive genus that includes the causative agents of tuberculosis and leprosy.

sitized or preyed on by smaller bacteria. The Delta class
includes Bdellovibrio species, which attack proteobacterial host cells. The structure of the “attack cell” is a small,
comma-shaped rod with a single flagellum. The attack cell
attaches to the envelope of its host and then penetrates
into the periplasm, where it uses host resources to grow
(Fig. 18.41). The growing cell produces enzymes that cross

B.

A. Bdellovibrio bacteriovorus attacking
Escherichia coli
MEGAN E. NÚÑEZ, ET AL. BIOPHYSICAL JOURNAL, VOLUME 84, ISSUE 5, MAY 2003, PAGES
3379-3388 © THE BIOPHYSICAL SOCIETY PUBLISHED BY ELSEVIER INC.

Epsilonproteobacteria include the genera Campylobacter and
Helicobacter. Helicobacter pylori is well known today as the
causative agent of gastritis and stomach ulcers (Fig. 18.42).
Yet, until recently, most microbiologists believed that bacteria could not live in the acidic stomach. The discovery of
H. pylori as the cause of gastritis earned Barry Marshall and
J. Robin Warren, of the University of Western Australia,

1. Bdellovibrio finds
host by chemotaxis.

2. Binds host
receptors.

3. Invades
periplasm.

6. Host lysis releases
Bdellovibrio cells.
E. coli
cytoplasm
Bdellovibrio

1 µm

FIGURE 18.41

■ Parasites of bacteria:
Bdellovibrio. A. Escherichia coli under attack by

B. bacteriovorus (note the Bdellovibrio cell within the
E. coli periplasm) (AFM). B. Life cycle of a bdellovibrio.
Source: Part A from Megan E. Núñez et al. 2003. Biophys. J. 84:3379.

5. Chain fragments
into flagellated
flage ted cells.

4. Spiral chain
cha
ain
grows.

CHAPTER 18
■

CAMR/A. BARRY DOWSETT/SCIENCE SOURCE

■

■

2 μm

FIGURE 18.42 ■ Helicobacter, a neutralophile growing
within the acidic stomach. H. pylori is a short spirillum with

■

unusual knobbed flagella projecting from one end.

the 2005 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine. Marshall
famously swallowed a Helicobacter culture to prove these
bacteria cause gastritis.
H. pylori and related species grow primarily on the stomach epithelium, at about pH 6, which is less acidic than the
gastric contents (pH 2–4). The bacteria bury themselves in
the epithelial layer and neutralize their acidic surroundings
by making urease enzyme, which converts urea to ammonia and carbon dioxide. Helicobacter species form wide spiral cells (spirilla) with an unusual grouping of flagella at
one end. The metabolism of H. pylori is microaerophilic,
requiring a low level of oxygen. The bacteria can be isolated
through biopsy of the gastric mucosa.
Several groups of related Epsilonproteobacteria are sulfur
oxidizers and sulfur reducers, found in marine and aquatic
habitats. Thiovulum species oxidize sulfides aerobically,
using oxygen available in marine water. In deep-ocean sediment, near hydrothermal vents, hydrogenotrophs Nautilia
and Hydrogenimonas oxidize H 2 using sulfur or nitrate.
These bacteria enrich the marine habitat by cycling carbon,
nitrogen, and sulfur. Surprisingly, genes from Epsilonproteobacteria are found in the sequenced genomes of deepbranching taxa, the Aquifex species (see Section 18.1). Like
other hyperthermophiles, the Epsilons “get around,” with
their genes migrating into distantly related organisms.

To Summarize
■

Proteobacteria stain Gram-negative, with a thin cell
wall and an outer membrane containing LPS. They
show wide diversity of form and metabolism, including
phototrophy, lithotrophy, and heterotrophy on diverse
organic substrates.

■

■

BACTERIAL DIVERSITY

■

725

Alphaproteobacteria include photoheterotrophs (such
as Rhodospirillum) and heterotrophs, as well as methylotrophs. They include intracellular mutualists such as rhizobia, and pathogens such as the rickettsias. Rickettsias
share ancestry with mitochondria.
Betaproteobacteria include photoheterotrophs (Rhodocyclus), as well as nitrifiers (Nitrosomonas) and ironsulfur oxidizers (Thiobacillus). Pathogenic diplococci
include Neisseria gonorrhoeae, the cause of gonorrhea.
Gammaproteobacteria include sulfur and iron bacteria (Acidithiobacillus, Chromatium). The most famous
species are the Enterobacteriaceae found in the human
colon. Intracellular pathogens include Salmonella and
Legionella. The pseudomonads, aerobic rods, can respire
on a wide range of complex organic substrates.
Deltaproteobacteria include sulfur and iron reducers
(Geobacter), fruiting-body bacteria (Myxococcus), and
bacterial predators (Bdellovibrio).
Epsilonproteobacteria are spirillar pathogens such as
Helicobacter pylori, the cause of gastritis.

18.5

Deep-Branching
Gram-Negative Phyla

Do other phyla besides Proteobacteria possess an outer
membrane and stain Gram-negative? Some Gram-negative
bacteria branch more deeply from the Proteobacteria than
the five Greek-lettered classes do from each other, and they
are thus classified as separate phyla. Most members of these
phyla (though not all) are obligate anaerobes. They have
diverse lifestyles and habitats, from aquatic phototrophs to
human pathogens. Major phyla include Acidobacteria, Bacteroidetes, Chlorobi, Fusobacteria, and Nitrospirae.

Acidobacteria

Acidobacteria are abundant in soils, where they metabolize a
wide range of organic substrates using diverse electron acceptors. Many species grow in extreme conditions, such as in the
presence of acid and metals—for example, in soils contaminated by uranium mining. Others grow at high temperature,
such as isolate K22 (Fig. 18.43) obtained from the Taupo
Volcanic Zone, New Zealand, by GNS Science, a geoscience
prospecting company. The thin section of isolate K22 in Figure 18.43B shows its extensive outer membrane.
The candidate species Chloracidobacterium thermophilum is a thermophilic aerobic phototroph, isolated
from Octopus Spring, at Yellowstone National Park. This
acidobacterium is a photoheterotroph that supplements

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY
B.
STOTT ET AL. 2008. ENVIRONMENTAL MICROBIOLOGY 10:2030. PHOTO:
© MATTHEW STOTT, GNS SCIENCE

A.

1 µm

FIGURE 18.43

■

isolate K22 (TEM).

1 µm

Acidobacteria isolate K22. A. A thermophilic acidophile, showing a Gram-negative outer membrane. B. Thin section of

catabolism with light absorption by photosystem I (PS I).
It grows chlorosomes similar to those of Chloroflexi (see
Section 18.1). These distantly related organisms may have
shared photosynthesis genes via horizontal gene transfer.

Bacteroidetes

The phylum Bacteroidetes includes genera such as Bacteroides and Flavobacterium. Bacteroides species, such as B. fragilis and B. thetaiotaomicron, are the major inhabitants of
the human colon (Fig. 18.44). Their envelope polysaccharides help the bacteria evade the immune system. Bacteroides species grow anaerobically under extremely low oxygen
concentrations such as those found in the human intestine
(1 ppm), yet they can actually use the oxygen they find;
thus they have been called “nanoaerobes.”
Their main source of energy is fermentation of a wide
range of sugar derivatives from plant material, compounds

that are indigestible by humans and potentially toxic (discussed in Chapter 13). Bacteroides bacteria convert these
substances into simple sugars and fermentation acids, some
of which are absorbed by the intestinal epithelium; others feed associated gut bacteria such as E. coli (discussed
in Chapter 21). Thus, Bacteroides species serve important
functions for their host: They break down potential toxins
in plant foods, and their fermentation products make up
as much as 15% of the caloric value we obtain from food.
Yet another benefit of Bacteroides is their ability to remove
side chains from bile acids, enabling the return of bile
acids to the hepatic circulation. In effect, our gut bacteria,
including Bacteroides, constitute a functional organ of the
human body.
Bacteroides species cause trouble, however, when they
reach parts of the body not designed to host them. During abdominal surgery, bacteria can escape the colon and
invade the surrounding tissues. The displaced bacteria can
form an abscess, a localized mass of bacteria and pus contained in a cavity of dead tissue. The interior of the abscess
is anaerobic and often impenetrable to antibiotics.

INSTITUT PASTEUR/PHOTOTAKE

Chlorobi

FIGURE 18.44

STOTT ET AL. 2008. ENVIRONMENTAL MICROBIOLOGY 10:2030. PHOTO:
© MATTHEW STOTT, GNS SCIENCE

726

2 μm

■ Bacteroides fragilis cells colonize the human colon. B. fragilis causes intestinal infections (colorized SEM).

The Chlorobi (mainly Chlorobium species) are known
informally as green sulfur bacteria. While they are genetically close to Bacteroides, their metabolism is surprisingly
different. Chlorobi are strict photolithotrophs, using PS I
to split electrons from H 2, H 2S, or other reduced sulfur
compounds (Fig. 18.45; see also Table 18.2). During the
oxidation of sulfide, Chlorobium species deposit elemental sulfur extracellularly, forming attached sulfur globules (Fig. 18.45A). In contrast, the sulfur granules of
Gammaproteobacteria such as Chromatium are deposited
internally.

CHAPTER 18

■

BACTERIAL DIVERSITY

■

727

A.

COURTESY NIELS-ULRIK FRIGAARD

related biofilm partners have transferred exceptional numbers of genes to the F. nucleatum genome.

Nitrospirae

1 μm

B.

JÖRG OVERMANN, U. OF MUNICH

Chlorosomes

100 μm

FIGURE 18.45 ■ Chlorobium: Gram-negative green sulfur
bacteria. A. Chlorobium sp. cells covered with sulfur globules; cells

form a cluster surrounding a nonphototrophic symbiotic bacterium.
B. C. tepidum cell containing chlorosomes.

The phylum Nitrospirae consists of Gram-negative spiral
bacteria that oxidize nitrite ion to nitrate (NO2 – to NO3 –).
Their cell structure resembles that of the Proteobacteria, although their phylogenetic branch is deep enough
for assignment to a separate phylum. Most species, such
as Nitrospira species (see Tables 18.1 and 18.4), are true
lithotrophs or autotrophs, fixing carbon in the form of
carbon dioxide or carbonate using carboxysomes. Nitrospira species are generally found in freshwater or salt water.
Their removal of excess nitrite makes a key contribution to
aquatic ecosystems.
Another important genus is Leptospirillum, which
includes acidophilic iron oxidizers. Leptospirillum species are also strict autotrophs, fixing carbon by using Fe2+
as their electron donor and O2 as the electron acceptor.
Their metabolism generates acid, contributing to acid mine
drainage in iron mines at Iron Mountain, California, where
they grow in massive pink biofilms.

To Summarize
Chlorobium species require extensive membrane systems
full of photopigments for light absorption. The chlorophyll reaction centers of Chlorobium are contained within
chlorosomes associated with the cytoplasmic membrane
(Fig. 18.45B), similar to chlorosomes of the deep-branching phylum Chloroflexi. The photopigment of Chlorobium is predominantly BChl c, which absorbs in the blue
(460 nm) and near-infrared (750 nm), thus reflecting the
middle range, brownish green.

Note:

Distinguish phylum Chlorobi (sulfur photoautotrophs)
from phylum Chloroflexi (thermophilic filamentous photoheterotrophs). Both taxa are phototrophs containing green photopigment
complexes arranged in chlorosomes, but they are deeply divergent
genetically.

■

■

■

■

■

Acidobacteria are Gram-negative soil bacteria, including many acidophiles.
Bacteroidetes are anaerobes that ferment complex plant
materials in the human colon. They may enter body
tissues through wounds and cause abscesses.
Chlorobi are green sulfur phototrophs, obligate anaerobes
incapable of heterotrophy.
Fusobacteria are pathogens that cause septicemia and
skin ulcers.
Nitrospirae are Gram-negative spiral bacteria that oxidize nitrite to nitrate (Nitrospira).

18.6
Fusobacteria

Fusobacteria is an emerging taxon of surprisingly virulent
pathogens. Fusobacterium nucleatum was identified from
dental plaque; this bacterium is the second most frequent
cause of human abscesses (after Bacteroides). Within biofilms such as dental plaque, Fusobacterium species form
carbohydrate bridges with numerous other kinds of bacteria, such as spirochetes, proteobacteria, and firmicutes, as
well as eukaryotic pathogens such as fungi. These distantly

Spirochetes: Sheathed
Spiral Cells with
Internalized Flagella

Spirochetes (or Spirochaeta) is a unique phylum of heterotrophic bacteria that form tightly coiled spirals. While
different species of spirochetes conduct a broad range of
heterotrophy, from aerobic to anaerobic, all spirochetes
share a distinctive cell structure consisting of a long,
tight spiral that is flexible like an old-style telephone cord

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

21.2 μm

10.5 μm

Flagellum

0.42 μm

D.

2 μm

CDC/JAMES GATHANY

MICHAEL ABBEY/VISUALS UNLIMITED

C.

FIGURE 18.46 ■ Spirochetes. A. Treponema azotonutricium
fixes nitrogen in the termite gut (TEM). B. Periplasmic flagellum of
T. azotonutricium. C. Borrelia recurrentis, shown here in a blood film,
is the cause of relapsing fever (stained LM). D. Lyme disease rash,
caused by tick-borne Borrelia burgdorferi.

JOSEPH GRABER, ET. AL. 2004 APPLIED AND ENV. MICRO. 70:1315

B.

JOSEPH GRABER, ET. AL. 2004 APPLIED AND ENV. MICRO. 70:1315

A.

too narrow (0.2 μm) to visualize by bright-field microscopy;
instead, dark-field, fluorescence, or electron microscopy
must be used. T. pallidum is not culturable in the laboratory, but its genome sequence reveals much about its physiology. The genome of 1.1 million base pairs (presented in
eTopic 13.3) is highly degenerate, lacking nearly all components of biosynthesis and of the TCA cycle; its only system
for ATP production is glycolysis.
The spirochete genus Borrelia includes two pathogens
that cause serious tick-borne diseases in the United States. B.
recurrentis causes relapsing fever (Fig. 18.46C). The related
species B. burgdorferi causes Lyme disease known for the distinctive bull’s-eye rash (Fig. 18.46D). A unique feature of
Borrelia species is their multipartite genome. Each species
possesses a linear main chromosome of less than a million
base pairs, plus a number of linear and circular plasmids. B.
burgdorferi, for example, has a linear chromosome of 910,725
base pairs, with at least 17 linear and circular plasmids that
total an additional 533,000 base pairs. The reason for this
unusual fragmentation of Borrelia genomes is unknown.
Spirochetes include important pathogens of animals,
such as Leptospira, the cause of leptospirosis, a form of
nephritis (kidney inflammation) with complications in the
liver and other organs. Leptospira cells are known for the
peculiar L shape of the cell, as each end of the spirochete
turns out at an angle. Members of the genus Treponema
also cause digital dermatitis in cattle and sheep. As in other
bacterial phyla, however, the pathogenic species are far outnumbered by harmless organisms.

(Fig. 18.46A). For many species, the spiral is so thin that
its width cannot be resolved by bright-field microscopy, and
the organisms can pass through a filter of pore size 2 µm.

Note: Distinguish the spirochete Leptospira from the nitriteoxidizing proteobacterium Leptospirillum.

Spirochete Diversity

Cell Structure of Spirochetes

Spirochetes grow in a wide range of habitats, from ponds and
The spirochete cell is surrounded by a thick outer sheath
streams to the digestive tracts of animals. Aquatic systems
of lipopolysaccharides and proteins. The spirochete sheath
carry free-living sugar fermenters of the genus Spirochaeta. A
is similar to a proteobacterial outer membrane, except that
particularly interesting spirochete community is found in the
the periplasmic space completely separates the sheath from
termite gut, where the organisms form elaborate symbiotic
the plasma membrane. At each end of the cell, one or more
associations with protists and assist in the digestion of cellupolar flagella extend and double back around the cell body
lose. Treponema azotonutricium actually fixes nitrogen for its
within the periplasmic space (Fig. 18.47). The periplasmic
host termite (Fig. 18.46A and B).
Other members of the genus TrepoA.
B.
nema are normal residents of the
Protoplasmic cylinder
Periplasm
Outer membrane
Flagellum
Outer envelope
human and animal oral, intestinal,
and genital regions.
The best-known spirochetes are
those that cause human and animal
diseases. The causative agent of the
FIGURE 18.47 ■ Spirochete structure. A. Spirochete cell strucsexually transmitted disease syphiture, showing the arrangement of periplasmic flagella. B. Cross section
0.1 µm
lis is the spirochete Treponema palFlagellum
through a human gingival spirochete, showing outer envelope and
flagella (axial fibrils) (TEM).
lidum. The cell of T. pallidum is

M.A. LISTGARTEN AND S. S. SOCRANSKY/1964.
J. BACTERIOL. 88:1087.

728

CHAPTER 18

■

BACTERIAL DIVERSITY

■

729

A.

To Summarize
■

■

■

The spirochete cell is a tight coil, enclosed by a sheath
and periplasmic space containing periplasmic flagella.

Reticulate
body
Elementary
body
Dividing
reticulate
body

CNRI/SCIENCE SOURCE

flagella (axial fibrils) rotate on proton-driven motors, as
do regular flagella; but because they twine back around
the cell body, their rotation forces the entire cell to twist
around, corkscrewing through the medium.
This corkscrew motion of the cell body turns out to
have a physical advantage in highly viscous environments,
such as human mucous secretions or agar culture medium.
Few nonspirochetes can swim through agar at standard
culture concentrations (1.5% agar); thus, growth within
agar provides a way to isolate anaerobic spirochetes from
environmental sources. When an environmental sample is
inoculated into agar, other bacteria grow and concentrate
at the injection point, whereas spirochetes migrate outward
in a “veil” through the agar.

0.5 µm

B. Chlamydia developmental cycle
1. Elementary body
attaches to host cell.
Nucleus
6. Cell lyses,
releasing
elementary
bodies.

2. Elementary body
is taken up by
endocytosis.

Spirochete motility is driven by a flexing motion caused
by rotation of the periplasmic flagella, propagated the
length of the coil.
Spirochetes grow in diverse habitats. Some are freeliving fermenters in water or soil. Others are pathogens,
such as Treponema pallidum, the cause of syphilis. Still
others are endosymbionts of an animal digestive tract,
such as the termite gut.

3. Elementary body
differentiates into
reticulate body.

5. Reticulate bodies
develop into
elementary bodies.
4. Reticulate body replicates and
persists in cell for long periods.

18.7

Chlamydiae,
Planctomycetes, and
Verrucomicrobia:
Irregular Cells

Several related phyla of bacteria have either no cell walls
or diminished cell walls. These organisms evolved independently of the mycoplasmas, and their alternative cell forms
show diverse environmental adaptations.

Chlamydiae: Intracellular Parasites

In the phylum Chlamydiae, the genera Chlamydia and
Chlamydophila evolved complex developmental life cycles
of parasitizing host cells. Chlamydia trachomatis causes the
most prevalent sexually transmitted infection among young
people in the United States. The same pathogen also causes
trachoma, an eye disease dating back to records in ancient
Egypt. The related species Chlamydophila pneumoniae
causes pneumonia and has been implicated in cardiovascular disease.

FIGURE 18.48

■ Chlamydia life cycle. A. C. trachomatis, multiplying within a human cell (colorized TEM). Infected cell, equivalent
to step 5 in part (B), contains reticulate bodies (yellow) growing and
dividing, as well as newly formed elementary bodies (red). B. Chlamydia species persist outside the host as a spore-like “elementary
body.” Upon endocytosis, the elementary body avoids lysosomal
fusion and develops into a “reticulate body” in which the DNA, now
uncondensed, has a reticular (netlike) appearance. The reticulate
body replicates within the host cytoplasm and then develops into
new elementary bodies that are released when the cell lyses.

Chlamydiae alternate between two developmental stages
with different functions: elementary bodies and reticulate
bodies (Fig. 18.48A). The form of chlamydia transmitted outside host cells is called an elementary body. Like
endospores, elementary bodies are metabolically inert, with
a compacted chromosome. While lacking a cell wall, they
possess an outer membrane whose proteins are cross-linked
by disulfide bonds, making a tough coat that provides
osmotic stability. The elementary body adheres to a host
cell surface and is endocytosed (Fig. 18.48B).
To reproduce, the elementary body must transform itself
into a reticulate body, named for the netlike appearance

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

of its uncondensed DNA. The reticulate body has an active
metabolism and divides rapidly, but outside the cell it is
incapable of infection and vulnerable to osmotic shock.
To complete the infection cycle, therefore, reticulate bodies must develop into new elementary bodies before exiting the host. When the host cell lyses, the elementary
bodies are released to infect new cells. Chlamydiae infect a
wide range of host cell types, from respiratory epithelium
to macrophages.

A.

Planctomycetes: A NucleusLike Compartment

Another cell wall–less group, the Planctomycetes, evolved
largely as free-living organisms. Planctomycetes are oligotrophs, heterotrophs requiring nutrients at extremely
low concentrations. They grow in aquatic, marine, and
saline environments. Their mechanism of osmoregulation
remains poorly understood.
Planctomycete
cells
possess
multiple
internal membrane compartments of unknown function
(Fig. 18.49A). An internal membrane just inside the cell
membrane divides the cytoplasm into concentric portions. A double membrane surrounds the entire nucleoid, analogous to the double membrane surrounding
the eukaryotic nucleus—a remarkable example of independent analogous evolution between bacteria and the
eukaryotes. The actual function of the nucleoid-surrounding membrane varies with different species; for
example, in anammox planctomycetes, a single membrane enclosing the nucleoid contains the complexes
conducting the anammox reaction (anaerobic ammonium oxidation; discussed in Chapter 14).
Like eukaryotic protists (discussed in Chapter 20),
the planctomycetes have f lexible cell bodies that can
assume diverse forms. For example, some Planctomyces species have rotary f lagella (Fig. 18.49B), whereas
P. bekefii cells have stalks that attach to each other to
generate a starlike aggregate (Fig. 18.49C). Most planctomycetes reproduce by budding, a strategy typical of
eukaryotic yeasts.

Cell
membrane

“Nuclear”
membrane
Inner cell membrane 0.2 μm

B.

300 nm

C.

Verrucomicrobia: Wrinkled Microbes

Verrucomicrobia, or “wrinkled microbes,” are irregularly
shaped bacteria found in a wide variety of aquatic and terrestrial environments, as well as in the mammalian gastrointestinal tract (see Table 18.1). Most Verrucomicrobia are
oligotrophs, growing heterotrophically in low-salt habitats. Some are ectosymbionts of protists, attached to the
cell surface of the eukaryote, where they eject harpoon-like
objects. They are rarely cultured, and until recently they

DR JOHN FUERST, UNIVERSITY OF QUEENSLAND

PART 4

DR JOHN FUERST, UNIVERSITY OF QUEENSLAND

■

10 μm

FIGURE 18.49

THOMAS WITTLING

730

Planctomyces: bacteria with a “nuclear
membrane.” A. Section through the planctomycete Gemmata
■

obscuriglobus, showing membrane compartmentalization (TEM).
The DNA is contained within a double membrane analogous to a
eukaryotic nuclear membrane. B. A swarmer cell of Planctomyces sp.
with multiple flagella (TEM). C. Planctomyces bekefii cells form stalks
that attach to each other at the center to yield a starlike form (LM).

CHAPTER 19

■

ARCHAEAL DIVERSITY

■

735

CHAPTER 19
Archaeal Diversity

19.2 Crenarchaeota across the Temperature Range
19.3 Thaumarchaeota: Symbionts and Ammonia

Oxidizers
19.4 Methanogenic Euryarchaeota
19.5 Halophilic Euryarchaeota
19.6 Extremophilic Euryarchaeota and Deeply

Branching Divisions

C U R R E N T R E S E A RC H

highlight

Archaea with grappling hooks. A newly discovered archaeon,
Altiarchaeum hamiconexum, was discovered in marsh water
rich in sulfides, from the Sippenauer Moor, Germany. The archaea fix CO2 by an unusual pathway related to methanogenesis. Their cells use a unique appendage, pilus-like grappling
hooks that connect neighboring cells in a biofilm matrix. The
matrix of grappling hooks also coats filaments of sulfideoxidizing bacteria that may cooperate with Altiarchaeum.
Source: Alexandra K. Perras et al. 2014. Front. Microbiol. 5:397.

Altiarchaeum

Grappling
hooks

Filamentous
bacteria
encased by
archaeal
grappling
hooks

1 µm

A

rchaea are found in all soil and water habitats,
in symbiosis with animals and plants, and in
extreme environments that exclude bacteria
and eukaryotes. Archaea include hyperthermophiles
inhabiting Earth’s hottest habitats, as well as Arctic
and Antarctic psychrophiles. Methanogens inhabit
the digestive tracts of humans and other animals, as
well as anaerobic soil and water, with consequences
for global climate. Many archaea collaborate with
bacteria in multispecies biofilms. No archaeon is yet
known to cause disease, but archaea do interact with
our innate immune system.

A N I N T E RV I E W W I T H
CHRISTINE MOISSL-EICHINGER, EXTREMOPHILE
MICROBIOLOGIST, MEDICAL UNIVERSITY OF GRAZ

What is most surprising about the
new kind of archaeon you discovered?
The ultrastructural analyses of Altiarchaeum were breathtaking, especially
the discovery of the “hami.” The hami
are filamentous cell-surface appendages that carry a tiny grappling hook
at their end. Such features have never
been found for any cellular appendage of eukaryotic or
prokaryotic cells.
©ANNA AUERBACH

19.1 Archaeal Traits and Phylogeny

How did your research on archaea prepare you to investigate microbes on board the International Space Station?
Our methods found that Archaea are a substantial part of
the human skin microbiome. I am driven by the idea that
Archaea are everywhere, and that we just need to use the
right methods to understand their biology. I obtained an
award from the European Space Agency for a comprehensive microbiome analysis of the International Space Station in order to find interesting Archaea and Bacteria there
and to identify the potential adaptations to this very interesting habitat. Such analysis will help us understand the
mechanisms of an encapsulated ecosystem, the impact
of microbes on long-term spaceflight, and the adaptation
capacity of a microbial community.
735

736

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

In 1977, Carl Woese revealed the existence of a third kind
of life—the Archaea, a domain of life-forms very different
from the plants, animals, and bacteria that had long been
known. Today, the Archaea continue to yield surprises. An
example is the candidate species Altiarchaeum hamiconexum, first known as the SM1 euryarchaeon discovered in
2004 by Rudolph Huber and his students at the University
of Regensburg, Germany. The marsh-dwelling microbe is
an archaeon related to methanogens, and it appears to fix
CO2, but its precise metabolism remains unknown. Christine Moissl-Eichinger (see the Current Research Highlight)
showed how this organism forms netlike biofilms by use of
grappling-hook appendages, called hami (singular, hamus)
(Fig. 19.1). Each grappling hook contains paired barbs
along an extended protein filament many times the length
of the cell. The filament ends with a triple fishhook that
enables filaments to clasp each other. No other kind of cell
is known to make this type of appendage.
Archaea are known for extremophiles, such as hyperthermophiles growing above 100°C and hyperacidophiles at
below pH 1. Extremophiles are of interest to biotechnology
because their enzymes may catalyze reactions under industrially useful conditions, such as high salt or acidity. But we
also find archaea throughout mesophilic soil and water, and
within the digestive tracts of humans and other animals.
Moissl-Eichinger even discovered archaea on human skin,
comprising more than 4% of the skin’s prokaryotic microbiome. She argues that archaea exist everywhere, in every livable habitat; we just need the right methods to find them.
How do archaea in “moderate” habitats interact with
bacteria and eukaryotes? Many archaea join bacteria
A.

within biofilms in soil and on marine particles. For example, Altiarchaeum envelops sulfide-oxidizing bacteria
in its grappling appendages to form thick biofilms like
pearls on a string. Other archaea cooperate with eukaryotes, for example, by colonizing the surface of plant roots.
Even in these shared habitats, archaea show unique traits,
such as energy-yielding methanogenesis and cyclic diether
membranes. Perhaps the most compelling unique feature of
archaea, from the human point of view, is that no archaea
are known to cause disease. Recent reports find gut methanogens associated with the inflammatory response, but
no causal relationship has yet been demonstrated.
In Chapter 19 we explore the diversity of archaea. We
emphasize the unique structures and metabolic pathways
of archaeal cells. While surveying their major taxonomic
categories, we introduce research techniques used to study
organisms in extreme environments and those with unique
forms of metabolism, such as methanogenesis.

19.1

Archaeal Traits
and Phylogeny

Key traits such as ether-linked membrane lipids are found
only in archaea, and in a few bacteria that received them
by horizontal gene flow from archaea. Other traits, such as
diverse pathways of redox metabolism, archaea share with
bacteria. But archaea share core traits of DNA-RNA machinery and transcription factors with eukaryotes. Genomic analysis suggests that eukaryotes possess an archaeal ancestor.

B.

FIGURE 19.1

50 nm

Grappling hooks (hami) of Altiarchaeum
species. A. Hooked appendages extending from a cell (TEM).
■

B. Cryo-EM tomography model of a grappling hook (hamus).

CHRISTINE MOISSL, ET AL. MOLECULAR MICROBIOLOGY 56: 361, FIG. 4C.

100 nm

ALEXANDER K. PERRAS, ET AL. 2014. FRONTIERS IN MICROBIOLOGY 5: 397.

Archaeal Cell Structure and Metabolism

Distinctive features of archaea, sometimes called “archaeal
signatures,” include components of the cell membrane and
envelope and certain metabolic pathways to gain energy
(Table 19.1).
Isoprenoid membranes. The most distinctive structure of

archaea is their membrane (Fig. 19.2). The membrane lipids of archaea differ profoundly from those of bacteria and
eukaryotes, with the exception of a few thermophilic bacteria
that obtained ether lipids horizontally from archaea. Most
features of archaeal lipids increase lipid stability in extreme
environments such as high temperature or extreme acidity.
Nevertheless, ether lipids are also widespread in mesophiles
(grow at moderate temperatures). Some researchers argue
that the original archaea were hyperthermophiles but later
evolved as mesophiles by acquiring genes from bacteria.
Archaeal lipids contain distinctive structures that differ
from those of bacteria and eukaryotes:

CHAPTER 19

■

ARCHAEAL DIVERSITY

■

737

TABLE 19.1*Archaeal Traits Distinct from Bacteria and Eukaryotes
Traits of archaea

Archaea showing
the trait

Alternative traits of
bacteria and/or eukaryotes

Cell envelope
Membrane lipids: isoprenoid L-glycerol ethers
or diethers

All archaea

Membrane lipids: D-glycerol hydrocarbon
diesters

Membrane lipid chains stiffened by covalent cross-links
or by pentacyclic rings

Most archaea

Chains stiffened by saturation

S-layer of glycoprotein

Crenarchaeota and
Thaumarchaeota

Peptidoglycan (bacteria); cellulose and other
polysaccharides (eukaryotes)

S-layer of protein, methanochondroitin, or sulfated
polysaccharide

Methanogens and
Haloarchaea

Peptidoglycan (bacteria); cellulose and other
polysaccharides (eukaryotes)

Pseudomurein sacculus contains talosaminuronic acid;
peptide bridges contain only L-amino acids

Methanobacteriales,
Methanopyrales

Peptidoglycan (bacteria); cellulose and other
polysaccharides (eukaryotes)

Nonphosphorylated intermediates of sugar catabolism
and synthesis (EMP glycolysis in some cases)

All archaea

EMP pathway of glycolysis, with
phosphorylation mediated by NAD or NADP
(or Entner-Doudoroff)

Methanogenesis from H2 and CO2; or from CO,
methanol, methyl sulfides, formate, or acetate

Methanogens

Anaerobic metabolism such as fermentation;
no methane production

Archaeal coenzymes: cofactors F420 and F430, and
coenzyme M

Most methanogens

Flavin mononucleotide, coenzyme A, others

Retinal-associated light-driven membrane pumps for
H+ or Na+

Haloarchaea

Chlorophyll-based photosynthesis (bacteria and
eukaryotic chloroplasts)

Positive superturns generated by reverse gyrase
protect DNA from extreme acid.

Hyperthermophilic archaea

Negative superturns generated by gyrase

Unique base structures in tRNA, such as the guanine
analog archaeosine

Most archaea

tRNA bases, such as queuosine, found only in
bacteria and eukaryotes

Metabolism

Nucleic acid structure and function

Sources: O. Kandler and H. König. 1998. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 54:305–308; C. Bullock. 2000. Biochem. Mol. Biol. Ed. 28:186–191.

■ L-Glycerol.

Archaeal membrane lipids incorporate L-glycerol (Fig. 19.2A), rather than the mirrorsymmetrical form D-glycerol, which is used by bacteria
and eukaryotes. The two chiral forms show similar thermal stability, but their biochemistry requires different
enzymes, and thus they represent a deep divergence in
ancestry. In some archaea the glycerol is extended by six
carbons, forming nonitol (nine OH groups).

■

Ether linkage. The glycerol units are linked to side chains
by ether links (R–O–R) instead of the ester links (R–
COO–R) found in bacteria and eukaryotes (Fig. 19.2A).
Ether links are much more stable than ester links; in other
words, breaking them requires more energy.

■

Isoprenoid chains. The side chains of archaeal lipids are
branched at every fourth carbon. The methyl branches
arise by condensation (C–C bond formation) of units of
isoprene (see Fig. 19.2A). Condensed isoprene chains

are called isoprenoid or diphytanyl chains; thus, the
overall lipid is diphytanylglycerol diether. Isoprenoid
branched chains increase membrane stability by hooking
each other in place.
■

Cross-linked lipids. In some hyperthermophiles, the
ends of side chains are linked covalently, either to each
other (Fig. 19.2B) or to a lipid on the opposite side of
the membrane (Fig. 19.2C). Two pairs of lipid chains
cross-linked across the membrane form a tetraether,
so called because the complex contains four ether links
in all. In some cases, an additional covalent bond links
the two linked pairs of side chains across the middle
(Fig. 19.2D).

■

Cyclopentane rings. In some archaea, the lipid’s
methyl branches cyclize, forming cyclopentane rings
(Fig. 19.2E). Cyclopentane rings strengthen membranes at high temperature.

738

■

A.

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

L-Glycerol

S-layer and cell wall. Most archaea possess a single mem-

diether

O
O
HO

Isoprene unit

Diphytanylglycerol diether

B.
O

The ends of the lipid
side chains are joined
to each other.

O
HO

Macrocyclic diether

C.
The end of a lipid chain is linked to
the end of a chain on the opposite
side of the membrane.

HO HO HO HO HO
OH
OH

Nonitol

O

O

O

O

HO
HO
OH OH OH OH OH

Membrane
Tetraether

D.
Cross-link is formed by an additional
covalent bond between the lipid chains.
O
O

O
Cross-linked tetraether
Cyclopentane ring

O

HO

OH
O

HO
E.

R

O

R
O

OH

O

FIGURE 19.2

Branched-chain ether lipids are characteristic of archaeal membranes. Source: Modified from R. M. Daniel and D. A.
■

Cowan. 2000. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 57:250–264.

A. Sulfolobus

brane, without any outer membrane such as that of
Gram-negative bacteria (shown in Chapter 3). Many,
such as the thermophilic crenarchaeotes, possess no cell
wall at all, but only an S-layer of proteins plugged into
the tetraether membrane (Fig. 19.3). The S-layer proteins of Sulfolobus species lock together to form a sturdy
array (Fig. 19.3A). While helping to keep the cell intact,
the S-layer protein array nonetheless allows a flexible
cell structure, in contrast to the more rigid structures of
most bacteria.
Some archaea do have a cell wall, but the structure
differs fundamentally from the bacterial peptidoglycan.
The methanogen Methanothermus (Fig. 19.3B) has a
peptide-sugar sacculus that is composed not of murein
(see Chapter 3), but of a related macromolecule called
pseudomurein or pseudopeptidoglycan. Pseudopeptidoglycan contains chains of alternating sugar derivatives
including N-acetylglucosamine, as in bacterial peptidoglycan. The bacterial N-acetylmuramic acid, however, is
replaced by a related sugar, N-acetyltalosaminuronic acid;
and the sugar linkage is β(1,3) instead of β(1,4) as in bacteria. As a result, these archaea are resistant to lysozyme,
which degrades bacterial cell walls at the β(1,4) sugar linkage. The peptide cross-bridges of pseudopeptidoglycan
differ as well, causing resistance to penicillin (discussed
in Chapter 3).
Similarly, many archaea possess filamentous protein
structures for attachment and motility that are analogous
to bacterial pili and flagella. Despite functional similarity,
the archaeal protein structures are very different from those
of bacteria. Archaeal flagella have rotary motors, but their
distinctive form earns them the name “archaella” (singular,
archaellum).
Unique metabolic pathways. Archaea utilize many distinctive metabolic pathways. Glucose is catabolized
by several variants of the Entner-Doudoroff (ED) and

B. Methanothermus
Pseudopeptidoglycan

S-layer

FIGURE 19.3

■ Envelopes of
archaea. A. Sulfolobus species have

S-layer proteins plugged into a tetraether
membrane. B. Methanothermus species
have a cell wall of pseudopeptidoglycan
between their membrane and S-layer.

S-layer

CHAPTER 19

Archaeal
ED pathways
Glucose

Bacterial
ED pathway

ATP

NAD(P)+
Glucose 6- P
NAD(P)H

NAD(P)+

6- P -gluconate

Gluconate

H2O
2-Oxo-3-deoxygluconate
Sulfolobus
Thermoplasma

NAD(P)H

H2O

ATP

Pyrococcus
Halobacterium

2-Oxo-3-deoxy-6- P -gluconate

Pyruvate

Pyruvate

Glyceraldehyde 3- P

Glyceraldehyde

NAD(P)+
Pi

NAD(P)+
NAD(P)H

NAD(P)H
1,3-di- P -glycerate

Glycerate
ATP

EMP
stage 2
pathway

ATP
3- P -glycerate

2- P -glycerate

ATP
0 net ATP

1 net ATP

■

ARCHAEAL DIVERSITY

■

739

generating pyruvate with no net production of ATP. (ATP
is still produced by further breakdown of pyruvate.) On
the other hand, halophilic archaea such as Halobacterium phosphorylate the dehydrated product of gluconate
(2-oxo-3-deoxygluconate), which enters the “standard”
ED pathway. The ED pathway generates one molecule
of pyruvate and one molecule of 3-phosphoglycerate,
which produces one net ATP through the second stage
of the EMP pathway. A unique variant of the EMP pathway is seen in the vent thermophile Pyrococcus furiosus,
which oxidizes glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate using ferredoxin instead of NAD+ and avoids phosphorylation. The
reduced ferredoxin is then used to reduce 2H+ to H 2 in an
energy-yielding reaction.
The energy-yielding process of methanogenesis occurs
only in archaea. Methane production by methanogenic
archaea (methanogens) makes a growing contribution to
global warming, as discussed in Chapter 22. Methanogenesis includes a unique pathway of carbon fixation, called
the carbon monoxide reductase pathway because the key
enzyme can fix CO as well as CO2. A CO group is fixed
into acetyl-CoA by condensation with a methyl group generated by methanogenesis. Acetyl-CoA then enters the
TCA cycle. Methanogenesis also uses unique cofactors
that largely replace NAD, FAD, and FMN (discussed in
Section 19.4).
The only known form of phototrophy in archaea is that
of retinal-based ion pumps. Membrane protein complexes
known as bacteriorhodopsin and halorhodopsin contain
retinal and pumps for H+ or Na+ (discussed in Chapter 14).
Bacteriorhodopsins are found in haloarchaea (formerly
called halobacteria) such as Halobacterium halobium; the
species was named before it was known to be an archaeon
(discussed in Section 19.5). It turns out that haloarchaea
have transferred genes encoding light-absorbing proton
pumps into many marine bacteria. By contrast, the chlorophyll-based phototrophy found in bacteria and plants is
completely unknown in archaea.

Pyruvate

FIGURE 19.4

■ Glucose catabolism in archaea. Sulfolobus
and Thermoplasma species catabolize glucose to pyruvate by a
modified ED pathway without phosphorylating glucose and produce no net ATP. Halobacterium species phosphorylate 2-oxo3-deoxygluconate and produce one net ATP by the EMP stage 2
pathway. Pyrococcus furiosus oxidizes glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate
using ferredoxin instead of NAD+ and avoids phosphorylation.

Embden-Meyerhof-Parnas (EMP) pathways that rarely
occur in bacteria (Fig. 19.4). For example, the sulfur
thermophiles Sulfolobus and Thermoplasma convert glucose to gluconate without phosphorylation, ultimately

Archaeal Genome Structure
and Regulation

How do archaeal genomes compare with those of bacteria and eukaryotes? The genomes of archaea generally
resemble those of bacteria in size and gene density, and
genes of related function are often arranged in operons,
like those of bacteria. Nevertheless, certain features of
genome structure are unique to archaea, and some traits
more closely resemble those of eukaryotes than those of
bacteria.

740

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

A distinctive feature of archaeal chromosome function is
the “reverse gyrase” enzyme found in hyperthermophiles.
For comparison, all bacteria and eukaryotes, as well as
mesophilic archaea, have gyrase to maintain their DNA in
an “underwound” negatively supercoiled state (presented
in Chapter 7). But hyperthermophilic archaea with reverse
gyrase maintain positive supercoiling to stabilize their
DNA. The positive superturns “overwind” the DNA, preventing the helix from melting into separate strands at high
temperature.
A unique feature of archaeal RNA is the distinctive
modified bases in their tRNA molecules. In particular, the

guanosine analog archaeosine (7-formamidino-7-deazaguanosine) is used by nearly all archaea, but not by any
bacteria or eukaryotes. Other unusual tRNA bases, such as
queuosine, are found only in bacteria and eukaryotes, not
in archaea.
The genes encoding most archaeal proteins contain
uninterrupted coding sequences, as in bacteria, but certain tRNA gene sequences are interrupted by introns (nontranslated sequence), similar to the tRNA introns found
in eukaryotes. Furthermore, the archaeal apparatus for
DNA and RNA polymerases, transcription factors, and
protein synthesis show remarkable similarity to those of

B.
A.
Eukaryotic RNA polymerase II

Archaeal RNA polymerase

TFIIF

TATA-binding
protein (TBP)

TFIID

RNAP

DNA

TFB

Core
polymerase

RNAPII

TFIIA
TFIIB

TFIIE
TFIIH

C.

COURTESY OF JOHN REEVE

TBP

D.
Methanothermus DNA

Histone tetramer

FIGURE 19.5 ■ Central genetic molecules of Archaea resemble those of Eukarya. A. The core RNA polymerase (RNAP) subunits
of the archaeon Sulfolobus show homology to those of the eukaryotic RNA polymerase II (RNAPII). The TATA-binding protein (TBP, green)
and transcription factor B (TFB, pink) also show homology to eukaryotic counterparts. B. John Reeve, pictured here with a graduate student,
studies the molecular biology of methanogens using an anaerobic glove box. C. Methanothermus fervidus DNA binds to histone tetramers that
show homology to the histones of eukaryotes. (PDB code: 1A7W) D. Eukaryotic histone octamer. (PDB code: 1AOI) Source: Part C from Kathryn A.
Bailey et al. 2002. J. Biol. Chem. 277:9293; part D from K. Luger et al. 1997. Nature 389:251.

CHAPTER 19

eukaryotes. Figure 19.5A compares the components of an
archaeal RNA polymerase (from Sulfolobus) with those of
eukaryotic RNA polymerase II, the enzyme that catalyzes
synthesis of messenger RNA. The archaeal polymerase possesses two transcription factors (regulatory protein components) that are found in eukaryotes: TATA-binding protein
(TBP, a subunit of transcription factor II D, TFIID) and
transcription factor II B (TFIIB, which in archaea is designated TFB). By contrast, bacteria have no homologs of
these factors. A consequence of the eukaryotic-like transcription and translation in archaea is that archaea are resistant to antibacterial antibiotics that target transcription
and translation.
Another eukaryotic structure for which archaeal homologs were discovered is that of histones, the fundamental
packaging proteins of DNA. The histone complex found
in eukaryotic chromosomes contains a histone (H3 + H4)2
tetramer flanked by two histone (H2A + H2B) dimers.
The archaeal homologs form an (H3 + H4)2 tetramer, with
no (H2A + H2B) homologs. John Reeve and colleagues
at the Ohio State University (Fig. 19.5B) showed that

PARC ORNITHOLOGIQUE DU TEICH

Root of
archaeal tree

ARCHAEAL DIVERSITY

■

741

isolated DNA of specific sequences could be bound and
curved around a histone tetramer from the methanogen
Methanothermus fervidus (Fig. 19.5C). The DNA has ATrich sequences that specifically fit the histone complex. The
key sequences of the histones (the ones that bind to DNA)
show homology to eukaryotic histones. Histones have since
been found in many species of archaea.

Phylogeny of Archaea

What are the major kinds of Archaea? The domain includes
three phyla, also called divisions, that have been extensively
characterized (Fig. 19.6). These phyla are Crenarchaeota,
Thaumarchaeota, and Euryarchaeota. In addition, a
growing number of phyla emerge through exploring the
sequences of environmental samples, such as the Ancient
Archaeal Group (AAG) of vent hyperthermophiles and
benthic subsurface communities. Major taxa are outlined
in Table 19.2. An expanded version of this table appears
in Appendix 2.

Sulfolobus
Pyrodictium
Desulfurococcus
Thermoproteus

0.1
100 mutations/1,000 nt

■

Thermoprotei
Crenarchaeota

Deep-sea Archaeal Group/Marine
Benthic Group B (DSAG/MBGB)
Bathyarchaeota (formerly MCG*)
Eukarya
Lokiarchaeota
Nitrososphaera
Nitrosopumilus
Cenarchaeum
Korarchaeota
Methanococcus
Methanogens
Methanocaldococcus
Thermococcus
Archaeoglobus
Methanobacterium
Methanothermus
Altiarchaeum
Thermoplasma

Lokiarchaeota
Thaumarchaeota*

Thermococcales
Methanogens
Thermoplasmatales

Euryarchaeota

South African Gold Mine Eury. Group (SAGMEG)
Haloferax
Haloarchaea*
Methanosarcina
Methanogens*
Methanospirillum
Anaerobic Methane Oxidizers (ANME)
Terrestrial Misc. Eury. Group (TMEG)
Nanoarchaeum equitans
Ancient Archeal Group (AAG)
Bacteria

FIGURE 19.6

Archaeal phylogeny. Major clades, divisions, and metagenomic groups of Archaea. Divergence is based approximately
on SSU rRNA and genomic sequences. Inset: Purificación López-García argues that hyperthermophiles evolved into mesophiles by acquiring
genes from bacteria. Starred taxa contain >20% bacterial genes.
■

742

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

TABLE 19.2*Archaeal Diversity* (Expanded Table Appears in Appendix 2.2 and eAppendix 4.2)
Crenarchaeota. Tetraether membranes surrounded by S-layer. Wide range of growth temperatures.
Bathyarchaeota (formerly MCG). Widely divergent crenarchaeotes in diverse soil and water.
Deep-Sea Archaeal Group/Marine Benthic Group B (DSAG/MBGB). Anoxic marine sediments: deep-sea methane hydrates,
hydrothermal vents, coastal regions.
Thermoprotei. Many thermophiles in hot springs and marine vents. Also includes marine mesophiles and psychrophiles.
Thermosphaera.
4● Caldisphaerales. Thermoacidophilic heterotrophs grow in hot springs. Caldisphaera spp.
4● Desulfurococcales. Anaerobic sulfur reduction with organic electron donors. Irregularly shaped cells with glycoprotein S-layer;
no cell wall (Aeropyrum pernix, Desulfurococcus fermentans). Ignicoccus islandicus. Pyrodictium abyssi, Pyrodictium occultum,
Pyrolobus fumarii grow at marine thermal vents, up to 110°C.
4● Psychrophilic marine crenarchaeotes (uncharacterized). Marine water, deep sea, and Antarctica.
4● Sulfolobales. Aerobic acidophiles; moderate thermophiles. Oxidize H2S to H2SO4. Sulfolobus, Sulfurisphaera, Acidianus.
4● Thermoproteales. Pyrobaculum, Thermoproteus, Vulcanisaeta.
Thaumarchaeota. Tetraether membranes include crenarchaeol. Marine and soil archaea that oxidize NH3 with O2. Important marine
sources of nitrates for phytoplankton, and of methylphosphonate (CH3–PO32–), which bacteria convert to methane. Includes
members of Marine Group 1.1a.
4● Cenarchaeales. Sponge symbionts; grow at 10°C. Cenarchaeum symbiosum.
4● Nitrosopumilales. Ammonia-oxidizing archaea (AOA), marine and soil. Nitrosopumilus maritimus, Nitrososphaera gargensis.
4● Psychrophilic marine thaumarchaeotes (uncharacterized). Marine water, deep sea, and Antarctica. Anaerobic heterotrophs,
sulfate reducers, nitrite-reducing methanotrophs.
Euryarchaeota. Metabolism includes methanogenesis, halophilic photoheterotrophy, and sulfur and hydrogen oxidation; acidophiles and
alkaliphiles. Methanogens and halophiles have rigid cell walls.
Altiarchaeota. Includes Altiarchaeum. Form grappling-hook biofilms in cold sulfidic water.
Anaerobic Methane Oxidizers (ANME). Anoxic marine sediments. Oxidize methane from methanogens, in syntrophy with sulfatereducing bacteria.
Archaeoglobi. Order Archaeoglobales. Hyperthermophiles; sulfate oxidation of H2 or organic hydrogen donors; reverse
methanogenesis. Archaeoglobus fulgidus.
Haloarchaea. Order Halobacteriales. Halophiles; grow in brine (concentrated NaCl). Conduct photoheterotrophy, with light-driven H+
pump and Cl– pump. Haloarcula, Halobacterium, Haloferax grow in salterns and salt lakes. Haloquadra (Haloquadratum) are squareshaped. Halorubrum lacusprofundi is an Antarctic psychrophile. Natronococcus spp. are alkaliphiles in soda lakes.
Methanogens (many classes). Generate methane from CO2 and H2, formate, acetate, other small molecules; strict anaerobes.
Pseudopeptidoglycan or sulfated chondroitin cell walls. Grow in anaerobic soil, water, or animal digestive tracts. Deep-sea
psychrophiles generate methane hydrates.
4● Methanobacteriales. Lack cytochromes; reduce CO2, formate, or methanol with H2 by electron bifurcation. Methanobrevibacter
smithii and Methanosphaera stadtmanae inhabit human digestive tract.
4● Methanomicrobiales, Methanococcales, and Methanopyrales. Lack cytochromes; reduce CO2, formate, or methanol with H2 by
electron bifurcation. Methanocaldococcus jannaschii, vent thermophile.
4● Methanosarcinales. Possess cytochromes; reduce methylamines and acetate (as well as CO2 and formate) with H2.
Nanoarchaeota. Vent hyperthermophiles; obligate symbionts attached to Ignicoccus. Nanoarchaeum equitans.
South African Gold Mine Euryarchaeotal Group (SAGMEG). Deep subsurface. Anaerobic heterotrophs.
Terrestrial Miscellaneous Euryarchaeotal Group (TMEG). Deep subsurface and surface soils, marine and freshwater sediments.
Thermococci. Hyperthermophiles (grow above 100°C) and barophiles (up to 200 atm pressure). Anaerobes; reduce sulfur. Order
Thermococcales: Thermococcus, Pyrococcus abyssi, P. furiosus.
Thermoplasmata. Extreme acidophiles; oxidize sulfur from pyrite (FeS2), generating sulfuric acid. Mesophiles or moderate
thermophiles. Order Thermoplasmatales: Ferroplasma acidiphilum and F. acidarmanus grow at 37°C–50°C. Oxidize sulfur from
FeS2, generating ambient pH as low as pH 0. No cell wall. Thermoplasma acidophilum grows at 59°C and pH 2.
Deeply branching groups of uncultured Archaea.
Ancient Archaeal Group (AAG). Vent hyperthermophiles and benthic subsurface communities.
Korarchaeota. Hyperthermophiles in Yellowstone hot springs and in deep-sea thermal vents.
Lokiarchaeota. Found in marine sediment near thermal vent; shares 3% eukaryotic genes. May represent ancient ancestor of Eukarya.
Marine Hydrothermal Vent Group (MHVG). Vent hyperthermophiles.
*Bulleted terms are representative orders (unless stated otherwise).

CHAPTER 19

For several reasons, the phylogeny of Archaea is a challenge to define. Most archaea are uncultured and are
known solely through small-subunit (SSU) rRNA sequence
or through metagenomics (the genome sequences of a
microbial community). Many of their genomes are highly
“recombinogenic.” For example, two different samples of
Ferroplasma acidarmanus show 99% identical SSU rRNA,
yet their overall genomes differ by 22%, implying extensive
horizontal gene exchange. And many archaeal genomes,
particularly those of mesophiles, include large portions
of DNA transferred from bacteria. (In Figure 19.6, the
starred taxa contain more than 20% bacterial genes.)
Microbial ecologist Purificación López-García, Université
Paris-Sud, proposes that hyperthermophilic archaeal species evolved into mesophiles by acquiring genes from bacteria. According to her model, the bacterial genes provided
key metabolic pathways and cell structures optimized for
growth at moderate or cold temperatures.
Finally, deeply branching clades such as the Ancient
Archaeal Group (AAG) have such divergent SSU rRNA
that their sequence fails to amplify with “standard” PCR
primers based on the most highly conserved regions of the
gene. Much “dark matter” remains unknown, as yet undetected by our current molecular tools.

Note:

The phylogeny of Archaea undergoes frequent revision,
as new taxa are discovered and novel genomes are sequenced. For
example, the taxa now designated Thaumarchaeota were originally
classified with the Crenarchaeota, until multilocus genome comparison revealed the deeper division between the two clades.

Crenarchaeota. The Crenarchaeota include a substantial

proportion of soil, marine, and benthic (marine sediment)
microbial communities and are found in the microbiomes
of plants and animals. Understanding these organisms is
important for assessing their contribution to the global carbon cycle.
A fascinating group of crenarchaeotes is the thermophiles. Many thermophilic crenarchaeotes metabolize
sulfur, either by anaerobic reduction (such as by H 2 to
form H 2S) or by aerobic oxidation (by O2 to form sulfuric acid). Anaerobic sulfur metabolizers include moderate
thermophiles (growth range about 60°C–80°C), as well
as hyperthermophiles (90°C–120°C). Many of the hyperthermophiles are also barophiles, growing under high pressure at hydrothermal vents on the ocean floor; an example
is Pyrodictium abyssi. Yet other crenarchaeotes are mesophiles (growing at moderate temperatures) and even psychrophiles (growing at temperatures below 20°C), found
in Antarctic lakes. Overall, the Crenarchaeota encompass
the widest range of growth temperature of any division
of life.

■

ARCHAEAL DIVERSITY

■

743

Thaumarchaeota. The phylum Thaumarchaeota includes

mesophiles originally classified with Marine Group I Crenarchaeota but now recognized as a distinct clade very important for marine environments. Thaumarchaeota include
ammonia-oxidizing archaea (AOA), which oxidize ammonia to nitrite. These ammonia oxidizers play a major role in
the nitrogen cycle (discussed in Chapters 21 and 22). Other
Thaumarchaeota include mesophilic heterotrophs and sulfur oxidizers in soil and water. Some are key symbionts of
invertebrate animals such as deep-sea sponges.
Lokiarchaeota. A recently characterized clade of deep-sea

archaea is the Lokiarchaeota, branching from the DeepSea Archaeal Group/Marine Benthic Group B (DSAG/
MBGB). First identified at a thermal vent named Loki’s
Castle, the Lokiarchaeota genomes share surprising traits
with eukaryotes. Eukaryotic-like genes found in Lokiarchaeota include those associated with an actin cytoskeleton
and phagocytosis. These features suggest that Lokiarchaeota may descend from a common ancestor of a cell that
contributed to the ancestral eukaryote.
Euryarchaeota. The phylum Euryarchaeota also includes

members throughout soil and water, and associated with
plants and animals. They show a greater range of metabolism than the Crenarchaeota. The most highly divergent
group of Euryarchaeota is the methanogens. Methanogens
serve a key energetic role in ecosystems by offering an
anaerobic mechanism for removing excess H 2 and other
small-molecule reductants. Despite their common energetic pathway, methanogens branch deeply among other
euryarchaeotic groups, and they show a wide range of
cell shape and environmental adaptations. One branch
of euryarchaeotes is the Haloarchaea, extreme halophiles
that are the only form of life to grow in concentrated brine
(NaCl). Most haloarchaea, such as Halobacterium species
NRC-1, are photoheterotrophs that can supplement their
metabolism with light-driven ion pumps.
Euryarchaeotes include extreme acidophiles, as well
as extreme alkaliphiles. With respect to pH, the euryarchaeotes show the widest range of any clade, from Ferroplasma (order Thermococcales), growing at pH 0, to
Natronococcus, growing at pH 10.

Note:

In Table 19.2, certain archaeal names contain a “bacteria”
component—for example, the genus Halobacterium. Such organisms were known and named as bacteria before 1977, when the category “archaea” was first defined.

Emerging phyla. Besides the major phyla Crenarchaeota,
Thaumarchaeota, and Euryarchaeota, metagenomic analysis continues to reveal new clades that branch near the

744

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

root of the tree. The Miscellaneous Crenarchaeota Group
(MCG) was reclassified in 2015 as the deep-branching
group Bathyarchaeota, capable of methanogenesis. The
Bathyarchaeota are the only known methanogens outside
of the Euryarchaeota. An even deeper branch is the Ancient
Archaeal Group (AAG), discovered in hydrothermal vents
and deep benthic sediment. The AAG organisms fail to
be detected by PCR primers based on known SSU rRNA
gene sequences. Instead, their detection requires reverse
transcription of rRNA from uncultured cells. The reverse
transcripts have shown that the rRNA sequence of AAG
organisms differs by 20% from the most conserved regions
of other known archaeal rRNA.

■

■

■

Thought Question

19.1 Suppose two deeply diverging clades each show a wide
range of growth temperature. What does this suggest about
the evolution of thermophily or psychrophily?

■

■

To Summarize
■

■

Glucose is catabolized by variants of the ED pathway. Other metabolic pathways found in archaea include
methanogenesis and retinal-associated light-driven ion
pumps such as bacteriorhodopsin.
Central genetic functions of archaea resemble those
of eukaryotes, as seen in the structure of DNA and
RNA polymerases and of histone-like DNA-binding
proteins.
The most studied phyla or divisions of archaea
are Crenarchaeota, Thaumarchaeota, and Euryarchaeota. Crenarchaeota include sulfur hyperthermophiles, mesophiles, and psychrophiles. Thaumarchaeota
include ammonia oxidizers, marine invertebrate symbionts, and others. Euryarchaeota include methanogens,
halophiles, and acidophiles.
The deep-sea clade Lokiarchaeota includes genes
shared by an ancestor of the eukaryotes.
Metagenomics reveals uncultured organisms. We continue to discover deeply branching clades of archaea by
designing new PCR primers, reverse-transcribing community rRNA, and sequencing metagenomes.

19.2

Archaeal membranes are composed of L-glycerol
diether or tetraether lipids, with isoprenoid side chains
that may include cross-links or pentacyclic rings.
Many archaea have no peptidoglycan cell wall, but an
S-layer of protein. Some methanogens have cell walls of
pseudomurein.

Crenarchaeota across
the Temperature Range

How were the first crenarchaeotes discovered and
described? The name Crenarchaeota means “scalloped
archaea,” derived from the amorphous scalloped cell shapes
of the first hyperthermophiles discovered. The first members described were hyperthermophiles such as Thermosphaera species (see Table 19.2). Since their discovery,
however, numerous mesophiles and psychrophiles have
been identified in soil and marine habitats.

Thought Question

19.2 What are the advantages of naming a microbial lineage

INGA SPENCE/VISUALS UNLIMITED

after a morphological feature? What problems might arise
later, as more members of the lineage are characterized?

FIGURE 19.7

Thermophiles colonize a hot spring. Morning Glory Pool, a hot spring in Yellowstone National Park, supports
thermophilic archaea and bacteria.
■

Habitats for Thermophiles

Thermophiles and hyperthermophiles commonly grow
in hot springs and geysers, such as those of Yellowstone
National Park (Fig. 19.7) or the Solfatara volcanic area
near Naples, Italy. A hot spring occurs where water seeps
underground above a magma chamber, which heats the
water to near boiling. The heated water expands and is

CHAPTER 19

■

ARCHAEAL DIVERSITY

■

745

TABLE 19.3*Hyperthermophilic Crenarchaeota
Growth
temperature (°C)

Growth pH

Metabolism

Aeropyrum pernix

70–100°

pH 5–9

Cocci

O2 respiration

Desulfurococcus fermentans

78–87°

pH 6

Flagellated cocci

Anaerobic S0 respiration or
fermentation

Ignicoccus islandicus

70–98°

pH 5–7

Flagellated cocci with
periplasmic space

Anaerobic lithotrophy, S0
oxidation of H2

Pyrodictium abyssi

80–110°

pH 5–7

Disks linked by
cannulae

Anaerobic oxidation of H2 by
S0 or S2O32– or fermentation

Sulfolobus solfataricus

50–87°

pH 2–4

Irregular cocci

O2 respiration on S0, producing
H2SO4

Thermosphaera
aggregans

65–90°

pH 5–7

Flagellated cocci in
aggregates

Anaerobic fermentation

■

Reduced minerals. The heated water dissolves high
concentrations of sulfides and other reduced minerals.
When the water emerges and cools, the minerals precipitate. These reduced minerals serve as rich energy sources
for autotrophs.

■

Low oxygen content. At higher temperatures, the oxygen concentration of water declines. Therefore, hyperthermophiles tend to be anaerobic, although there are
important exceptions, such as the aerobic sulfur oxidizer
Sulfolobus.

■

Steep temperature gradients. The temperature of the
water falls dramatically within a short distance from the
source, forming a steep gradient. Different species of
thermophiles are adapted to different temperatures and
grow in separate patches at the different temperatures,
causing a variegated pattern.

under several kilometers of ocean. Pressure increases by
approximately 100 atm per kilometer of ocean depth.
Organisms that grow only at high pressure are called barophiles (discussed in Chapter 5).

Desulfurococcales: Reducing
Sulfur from Hot Springs

Species of the order Desulfurococcales show distinctive
cell structures and forms of metabolism (Table 19.3). All
possess elaborate S-layers but lack a cell wall; their diphytanylglycerol membranes contain a combination of diethers
and tetraethers. Many take advantage of the high temperatures that increase the thermodynamic favorability of sulfur
redox reactions. An example is Desulfurococcus fermentans
(Fig. 19.8A), a flagellated coccoid cell isolated from hot
springs; it grows optimally at 85°C. D. fermentans respires
anaerobically by reducing elemental sulfur (S0) to sulfide
(HS –). Sulfur reduction is coupled to oxidation of small
organic molecules such as sugars.

A.

Acidity. Some hot-spring environments show extreme
acidity. The acidity results from oxidation of sulfur or
iron in reactions that generate strong inorganic acids
such as sulfuric acid (H 2SO4).

A special subcategory of volcanic hot-spring habitats is
that of submarine hydrothermal vents on the ocean floor.
The vent thermophiles must evolve to grow at high pressure

1 μm

FIGURE 19.8

A. PEREVALOVA1, ET AL. INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL
OF SYSTEMATIC AND EVOLUTIONARY MICROBIOLOGY
55, 995-999; © 2005 INTERNATIONAL UNION OF
MICROBIOLOGICAL SOCIETIES.

forced upward through fissures, coming out in a heated
spring. In a geyser, the water is heated under pressure.
As the water escapes upward, it turns into steam, which
expands and jets upward, falling into a heated pool. These
heated pools and their surrounding edges generate extreme
ranges of temperature, mineral content, and acidity. They
support a diverse range of microbial life, including thermophilic cyanobacteria and firmicutes, as well as archaea.
Several features of hot springs and geysers are important
for thermophiles:

■

Cell shape

B.
Membrane vesicles
Periplasmic space

1 μm

HUBER, ET AL. 2000. INTERNATIONAL
JOURNAL OF SYSTEMIC AND EVOLUTIONARY
MICROBIOLOGY 50: 2093–2100.

Representative species

Hyperthermophilic crenarchaeotes. A. Desulfurococcus fermentans (shadow EM). B. Ignicoccus islandicus (TEM).
Its unique periplasmic space contains membrane vesicles.
■

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

Another flagellated coccus, Ignicoccus islandicus, has
an unusual cell architecture (Fig. 19.8B). Ignicoccus has
an outer membrane surrounding its cytoplasmic membrane, with a large aqueous compartment between them.
This outer compartment contains membrane-enclosed vesicles of unknown function. The evolution of this compartment, similar to the extra membranes of the bacterial genus
Planctomyces (see Chapter 18), suggests a model for an
intermediate stage of evolution of the eukaryotic nucleus.
I. islandicus, unlike Desulfurococcus, is a marine organism,
growing at temperatures as high as 98°C. It is a lithotroph,
oxidizing hydrogen with sulfur:

A.
DR. MICHAEL PERFIT, UNIVERSITY OF FLORIDA, AND NOAA VENTS
PROGRAM.

746

H 2 + S0 ⎯→ H 2S
Most of the cultured species of Desulfurococcales are
obligate anaerobes. An exception is Aeropyrum pernix, one
of the first archaea to have its genome sequenced. A. pernix is an aerobic heterotroph, respiring with O2 on complex
compounds during growth at 70°C–100°C.

Barophilic Vent Hyperthermophiles

The most extreme hyperthermophiles are barophiles
adapted to grow near hydrothermal vents at the ocean
floor. The high pressure beneath several kilometers of
ocean allows water to remain liquid at temperatures above
100°C; the highest known temperature for growth of an
organism is 121°C.
A common feature of thermal vents is the black smoker
(Fig. 19.9). A black smoker is a chimney-like structure
resulting from the upwelling of seawater superheated by an
undersea magma chamber. As in a geyser above ground,
the heated water is forced upward through a small opening.
Because the thermal vent is under steam pressure, the water
can reach temperatures of over 400°C, enabling it to dissolve
high concentrations of minerals such as iron II sulfide (FeS).
When the rising water escapes, however, it immediately cools,
depositing iron sulfide around the edge of the vent chimney
and precipitating iron sulfide particles that cloud the water—
hence the term “black smoker.” While no organism can grow
at 400°C, various species of archaea are adapted to grow in
the range of 100°C–120°C, where the vent stream meets the
seawater and minerals precipitate (Fig. 19.9B).
How do we study organisms under such extreme conditions? To study hyperthermophiles from black smoker vents
requires specialized equipment. The isolation of such organisms is a challenge because their habitats endanger our own
survival. Undersea vent systems must be approached by a
special submersible device with a robotic arm. An example is the Environmental Sample Processor from the Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute (Fig. 19.10A).
The robotic system samples temperature and other properties of fluid emerging from a black smoker hydrothermal

B.
Vent water emerges
and cools, precipitating
FeS and other minerals.

Thermococcales-type
hyperthermophiles

Autotrophic
hyperthermophiles

Halophilic
archaea
Seawater drains
below until heated by
magma, turning into
steam.

Rising steam

Magma

FIGURE 19.9 ■ Extreme temperature and pressure: black
smoker vents. A. Black smoker vents with steam escaping from
“chimneys” of sulfide minerals at the Juan de Fuca Ridge on the
ocean floor. B. Different parts of the smoker vent system support
different classes of archaea.

vent. It can then sample organisms for study. An advanced
version of this device can actually process the organism’s
DNA. Thus, the DNA can be obtained from vent-adapted
microbes that could not survive transfer to a laboratory
at sea level. The robotic sample processor is supported by
NASA as a model for a future space probe to explore one of

CHAPTER 19

ARCHAEAL DIVERSITY

■

747

Jupiter’s moons, Europa, considered a possible source of extraterrestrial life.
Organisms that do survive transport
to sea level must nonetheless be maintained at high pressure and temperature
to ensure viability. In the laboratory, all
devices for microscopy and cultivation
must be kept under pressure and at high
temperature. Organisms are cultured in a
pressurized cell such as the “Deep Aquarium” (Fig. 19.10B). The culture must be
provided with reduced minerals and gases
needed for the growth of vent microbes.
Vent-adapted crenarchaeotes include
Pyrodictium abyssi (Fig. 19.11), P. occultum, and P. brockii; the latter is named
for Thomas Brock of the University of
Wisconsin–Madison, a pioneering researcher of hyperthermophiles. For energy, Pyrodictium species reduce sulfur to
H 2S, either with molecular hydrogen or with organic compounds. A membrane-embedded sulfur-reducing complex
and a proton-translocating ATP synthase have been isolated from P. abyssi. The complexes are extremely heat stable, exhibiting a temperature optimum of 100°C.
Pyrodictium species grow as flat, disk-shaped cells that
can be as thin as 0.1 µm. The cells contain a periplasm and
outer membrane with an S-layer that is coated with zinc
sulfide, a mineral that precipitates from the vent. The cell
disks are interconnected by glycoprotein tubules called
cannulae (singular, cannula). The cannulae can extend to
more than 0.1 mm, forming complex networks of connections (Fig. 19.11). In liquid culture, the networks grow
into white balls up to 10 mm in diameter. Cryo-electron
tomography of a Pyrodictium cell shows that the cannulae
bridge the periplasm between cells, but not the cytoplasm.
The cannulae may enable Pyrodictium cells to share nutrients and maintain a biofilm, while keeping their cellular
identity distinct with separated cytoplasm.
What happens when a Pyrodictium cell divides? Cells
of P. abyssi generate new cannulae as they undergo fission
(Fig. 19.12). Some of the new cannulae form as loops

FIGURE 19.10 ■ Robotic sampling from a
black smoker vent. A. Engineer Gene Mas-

sion, from the Monterey Bay Aquarium Research
Institute, deploys the submersible Environmental
Sample Processor with robotic collection arm at
an ocean site off the coast of Maine. B. The Deep
Aquarium, a pressurized device for cultivation of
vent organisms.

0.1 µm

FIGURE 19.11

■ Pyrodictium abyssi growing as networks of
cells linked by cannulae. SEM.

HARALD HUBER AND KARL O. STETTER. THE PROKARYOTES. 2002. SPRINGER-VERLAG.

Cannulae

Cannula

10 μm

FIGURE 19.12

■

10 μm

10 μm

10 μm

CHRISTIAN HORN ET. AL. "IN VIVO OBSERVATION OF
CELL DIVISION” J. BACTERIOL.1999 181: 5114-5118.

COURTESY OF MONTEREY BAY AQUARIUM RESEARCH
INSTITUTE. MARK GREISE © 2001 MBARI

IMAGES COURTESY OF JAPAN AGENCY FOR MARINE-EARTH SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY.

B.

A.

■

Pyrodictium abyssi undergoing cell division. Cells of P. abyssi generate new interconnecting cannulae as they divide.

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

connecting the two daughter cells while simultaneously
pushing the two cells apart. In this fashion, the cell division process expands the cell network.

A.

93˚C

Note:

Two genera of vent thermophiles have similar names
but only distant genetic relatedness: Pyrodictium abyssi, a crenarchaeote; and Pyrococcus abyssi, a euryarchaeote.

The intricate cell network of P. abyssi is an example of a
single-species biofilm. Other forms of biofilms are found at
hydrothermal vents. Thermosphaera aggregans forms colonies so tightly bound that they cannot be dissociated by
protease treatment or sonication (Fig. 19.13). Multispecies biofilms of hyperthermophiles line the chimneys of
black smoker vents.

Thought Question

19.3 What might be the advantages of flagellar motility for

3.

a hyperthermophile living in a thermal spring or in a black
smoker vent? What would be the advantages of growth in
a biofilm?

FIGURE 19.14

■ Isolating
Sulfolobus at Yellowstone.

A. A researcher holds a collecting
tube at length to obtain samples
from a steaming spring, Rabbit
Creek, at Yellowstone National Park.
B. Sulfolobus species grow at 80°C
at pH 2–3.

1 µm

study Sulfolobus solfataricus, a species that grows at 80°C
and pH 2 (Fig. 19.14). Sulfolobus species oxidize organic
compounds with oxygen, or they oxidize S0 or H 2S to sulfuric acid:

Sulfolobales: High Temperature
and Extreme Acid

Can some archaea grow in extreme acid, as well as high
temperature? The crenarchaeote order Sulfolobales
includes species that respire by oxidizing sulfur (instead
of reducing it as Desulfurococcus does). These organisms,
such as Sulfolobus species, grow at 80°C–90°C within hot
springs and solfataras (volcanic vents that emit only gases).
Ken Stedman and colleagues at Portland State University

DR. MANFRED ROHDE AT HELMHOLTZ CENTRE FOR INFECTION RESEARCH,
BRAUNSCHWEIG.

B.

2 μm

FIGURE 19.13 ■ Hyperthermal biofilm. Thermosphaera
aggregans forms a dense aggregate of cells (SEM).

2S0 + 3O2 + 2H 2O ⎯→ 2H 2SO4 ⎯→ 4H+ + 2SO42–
As a result of sulfuric acid production, the pH of the
organism’s surroundings falls to pH 2–3, effectively excluding all but acidophiles. While other archaea grow at higher
temperatures (up to 120°C) or lower pH (below pH 0), Sulfolobus is of interest as a “double extremophile,” requiring
both high temperature and extreme acidity simultaneously.
Sulfolobus cells have a membrane composed mainly of
tetraethers with cyclopentane rings (see Fig. 19.2E). Tetraether membranes are commonly seen in acidophilic
thermophiles, probably because they are exceptionally
impermeable to protons. Remarkably, Sulfolobus has no
cell wall, but only an S-layer of glycoprotein (Fig. 19.15A;
also see Fig. 19.3A). Like all archaea, these organisms are
nonpathogenic to animals, yet they secrete toxins deadly to
competitor strains of Sulfolobus.
Sulfolobus species are not obligate autotrophs; they can
also grow heterotrophically on sugars or amino acids. In
fact, many species are easily cultured in tryptone broth at
80°C, pH 3. Their internal pH is typically pH 6.5; thus,
they maintain more than three units of pH difference
across their membrane. The full metabolic potential of this
organism is revealed by annotation of its genome, which
contains homologs of sugar and amino acid transporters,
as well as the non-ATP-forming Entner-Doudoroff pathway of glucose catabolism. Genes are present for enzymes

OLIVER MECKES, NICOLE OTTAWA / PHOTO
RESEARCHERS, INC.

■

COURTESY OF KEN STEDMAN

748

CHAPTER 19
B.

SUSAN K. BRUMFIELD, ET AL. JOURNAL OF
VIROLOGY, JUNE 2009, P. 5964-5970, VOL.
83, NO. 12. © 2009, AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR
MICROBIOLOGY. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.

SUSAN K. BRUMFIELD, ET AL.
JOURNAL OF VIROLOGY, JUNE
2009, P. 5964-5970, VOL. 83,
NO. 12. © 2009, AMERICAN
SOCIETY FOR MICROBIOLOGY.
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.

K.M. STEDMAN ET AL. 2003. RES. MICROBIOL. 154:295.

COURTESY OF KEN STEDMAN.

ARCHAEAL DIVERSITY

■

749

Because Sulfolobus species are readily
cultured, their metabolism and ecology
S-layer
have been studied extensively, revealing
Fusellovirus
unexpected features. Some species show
multiple origins of replication of their
DNA; for example, S. solfataricus and
S. acidocaldarius each use three active
replication origins. The presence of multiple origins is yet another feature of
archaeal DNA management that resembles that of eukaryotes.
Another interesting discovery in Sulfolobus was that of archaeal viruses.
Sulfolobus species are attacked by a number of viruses, including fuselloviruses
200 nm
100 nm
(Fig. 19.15B). Fuselloviruses generally
FIGURE 19.15 ■ Sulfolobus. A. Sulfolobus cell with thick S-layer. B. Fusellovirus, a
resemble bacteriophages in size and funcdouble cone–shaped virus that infects S. solfataricus.
tion, but their capsid is spindle-shaped,
forming a cone at each end. Spindle-shaped capsids are common in archaeal viruses, but never seen in bacteriophages.
How does a virus infect an archaeon? The process
to oxidize HS – and S2O32–, as well as S0. The main redox
of a viral infection has been observed in S. solfataricus
carrier for respiration appears to be ferredoxin (instead of
(Fig. 19.16). Cells were infected with Sulfolobus turreted
NADH, which is relatively unstable at high temperature).
icosahedral virus (STIV), a virus isolated from a boiling acid hot spring in Yellowstone National Park. Each
icosahedral particle of STIV has 12 turret-like projecThought Question
tions, as shown in the cryo-EM image reconstruction in
Figure 19.16A. Mature virions contain a double-stranded
19.4 What problem with cell biochemistry is faced by
acidophiles that conduct heterotrophic metabolism?
DNA genome coated with lipid within the capsid. The
thin section of an infected cell (Fig. 19.16B) shows
progeny virions packed into a hexagonal array, portions
of which poke through the host cell’s S-layer in pyramidal forms. After lysis (Fig. 19.16C), the S-layer complex
is all that remains of the empty cell. The S-layer
A.
B.
appears surprisingly intact, showing that it provides a sturdy cell covering perhaps comparable
in strength to a cell wall.
This lytic cycle resembles lytic and fast-release
cycles of bacterial and eukaryotic viruses, although
the capsid “turrets” and the pyramiC.
dal bulges of the lysing cell are unique
to archaea. The structure of a capsid
300 nm
protein component shows surprising homology to both bacterial and
eukaryotic viral proteins. This finding
20 nm
supports the hypothesis that modern
viruses derive from an ancient reproFIGURE 19.16 ■ Sulfolobus turreted icosahedral virus
(STIV) infects Sulfolobus solfataricus. A. STIV capsid
ductive form predating the divergence
with “turrets” (cryo-EM). Capsid diameter 60 nm. B. A cell
400 nm
of the three domains of life (discussed
of S. solfataricus packed with a hexagonal array of STIV
in Chapter 11).
particles. Arrows point to pyramidal bulges where virus arrays
Numerous
other
archaeal
viruses have been discovered
poke through a breach in the S-layer. C. Empty cell membrane
in high-temperature environments, including icosahedral,
and S-layer following lysis and viral release. Arrow points to
released virus particles.
tailed, and filamentous forms. All known archaeal viruses
A.

GEORGE RICE, ET AL. PNAS MAY 18, 2004 VOL. 101

■

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

FIGURE 19.17

■ Crenarchaeotes
growing on the surface of a
tomato root. Crenarchaeotes were

detected by fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH, explained in
eAppendix 3). Red fluorescence
arises from a fluorophore-DNA probe
that hybridizes to an rRNA sequence
specific to Crenarchaeota.

10 μm

have genomes consisting of double-stranded DNA, suggesting that only double-stranded DNA is stable enough
for virus particles to persist at high temperature. In 2012,
however, a possible archaeal RNA-dependent RNA transcriptase (discussed in Chapter 11) was identified from a
Yellowstone hot spring. This finding suggests that there
may exist positive-strand RNA viruses that infect hyperthermophilic archaea.
Thought Question

19.5 What hypotheses might be proposed about archaeal

evolution if viruses of mesophilic archaea are found to have
RNA genomes? What if, instead, all archaeal viruses have DNA
genomes only?

Besides Sulfolobales, the class Thermoprotei includes
other orders of thermoacidophiles. Caldisphaerales is an
order of thermoacidophiles first isolated from a Philippine
hot spring at Mount Makiling. Members of Caldisphaerales, such as Caldisphaera, typically grow at pH 3 up to
80°C. Unlike Sulfolobus species, Caldisphaera species are

H. SIMON, OREGON HEALTH AND SCIENCE
U., BEAVERTON, OR

750

anaerobes or microaerophiles, tolerating only low concentrations of oxygen. They grow by fermentation or anaerobic respiration. Another order, Thermoproteales, includes
hyperthermoacidophiles isolated from marine vents; thus,
they survive extreme pressure, as well as heat and acid!
Thermoproteus species grow at temperatures up to 97°C
and at pH values lower than pH 3. Their rod-shaped cells
are less than 0.3 µm in length—one of the smallest cell
types known. Their metabolism is autotrophic, gaining
energy by reducing sulfur with H 2 to H 2S.

Mesophilic Crenarchaeota

Because archaea were first isolated from extreme habitats,
it came as a surprise when SSU rRNA probes revealed
crenarchaeotes in moderate habitats throughout the biosphere. The mesophiles may have evolved from hyperthermophiles by gene acquisition from mesophilic bacteria (see
Section 19.1). Today, many crenarchaeotes—perhaps the
majority, in nature—grow in water or soil, or in association with plants; for example, Figure 19.17 shows crenarchaeotes growing on the surface of a tomato root.
Others are marine mesophiles. The first marine mesophiles were found in 1992 by Edward DeLong and colleagues in samples from the Pacific Ocean (Fig. 19.18A).
A survey in 2001 of marine archaea at the Hawaii Ocean
Time-series Station found high numbers of crenarchaeotes
(Fig. 19.18B). The abundance of crenarchaeotes varied according to season and increased with depth, typically comprising 40% of the total microbial population
at depths of 1,000 meters, where temperatures are cold.

B.

A.

5
40

FIGURE 19.18 ■ Crenarchaeota in the Pacific Ocean. A. Ed

Ocean water depth (m)

COURTESY OF ED DELONG.

35
30
100

25
20
15

Crenarchaeota as % of DAPI count

10

1,000
10
DeLong, now at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, discovered
5
marine crenarchaeotes (some of
Crenarchaeota
Crenarchaeota
which have since been reclassi5,000
fied as thaumarchaeotes). B. The
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
proportion of Crenarchaeota (color
1998
profile) is shown as a function of
depth and season, measured at
the Hawaii Ocean Time-series Station. Crenarchaeotes were identified by FISH (explained in eAppendix 3). A fluorescein-labeled DNA probe
specific to Crenarchaeota was hybridized to a cellular rRNA sequence; DNA was detected using the DNA-binding fluorophore DAPI.

Source: Part B from Markus Karner et al. 2001. Nature 409:507.

CHAPTER 19

Some of the organisms identified as crenarchaeotes were
later reassigned as thaumarchaeotes (discussed in the
next section).

■

Thought Question

19.6 What hypothesis might you propose to explain the reason
for the time and depth distribution of marine Crenarchaeota
seen in Figure 19.18? How might you test your hypothesis?

■

To Summarize
■

Crenarchaeote species are found in a wide range of
extreme and moderate habitats.

ARCHAEAL DIVERSITY

751

Habitats for hyperthermophiles include hot springs
and submarine hydrothermal vents. Vent organisms are
barophiles as well as thermophiles. Anaerobic hyperthermophilic acidophiles include Caldisphaerales and
Thermoproteales.
Desulfurococcales includes diverse thermophiles.
Most are anaerobes that use sulfur to oxidize hydrogen
or organic molecules.
Pyrodictium species are disk-shaped cells interconnected
by cytoplasmic bridges called cannulae.

■

Sulfolobus species oxidize sulfur or H 2S to sulfuric acid,
and they catabolize organic compounds.

■

Oceans, soil, plant roots, and animals provide habitats for mesophilic and psychrophilic crenarchaeotes.
Psychrophilic crenarchaeotes in marine sediment play
a key role in recycling methane hydrates produced by
methanogens.

19.3

Thaumarchaeota:
Symbionts and
Ammonia Oxidizers

The first mesophilic crenarchaeotes were identified by the
sequence of their SSU rRNA. But more recent analysis
combined the sequences of multiple genes, such as those
encoding ribosomal proteins. This more finely tuned
analysis showed that some of the organisms, the Marine
Group I Crenarchaeota, branched deeply from the rest.
These deep-branching archaea were reclassified as a new
clade, the Thaumarchaeota. Thaumarchaeotes synthesize a
distinctive tetraether lipid called crenarchaeol, containing

B.

A.

■

■

Psychrophilic Crenarchaeota

Genetic surveys also reveal crenarchaeotes that are
psychrophiles—species adapted to low temperatures. Alison Murray and colleagues from the Desert Research Institute found crenarchaeotes growing in sea ice off Antarctica
(Fig. 19.19). Organisms were collected from ice and seawater at a temperature of –1.8°C; the water remains liquid
below zero because of the high salt concentration. Other
crenarchaeotes are adapted to high pressure as well as cold.
At the ocean floor, at temperatures of about 2°C, benthic
strata show crenarchaeotes that include anaerobic heterotrophs, sulfate reducers, and anaerobic methanotrophs
(methane oxidizers). Methanotrophs are particularly crucial in recycling the methane produced by seafloor methanogens (euryarchaeotes, discussed in Section 19.4).
Another source of psychrophilic archaea is Ace Lake,
Antarctica, a well-studied cold, high-salt habitat with temperatures in the range of 14°C–24°C and bottom anoxic
layers never warmer than 2°C. Ace Lake supports crenarchaeotes, as well as euryarchaeotes such as methanogens
(discussed in Section 19.4).

■

C.

FIGURE 19.19

COURTESY OF ALISON MURRAY

2003 ALISON MURRAY

COURTESY OF ALISON MURRAY

O˚C

■ Collecting psychrophiles in Antarctica. A. Alison Murray studies psychrophilic microbes in Antarctica. B. Microbes are
collected off Bonaparte Point, Antarctica, from seawater samples down to 45 meters. C. Antarctic seawater samples are filtered to concentrate psychrophilic archaea and bacteria.

HO

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

O

30

O

FIGURE 19.20

OH

Crenarchaeol: a biosignature for
thaumarchaeotes. Crenarchaeol is a diphytanylglycerol diether
■

containing a six-membered cyclic ring.

a six-membered cyclic ring (Fig. 19.20). Crenarchaeol was
originally named for “Crenarchaeota” but now appears
to be found mainly in those organisms reclassified as
Thaumarchaeota. Thaumarchaeota include intriguing symbionts of marine sponges, as well as ammonia oxidizers that
perform a key role in cycling nitrogen.

Ammonium or nitrite (mM)

O
O

NH4+

25
20
15
10
5
0

0

FIGURE 19.21

5

■

10
15
Time (day)

3.25 ! 108
3.0 ! 108
Cell
2.75 ! 108
density 2.5 ! 108
2.25 ! 108
2.0 ! 108
1.75 ! 108
1.5 ! 108
1.25 ! 108
1.0 ! 108
0.75 ! 107
NO2–
0.5 ! 107
0.25 ! 107
0
20
25

Cell density (cells/ml)

752

Enrichment culture for ammonia oxidizers.

Ammonia-oxidizing microbes from eelgrass seafloor samples
convert ammonia to nitrite. Source: Naoki Matsutani et al. 2011. Microbes

Ammonia-Oxidizing Thaumarchaeotes
Cycle Global Nitrogen

From a global standpoint, the most significant thaumarchaeotes discovered are the ammonia-oxidizing archaea
(AOA), such as those of the order Nitrosopumilales.
Ammonia-oxidizing archaea gain energy by aerobically oxidizing ammonia to nitrite:
2NH3 + 3O2 ⎯→ 2NO2 – + 2H 2O + 2H+
This lithotrophic reaction yields redox energy, enabling the
microbe to fix CO2 for biomass (discussed in Chapter 14).
In marine environments, excreted ammonia can build up
to high levels, until it is oxidized by archaea and bacteria.
In some habitats, the Thaumarchaeota perform most of the
recycling of ammonia, such as the ammonia excreted by
fish in your aquarium. The thaumarchaeotes thus help balance the ecology of intertidal pools and beaches. The reaction plays a key role in the global nitrogen cycle, as the
first step of returning organic nitrogen to atmospheric N2
(discussed in Chapters 21 and 22). It also provides a major
source of nitrite for marine phytoplankton.
Habitats for free-living ammonia-oxidizing archaea (AOA).

Ammonia-oxidizing archaea are found in marine environments, such as the seafloor of Tanoura Bay, Japan
(Fig. 19.21). Tatsunori Nakagawa and colleagues at Nihon
University, Japan, used enrichment culture (described in
Chapter 4) to hunt for new kinds of AOA. Samples of sand
from the seafloor were serially diluted in medium containing
ammonium sulfate and adjusted to pH 8, a pH high enough
for significant deprotonation of ammonium ion (NH4+) to
ammonia (NH3). During the enrichment culture, ammonia was progressively consumed and converted to nitrite
(NO2–). In the culture, the gene encoding ammonia oxidase
(amoA) was identified by PCR amplification. The ammoniaoxidizing archaea (AOA) were identified by fluorescence in

and Environments 26:23–29.

situ hybridization (FISH) using a fluorophore attached to
DNA that hybridizes to rRNA of Nitrosopumilus species.
The best-studied ammonia-oxidizing thaumarchaeote,
Nitrosopumilus maritimus, was isolated from a marine
aquarium in 2005 by David Stahl and colleagues at the
University of Washington, Seattle. Nitrosopumilus and
related AOA oxidize ammonia at extremely low concentrations. Thus, AOA quickly remove a substance toxic to fish.
AOA have since been found throughout marine and freshwater communities, as well as in soil, where they perform
the important function of ammonia removal. They appear
in industrial waste sludge, revealed by fluorescent DNA
probes (Fig. 19.22). While bacteria also oxidize ammonia, in many habitats the AOA are the dominant oxidizers.
Ammonia-oxidizing thaumarchaeotes continue to be discovered in other habitats, including Antarctic lakes down
to temperatures of –20°C.
Symbiotic ammonia-oxidizing archaea. Are AOA found

on humans? Christine Moissl-Eichinger discovered AOA in
the microbiome of human skin, where they are the major
archaeal component of the skin microbiome. The human
body continually emits ammonia, so AOA may help metabolize this toxic substance while controlling skin pH for the
microbial community. The finding of ammonia-oxidizing
thaumarchaeotes on the skin, as well as methanogens in the
gut, may help explain another discovery made by MoisslEichinger—namely, the DNA signatures of thaumarchaeotes
and methanogens in hospital intensive care units and industrial clean-room facilities.
In the deep ocean, some of the psychrophilic
thaumarchaeotes found by DeLong and colleagues live
as endosymbionts of marine animals such as the sponge.
The thaumarchaeote Cenarchaeum symbiosum inhabits
the sponge Axinella mexicana (Fig. 19.23A). Like other

CHAPTER 19

■

753

■

MARK MUSSMANN ET AL. 2011 PNAS 108:16771

B.

5 µm

FIGURE 19.22

ARCHAEAL DIVERSITY

MARK MUSSMANN ET AL. 2011 PNAS 108:16771

A.

■

Ammonia-oxidizing Thaumarchaeota in nitrogen-rich industrial sludge. A. FISH probe hybridizes with rRNA

EDWARD F. DELONG. ASM NEWS/VOLUME 69, NUMBER 10, 2003

B.
marine thaumarchaeotes, C. symbio- A.
sum has yet to be grown in pure culture. But the presence of the microbes
is shown by the fluorescence of a DNA
probe that hybridizes to sequences specific to C. symbiosum (Fig. 19.23B).
How the microbe benefits its sponge
host is unknown, but the sponge and
its endosymbionts can be cocultured in
an aquarium for many years. A hypothesis investigated by researchers is that
10 μm
C. symbiosum produces antimicrobial
agents that protect the sponge from FIGURE 19.23 ■ Symbiosis between a thaumarchaeote and a sponge.
pathogens. Some of the products of C. A. Cenarchaeum symbiosum inhabits the sponge Axinella mexicana. B. Differential fluosymbiosum are being tested for their rescent staining of C. symbiosum present in sponge tissue (green fluorescence) visualized
by FISH (fluorescent probes that hybridize rRNA; discussed in Chapter 21). Host cell nuclei
pharmacological properties.
fluoresce red (DAPI stain).
Further metagenomic studies of
soil and water continue to reveal additional novel kinds
of Thaumarchaeota, including thermophiles. Overall, the
clade may turn out to be as diverse as the Crenarchaeota.

To Summarize
■

■

■

Ammonia-oxidizing archaea (AOA) contribute to
global nitrogen cycling in water and soil.
Ammonia-oxidizing archaea comprise a significant
part of the human skin microbiome.
Thaumarchaeotes include symbionts of marine
sponges. Emerging thaumarchaeotes include mesophiles,
psychrophiles, and thermophiles in many environments.

19.4

Methanogenic
Euryarchaeota

A third major branch of known archaea is Euryarchaeota,
the “broad-ranging archaea” (see Table 19.2). The euryarchaeotes include several independent branches of methanogens, species that derive energy through reactions
producing methane. Methanogens release methane from
soil and animal digestive habitats throughout Earth. For
the methanogen, methane is just a by-product of its energyyielding metabolism, but this by-product is a greenhouse

PRESTON, MONTEREY BAY AQUARIUM RESEARCH INSTITUTE,
MOSS LANDING, USA.

sequence specific to thaumarchaeotes. B. Light micrograph.

754

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

gas with profound consequences for our biosphere (discussed in Chapter 22).
The phylogeny of Figure 19.6 shows how clades of
methanogens branch deeply, as diverse as all the euryarchaeotes together. Two possible explanations of this phylogeny would be (1) the ancestral euryarchaeote was a
methanogen, but many descendant lineages lost the metabolism; or (2) divergent euryarchaeotes acquired the genes
for methanogenesis later, independently by gene transfer. As yet, we lack sufficient genomic data to determine
which model is correct. Furthermore, methanogenesis now
appears in one deep-branching clade outside the Euryarchaeota, now called the Bathyarchaeota (formerly the Miscellaneous Crenarchaeota Group).

Biogenic Paths to Methane

Biogenic methane formation has actually been observed
since 1776, when the Italian priest Carlo Campi and physicist Alessandro Volta (1745–1827) investigated bubbles of
“combustible air” from a wetland lake. Volta wrote:
Being in a little boat on Lake Maggiore, and passing
close to an area covered with reeds, I started to poke
and stir the bottom with my cane. So much air emerged
that I decided to collect a quantity in a large glass container. . . . This air burns with a beautiful blue flame.
Volta noted that methane arose from wetlands containing water-saturated decaying plant material. In 1882, the
German medical researcher Hermann von Tappeiner (1847–
1927) combined plant materials with ruminant stomach
contents (a source of methanogens) and showed that both
components were essential to produce methane. During the
late nineteenth century, in England, methane was collected
from manure and sewage and used as a fuel for street lamps.
Different species generate methane from different substrates, such as CO2 and H 2 or small organic compounds,
generally fermentation products of bacteria. Each pathway
of methanogenesis generates a small free energy change
(ΔG°′) that is just enough to drive processes of carbon fixation and biosynthesis. All types of methanogenesis are poisoned by molecular oxygen and therefore require extreme
anaerobiosis. Major substrates and reactions include:
Carbon dioxide: CO2 + 4H2 ⎯→ CH4 + 2H2O
Formic acid: 4CHOOH ⎯→ CH4 + 3CO2 + 2H2O
Acetic acid: CH3COOH ⎯→ CH4 + CO2
Methanol: 4CH3OH ⎯→ 3CH4 + CO2 + 2H2O
Methylamine: 4CH3NH2 + 2H2O ⎯→
3CH4 + CO2 + 4NH3
Dimethyl sulfide: 2(CH3)2S + 2H2O ⎯→
3CH4 + CO2 + 2H2S

In CO2 reduction, the most common form of methanogenesis, carbon dioxide plus molecular hydrogen combine
to form water and methane. CO2-reducing methanogens are autotrophs, growing solely on CO2 and H 2 with
a source of nitrogen and other minerals. Methanogenesis
from other carbon sources, such as formate, acetate, or
methanol, is heterotrophic and generates CO2 as a product
in addition to methane. The nitrogen-containing substrate
methylamine generates ammonia in addition to methane
and CO2, whereas the sulfur-containing substrate dimethyl
sulfide generates hydrogen sulfide.
Note that only a narrow range of substrates supports
methanogenesis. For unknown reasons, most methanogens lack the vast array of energy-yielding pathways found
in soil bacteria such as Rhodopseudomonas or Streptomyces. Thus, methanogens generally require close association with bacterial partners to provide their substrates—a
relationship called syntrophy (discussed in Chapter 14).
Syntrophic methanogens usually grow in habitats with
minimal resource flux, where hydrogen and carbon dioxide
gases can be trapped for their use. Removal of these gases
then enhances bacterial metabolism.
Many kinds of methanogens can be cultured in the laboratory. Their culture poses special challenges because the
reactions of methanogenesis are halted by oxygen. Thus,
most methanogens are strict anaerobes, although a few
that tolerate oxygen have been found. To exclude oxygen,
all growth and manipulation of cultures are performed in
an anaerobic chamber. Furthermore, methanogens that
use CO2 and H 2 as substrates must receive a steady supply of these gases. Even more challenging is the culture of
hyperthermophilic methanogens, such as Methanopyrus, a
deep-ocean vent hyperthermophile that grows at scorching
temperatures up to 122°C. For these organisms, we must
maintain both high temperature and high pressure.
Methanogens include at least four classes, of which five
major orders are shown in Table 19.4. The amount of
divergence within an order can be nearly as great as that
between orders. Particularly striking is the wide range
of growth temperatures among closely related species.
Thermophiles and even hyperthermophiles branch from
closely related mesophiles; for example, the order Methanobacteriales includes Methanobrevibacter ruminantium
(37°C–39°C), Methanobacterium thermoautotrophicum
(50°C–75°C), and Methanothermus fervidus (60°C–97°C).

Methanogens Show Diverse Cell Forms

Despite their metabolic similarity, methanogens display
an astonishing diversity of form, perhaps as diverse as
the entire domain of bacteria (Fig. 19.24). For example,
Methanocaldococcus jannaschii cells grow as cocci with

CHAPTER 19

■

ARCHAEAL DIVERSITY

■

755

TABLE 19.4*Methanogens
Representative
species

Growth
temperature (°C)

Growth pH

Cell shape

Substrates for
methanogenesis

Methanobrevibacter
ruminantium

37–39°

pH 6–9

Chains of short rods

H2 and CO2

Methanobacterium
thermoautotrophicum

50–75°

pH 7–8

Filaments of long rods

H2 and CO2, formate

Methanothermus fervidus

60–97°

pH 6–7

Rods

H2 and CO2

Methanococcus vannielii

20–40°

pH 7–9

Cocci with flagella

H2 and CO2

Methanocaldococcus
jannaschii

48–94°

pH 6–7

Cocci with flagella

H2 and CO2

Methanoculleus olentangii

30–50°

pH 6–8

Cocci

Acetate, complex
nutrients

Methanospirillum hungatei

20–45°

pH 6–7

Spirilla

Acetate

84–122°

pH 6–8

Long rods (2–14 µm)

H2 and CO2

20–50°

pH 5–7

Aggregates of cocci

H2 and CO2, methanol,
methylamine, acetate

Methanosaeta concilii

10–45°

pH 6–8

Filaments of rods

Acetate

Methanohalophilus zhilinae

45°

pH 8–10

Cocci

Methanol, methylamine,
dimethyl sulfide

Methanobacteriales

Methanococcales

Methanomicrobiales

Methanopyrales
Methanopyrus kandleri
Methanosarcinales
Methanosarcina barkeri

Source: Harald Huber and Karl O. Stetter. 2002. The Prokaryotes. Springer-Verlag.

A. Methanosarcina mazei

FIGURE 19.24

C. Methanobacterium thermoautotrophicum

5 µm

SALLIS ET AL. 2003. BIORESOUR.TECHNOL.89:255.

B. Methanothermus fervidus
RALPH ROBINSON/VISUALS UNLIMITED AND D. L. MAEDER ET AL.
2006. J. BACTERIOL. 188:7922

10 µm

form wide spirals. The morphological diversity of methanogens may be explained in part by their rigid cell walls,
which can maintain a distinctive shape.
The composition of methanogen cell walls is much more
diverse than that of bacteria. Methanobacterium species have
a cell wall composed of pseudopeptidoglycan, a structure in

5 µm

■ Methanogens show a wide range of shapes. A. Methanosarcina mazei, a lobed coccus form lacking flagella (SEM).
B. Methanothermus fervidus, a short bacillus (SEM). C. Methanobacterium thermoautotrophicum, an elongated bacillus (SEM).

SALLIS ET AL. 2003. BIORESOUR.TECHNOL.89:255.

numerous flagella attached to one side, while Methanosarcina mazei forms peach-shaped cocci lacking flagella.
Methanothermus fervidus cells are short, fat rods without flagella, and Methanobacterium thermoautotrophicum
grows as elongated rods reminiscent of the bacterial genus
Bacillus. Still others, such as Methanospirillum hungatei,

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

A.

B.

Aerator

Raw sewage

1. Organics are utilized
by bacteria and
converted into biomass.

Settler

Water

2. Biomass flocculates
and settles to the bottom.

CO2 CH4

200 µm

Lagoon

3. Conversion to acetate,
then to CO2 and CH4.

SALLIS ET AL. 2003. BIORESOUR.TECHNOL.89:255.

756

Residual sludge
(fertilizer)

10 µm

which chains of alternating amino sugars are linked by peptide cross-bridges analogous to those of peptidoglycan. By
contrast, Methanosarcina species have a cell wall composed
of sulfated polysaccharides. The genera Methanomicrobium
and Methanococcus have protein-derived cell walls.
Filamentous methanogens form chains of large cells
similar to those of filamentous cyanobacteria. Filamentous
methanogens, such as Methanosaeta, perform a key function in the treatment of sewage waste (Fig. 19.25). In
waste treatment, the raw sewage first undergoes aerobic
respiration by bacteria, converting the organic materials to
small molecules such as CO2 and acetate, and then anaerobic digestion of the remainder. The bacteria performing
anaerobic decomposition become trapped in filaments of
Methanosaeta, which convert bacterial fermentation products such as acetate into methane and CO2. The methanogenic filaments serve a key function by trapping bacteria
into granules that settle out from the liquid.

FIGURE 19.25

■ Filamentous methanogens bind bacterial
communities in waste treatment. A. Raw sewage is aerated

and decomposed by bacteria, followed by anaerobic incubation.
Under anaerobiosis, the bacterial waste products are converted to
methane and CO2. The bacteria are packed together by filamentous
methanogens to form sludge. B. Sludge (wastewater sediment)
forms granules packed with bacteria and methanogens (discussed
in Chapter 22). C. Filamentous methanogens entangle bacteria,
forming “flocs” that settle in the wastewater tank. Methanogens
fluoresce red with a DNA probe for Methanomicrobiales, while other
wastewater microbes fluoresce blue (DAPI stain).

environment is the anaerobic soil of wetlands (Fig. 19.26).
The wetlands that generate the most methane are typically
disturbed or artificial wetlands, particularly rice paddies,
which contain high levels of added fertilizer that bacteria
convert to the substrates used by methanogens. From the
standpoint of the organism, methane is an incidental byproduct, but this product has great significance for our biosphere as a greenhouse gas (discussed in Chapter 22).

COURTESY OF CHANGSHENG LI

Methanogens

PHOTO COURTESY OF JOSE LUIS SANZ/UNIVERSIDAD AUTONOMA DE
MADRID.

C.

Anaerobic Habitats for Methanogens

Methanogens grow in soil, in animal digestive tracts,
and in marine floor sediment. A major methanogenic

FIGURE 19.26 ■ Rice paddies release methane. Chinese farmers plant rice in waterlogged soil, an anaerobic habitat for methanogens.

CHAPTER 19

■

ARCHAEAL DIVERSITY

■

757

Methanogenesis in soil and landfills. Chinese farmers have

1˚C

B.

JEFF HOFFMAN/AUSTRALIAN ANTARCTIC DIVISION

found that one way to decrease methane production is to
drain the soils used for rice production. Changsheng Li and
colleagues at the University of New Hampshire showed in
experimental plots that drained soil produces less methane. The drained soil receives more oxygen, which blocks
methanogenesis. Draining soil also stimulates rice root
development and accelerates decomposition of organic matter in the soil to release nitrogen. Sufficiently dry rice paddy
soil can actually become a sink for atmospheric methane,
thanks to methane-oxidizing bacteria.
Another major source of methanogens is landfills. Landfills such as those outside New York City are among the
largest human-made structures on Earth. They are rich in
organic wastes, which bacteria ferment to CO2, H2, and
short-chain organic molecules that methanogens convert to
methane. As a result, large amounts of gas can build up and
spontaneously combust, causing explosions. To avoid explosions, the methane needs to be piped out. In some cases, the
gas can be collected and used to generate electricity.
As global temperatures increase, the largest release of
methane may come from the polar regions, where permafrost thaws and glaciers retreat. In Canada and Alaska, many
lakes and melting permafrost soils produce methane so fast
that one can ignite a flame (Fig. 19.27). In Antarctica, scientists such as Ricardo Cavicchioli from the University of
New South Wales, Australia, have discovered psychrophilic

FIGURE 19.28 ■ Antarctic lakes support psychrophilic
methanogens. A. Ace Lake now opens to the sea, containing

TODD PARIS/UAF

anoxic sulfidic layers. B. Ric Cavicchioli (left) and Torsten Thomas
process microbial samples collected at Ace Lake.

FIGURE 19.27

■ Polar methane release. Katey Anthony at
the University of Alaska Fairbanks demonstrates how bubbles
of methane from methanogens beneath the ice burst into the
atmosphere, where the methane ignites into flame.

RICARDO CAVICCHIOLI, 2006, NATURE REVIEWS MICROBIOLOGY 4:331-343

A.

methanogens (Fig. 19.28). The near-freezing water of Ace
Lake is saturated with methane from methanogens present at high numbers. Cavicchioli showed that the Ace Lake
methanogens have membrane lipids with many double
bonds; the unsaturated form allows more fluidity at low
temperature (see Chapter 3).
Rising temperatures accelerate methanogenesis, and the
methane bubbles up so fast that it melts holes in the ice sheets
covering Arctic lakes. In 2012, Andrew McDougall and
colleagues at the University of Victoria, British Columbia,
modeled the permafrost carbon release and its feedback
effect on global warming. They project that permafrost
could release more than a quarter of its carbon stores by the
year 2100, and that this amount could add another 1.5°C
to the global temperature by the year 2300.

758

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

SPECIAL TOPIC 19.1* *Methanogens

for Dinner

100 nm

FIGURE 1 ■ Methanobrevibacter smithii grown in gut
shows a thick capsule. TEM superimposed upon image of
colon. Source: Buck Samuel et al. 2007. PNAS 104:10643.

SEBASTIAN KAULITZK/123RF

If our gut is full of methanogens, what are they doing there? Do
they just pass through, picking up hydrogen and CO2 along the
way; or do they interact specifically with their host, and with
their neighboring microbes in the gut microbiome? Elizabeth
Hansen and colleagues at Washington University in St. Louis
set out to address these questions. They selected a well-studied gut methanogen, Methanobrevibacter smithii (Fig. 1). M.
smithii can be cultured inside the cecum (entrance to the large
intestine) of a germ-free mouse. When cultured in the mouse,
the archaeal cell forms a thick capsule of polysaccharide. By

contrast, M. smithii cultured in a batch fermentor forms cells
whose capsule is very thin. This difference suggests that capsule formation is a response to the animal host.
Hansen asked, does the existence of methanogens depend
on the genetic identity of the specific host? This question is
of interest because only some humans release methane, while
others do not; thus, we infer that only some of us are colonized by methanogens. We do not know whether this difference arises from host genetics or from environmental factors.
So, Hansen conducted a study comparing the methanogen
prevalence between pairs of monozygotic twins (identical
twins, from the same fertilized egg) and dizygotic twins (fraternal twins, from two different zygotes) (Fig. 2). Methanogen
prevalence was measured by quantitative PCR amplification (qPCR) of the signature gene mcrA. The gene encodes
methyl-coenzyme M reductase, the enzyme that converts
methyl-coenzyme M (CH3–S-CoM) and thiol-coenzyme B
(HS-CoB) to methane and the CoM-CoB disulfide (CoM-SS-CoB) (shown in Fig. 19.31B). A remarkably high correlation
was found between the methanogen levels of the monozygotic twin pairs. The dizygotic twin pairs, however, showed no
significant correlation. This finding suggests that methanogens are highly sensitive to the host molecular biology.
Hansen then asked whether the presence of methanogens
depends on specific bacterial members of the gut microbiome.
The researchers sequenced metagenomes (sets of partial
genomes from a microbial community; presented in Chapter 21). From the metagenomes, 22 partial bacterial genomes
were assembled that showed significant correlation with
the presence of M. smithii. Remarkably, 20 of the 22 partial

Methane hydrates on the seafloor. Psychrophilic marine

Digestive methanogenic symbionts. Numerous methan-

methanogens grow at or beneath the seafloor. These seabed methanogens generate large volumes of methane that
seep up slowly from the sediment. Under the great pressure
of the deep ocean, the methane becomes trapped as methane gas hydrates, which are crystalline materials in which
methane molecules are surrounded by a cage of water molecules. The methane hydrates accumulate in vast quantities. Methane hydrates are of interest as a potential source
of natural gas. But if a large part of this methane were to
be released, it could greatly accelerate global warming (discussed in Chapter 22).
Fortunately, much of the methane produced by seafloor
methanogens is oxidized to CO2 by anaerobic methane
oxidizers (ANME). The ANME euryarchaeotes oxidize
methane in syntrophy with sulfur-reducing bacteria such
as Desulfurococcus (discussed in Chapter 18). The bacteria
reduce sulfate (abundant in seawater) to sulfide. Coupled
together, the reactions of methane oxidation and sulfate
reduction have the negative value of ΔG needed to drive
metabolism for both kinds of organisms.

ogens also grow within the digestive fermentation chambers of animals such as termites and cattle (Fig. 19.29A)
(discussed in Chapter 21). Termites have to aerate their
mounds continually in order to remove methane; when
rainfall temporarily clogs the mound, the mound can be
ignited by lightning and explode. Cattle support methanogenesis within their rumen and reticulum (a common veterinary trick is to insert a tube into the rumen and ignite
the escaping methane gas). Bovine methanogenesis diverts
carbon from meat production, and it makes a significant
contribution to global methane.
Research on rumen microbiology focuses on attempts
to suppress growth of methanogens. For example, Steven
Ragsdale and his graduate student Bree DeMontigny at
the University of Nebraska–Lincoln tested potential chemical inhibitors of methanogenesis on samples of rumen fluid
(Fig. 19.29B). The rumen fluid was maintained in vials that
serve as artificial rumens. The artificial rumens allow researchers to assess how well the proposed methane-blocking compounds might perform in an actual bovine rumen.

CHAPTER 19

0

1

2

3

4

4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
–0.5
–1.0
–1.5

■

759

■ Correlation of intestinal methanogen levels between
twins. The amount of methanogens in

r2 = 0.04
p = 0.32

fecal samples was measured by qPCR
amplification of mcrA. A. Monozygotic
twins show similar methanogen levels.
B. Dizygotic twins show no correlation.
Source: Elizabeth Hansen et al. 2011. PNAS
108:4599.

0

1

Co-twin 1

genomes were assigned to the order Clostridiales. This is the
first such specific methanogen-bacterial correlation to be shown
across multiple human host metagenomes. The basis of the connection is not known, but Hansen speculates that specific methanogens couple with specific clostridia-like bacteria to provide the
hydrogen gas needed for methanogenesis. In effect, methanogens
may bring preferred “dinner guests” to the intestinal buffet.

RESEARCH QUESTION
Similar experiments have now been performed testing the colonization requirements of other gut methanogens, such as Methanomassiliicoccus species. How do the results differ, and why?

2

3

4

5

6

Co-twin 1

Elizabeth E. Hansen, Catherine A. Lozupone, Federico E.
Rey, Meng Wu, Janaki L. Guruge, et al. 2011. Pan-genome of
the dominant human gut-associated archaeon, Methanobrevibacter smithii, studied in twins. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences USA 108:4599–4606.
Sonja Vanderhaeghen, Christophe Lacroix, and Clarissa
Schwab. 2015. Methanogen communities in stools of humans
of different age and health status and co-occurrence with
bacteria. FEMS Microbiology Letters 362. doi:10.1093/
femsle/fnv092.

Methanogens also contribute to human digestion. Species such as Methanobrevibacter smithii and Methanosphaera
stadtmanae may constitute about
10% of gut anaerobes. Methanobrevi- A.
B.
bacter smithii increases the efficiency
of digestion by consuming excess
reduced products (formate and H2)
Rumen
from bacterial mixed-acid fermentation (discussed in Chapter 13). High
levels of H2 inhibit bacterial NADH
dehydrogenases and thus decrease
the proton potential for ATP proOmasum
duction. Methanosphaera stadtmanae consumes methanol, a potentially
Abomasum
toxic by-product of the bacterial degReticulum
radation of pectin, a major fruit polysaccharide. Thus, methanogens may FIGURE 19.29 ■ Methane production in the bovine rumen. A. Methanogens grow with
the community of fermentative bacteria in the rumen and reticulum of ruminating animals.
enhance the growth of human enteric
B. Bree DeMontigny, a graduate student in animal science who worked with Stephen Ragsdale
bacteria (see Special Topic 19.1).
at the University of Nebraska, is shown here pipetting rumen fluid samples into vials that serve
If methanogens influence the fer- as “artificial rumens.” The vials were then incubated and assayed for the amount of methane
mentation efficiency of gut flora, do formed. Ragsdale is now at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.

MONICA NORBY, RESEARCH NEBRASKA, U. NEBRASKA
LINCOLN, AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH DIVISION

r2 = 0.43
p < 0.001

Co-twin 2

Co-twin 2

4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
–0.5
–1.0
–1.5

ARCHAEAL DIVERSITY

FIGURE 2

B. Dizygotic twins

A. Monozygotic twins

■

760

■

PART 4

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

■

they affect the caloric content we obtain from food? Experiments with gnotobiotic mice test the interactions between
methanogens and Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, an anaerobic
bacterium that ferments complex polysaccharides from plant
foods. The mice were colonized in the presence or absence
of Methanobrevibacter smithii, which consumes H2 through
methanogenesis. Mice colonized with both B. thetaiotaomicron and M. smithii were found to make more fat after consuming the same quantity of food than those colonized solely
with B. thetaiotaomicron. Following up this result, a study of
humans found a correlation between methane breath release
and obesity. Thus, methanogenesis may somehow interact
with human gut bacterial digestion to increase the efficiency
of fat storage. How the composition of intestinal microbiota
may influence obesity is discussed in Section 23.2.
A. MFR
R

CH2NH2

OCH2

O

Methanofuran

Biochemistry of Methanogenesis

Methanogenesis is extremely important for our environment
because the process releases a potent greenhouse gas. Thus,
much effort goes into better understanding how methanogenesis works. Knowledge of methanogenic biochemistry
may help us develop controls, such as methanogen-specific
antibiotics to minimize methane output from cattle.
Cofactors for methanogenesis. The process of methan-

ogenesis uses a series of specific cofactors to carry each
carbon from CO2 (or other substrates) as it becomes progressively reduced by hydrogen. The hydrogen atoms also
require redox carriers. Most of the cofactors are unique
to methanogens, although the general structural types
resemble those of redox cofactors we saw in Chapter 14
(Fig. 19.30). For example, cofactor F420 is a heteroaromatic molecule (containing nitrogens in the aromatic rings)
that undergoes a redox transition by acquiring or releasing
two hydrogens (Fig. 19.30C)—a transition similar to that
of the nicotinamide ring of NADH.

B. H4MPT
H
O
HN
H2 N

N

H

N

N

CH
H CH3

N

H

CH2

H

H

H

C

C

C

CH2

OH OH OH O

H
O
OH HO
H
CH2 O

CH3

H
Tetrahydromethanopterin

H

H

C. F420
2H+ + 2e–

R
N

HO

N
N

H

N

N

O
N

H

O
Oxidized

HO

O

R

H
H O
Reduced

Cofactor F420

H

D. HS-CoM

H

S

CH2CH2

CH3R

RH

SO3–

H3C

S

CH2CH2

SO3–

H3CS-CoM

HS-CoM
Coenzyme M
E. HS-CoB (HS-HTP)

H

S

O

H

H

CH3

CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2C

N

C

C

O
O

P

OH

OH
HOOC H
7-Mercaptoheptanoylthreonine phosphate

FIGURE 19.30

Cofactors for methanogenesis. Cofactors
specific for methanogenesis transfer the hydrogens and the increasingly reduced carbon to each enzyme in the pathway.
■

Methanogenesis from CO2 . The for-

mation of methane from CO2 and H 2
(Fig. 19.31) is technically a form of
anaerobic respiration in which H 2 is the
CH2
O
electron donor and CO2 is the terminal
P O CH
electron acceptor (discussed in ChapOH
CO2H
ter 14). The process fi xes CO2 onto the
cofactor methanofuran (MFR) and then
passes the carbon stepwise from one
cofactor to the next, each time losing an oxygen to form
water or gaining a hydrogen carried by another cofactor.
The first step in the conversion of CO2 and H 2 to
methane is fixing the carbon onto methanofuran (for its
chemical formula, see Fig. 19.30A). This requires placement of protons onto the oxygen to form water. The
mechanism of methanogenesis depends on the available
concentration of H 2. High-H 2 environments, such as oil
wells and sewage sludge, favor genera such as Methanosarcina (Fig. 19.31A). The high H 2 concentration allows
electron donation to CO2 from an electron transport system (ETS). The ETS may provide energy from a sodium
potential (ΔNa+). Most methanogens require Na+ for
growth, unlike bacteria, many of which can grow without sodium. Methanogenesis ultimately generates a Na+
potential that drives ATP synthesis. The sodium requirement of methanogens is something they share with
another division of Euryarchaeota, the halophiles (discussed in Section 19.5).
Other methanogens, such as Methanobacterium
and Methanococcus, use much lower concentrations of
H 2 (<1/10,000 atm) common in soil or water. At lower
CO2H

CH2

CHAPTER 19

A. High H2 concentration (Methanosarcina)
CO2 + 4H2
CH4 + 2H2O

CHO

MFR

CHO

H4MPT

CH

H4MPT

Fdox
CHO

CH3
Fdox

H2

H4MPT

4 e–

F420 H2
CH3

2 H2

2 e–

CH3
∆H+
HS-CoB
HS-CoM

S-CoM

HS-CoM
HS-CoB

CoM-S-S-CoB

H4MPT
∆Na+ drives ATP
synthase to make ATP

H2

MFR

Fdred2–

2 e–
CH2

761

CO2

Fdred2–

H2O

F420 H2

H2

■

B. Low H2 concentration (Methanobacterium)

H2 O
∆Na+

ARCHAEAL DIVERSITY

2H2 reduces ferredoxinox ferredoxinred2–
CoM-S-S-CoB
CoM-SH, CoB-SH

CO2
H2

■

S-CoM

HS-CoB
(HS-HTP)

CoM-S-S-CoB + CH4

concentrations of substrate, the free energy (ΔG) of reaction becomes less favorable (discussed in Chapters 13
and 14). So the methanogen needs to couple CO2 reduction to an energy-spending reaction, the reduction of
CoM-S-S-CoB (Fig. 19.31B). This coupling of an energyspending electron transfer (CO2 reduction via ferredoxin)
to an energy-yielding electron transfer (CoM-S-S-CoB
reduction) is called electron bifurcation. The cost of electron bifurcation (compared to the ETS used with high H 2,
see Fig. 19.31A) is that fewer ATPs can be made; but it
allows many more types of methanogens to grow in a much
wider range of natural habitats.
Later steps in methanogenesis reduce the carbon with
H 2 to methane. In the final step, CoM-S-S-CoB serves as
an anaerobic terminal electron acceptor for an ETS accepting electrons from H 2. Overall, H 2 reduces CoM-S-S-CoB
back to the two cofactors HS-CoM and HS-CoB through
an ETS, generating a proton motive force. The proton
motive force drives ATP synthase.
Another important feature of methanogenesis is that
the enzymes catalyzing each step require several transition
metals. For example, the hydrogenase that reduces F420

CH4

FIGURE 19.31 ■ Methanogenesis from CO2 and H2. All
steps require specific enzymes (not shown). A. At high [H2]: The
initial incorporation of H2 requires a coupled sodium potential
(ΔNa+). The step CH3–H4MPT to CH3–S-CoM generates a transmembrane sodium potential (ΔNa+), which drives ATP synthesis.
B. At low [H2]: Electron donation to ferredoxin (Fd) requires
energy input from coupled electron donation to CoM-S-S-CoB.

requires both nickel and iron. The enzyme catalyzing the
reaction
CO2 + methanofuran + 3H ⎯→
CHO-methanofuran + H 2O
requires either molybdenum or tungsten, depending on
the species; some species have two alternative enzymes,
depending on which metal is available. Another metal,
cobalt, is required for a B12-related cofactor that participates
in methane production from methanol and methylamines.

Thought Question

19.7 What do the multiple metal requirements suggest about
how and where the early methanogens evolved?

Methanogenesis from acetate. Methane production from

acetate is particularly important for wastewater treatment,
where most of the substrate consists of short-chain bacterial
fermentation products. The acetate methanogenesis pathway is not fully understood, but the initial incorporation

762

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

of H 2 probably requires a coupled gradient of sodium ion,
as it does for CO2 methanogenesis. The two carbons from
acetate enter different pathways, which eventually converge:
CH3 –S-CoM + HS-CoB ⎯→ CH4 + CoM-S-S-CoB

To Summarize
■

■

■

■

■

Methanogens gain energy through redox reactions
that generate methane from CO2 and H 2, formate, and
acetate. They require association with bacterial species
that generate the needed substrates.
Methanogens have rigid cell walls of diverse composition in different species, including pseudopeptidoglycan, protein, and sulfated polysaccharides.
Species of methanogens show a wide range of different shapes, including rods (single or filamentous), cocci
(single or clumped), and spirals.
Methanogens inhabit anaerobic environments such
as wetland soil, marine benthic sediment, and animal
digestive organs.
Biochemical pathways of methanogenesis involve
transfer of the increasingly reduced carbon to cofactors
that are unique to methanogens.

19.5

Halophilic Euryarchaeota

environments are extremely halophilic archaea, members of
the class Haloarchaea. The halophilic archaea require at
least 1.5-M NaCl or equivalent ionic strength, and most
grow optimally at near saturation (about 4.3 M, seven times
the concentration of seawater). Salted foods such as meat
and fish and salt-cured hides can be spoiled by haloarchaea.
Most haloarchaea belong to the order Halobacteriales,
which was named before the archaea were classified as
distinct from bacteria. Halobacteriales includes species of haloarchaea that diverge among the methanogens
(see Fig. 19.6). The halophiles, however, do not conduct
methanogenesis, but grow as photoheterotrophs, using
light energy to drive a retinal-based ion pump to establish a
proton potential. Their photopigments color salterns, brine
pools that are evaporated to mine salt (Fig. 19.33A). The
red pigment bacterioruberin protects cells from damage by
light (Fig. 19.33B).

Haloarchaeal Form and Physiology

Halophilic microbes need a way to maintain turgor
pressure—that is, to avoid cell shrinkage as cytoplasmic
water runs down the osmotic gradient toward external high
salt. Most bacterial halophiles compensate for high external salt by uptake or synthesis of other kinds of osmolytes,
such as small organic molecules. Haloarchaea, however,

A.

ALISON WRIGHT/GETTY IMAGES

FIGURE 19.32 A high-salt environment. A swimmer
effortlessly floats with her head up in the highly concentrated
brine of the Dead Sea, in Israel.
■

COURTESY OF DON GREEN PHOTOGRAPHY AND MORTON SAL

In the saturated salt water of Utah’s Great Salt Lake
or Israel’s Dead Sea, swimmers float with their heads
well above the dense brine, but few living things can
grow (Fig. 19.32). The main inhabitants of high-salt

B.

OH

HO

OH
OH
Bacterioruberin

FIGURE 19.33

A saltern for salt production. A. Aerial view
of a solar saltern facility in Grantsville, Utah. B. The red pigment
bacterioruberin protects haloarchaea from damage by light.
■

CHAPTER 19

■

ARCHAEAL DIVERSITY

■

763

TABLE 19.5*Halophilic Archaea
Representative species

NaCl range (M)

Growth
temperature (°C)

Growth pH

Cell shape

Location of isolate

Haloarcula quadrata

2.7–4.3

53°

pH 7

Square flat;
pleomorphic

Sabkha, Sinai, Egypt

Haloarcula valismortis

3.5–4.3

40°

pH 7.5

Pleomorphic rods

Salt pools, Death
Valley, CA

Halobacterium salinarum

3.0–5.2

35–50°

pH 7

Rods

Salted cow hide

Halococcus morrhuae

2.5–5.2

30–45°

pH 7

Cocci

Dead Sea, Israel

Haloferax volcanii

1.5–5.2

40°

pH 7

Pleomorphic
dish-shaped

Dead Sea, Israel

Halorubrum lacusprofundi

1.5–5.2

1–44°

pH 7

Long rods (12 µm)

Deep Lake, Antarctica

Natronococcus occultus

1.4–5.2

30–45°

pH 9.5

Cocci

Lake Magadi, Kenya

Natronomonas pharaonis

2.0–5.2

45°

pH 9–10

Rods

Wadi El Natrun, Egypt

Sources: Aharon Oren, The order Halobacteriales, The Prokaryotes, Springer-Verlag; the Halorubrum lacusprofundi growth temperature range comes from Ricardo Cavicchioli.
2006. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 4:331.

■

High GC content of DNA. High salt concentration
decreases the fidelity in base pairing of DNA. Because
the triple hydrogen bonds of GC pairs hold more
strongly than those of AT pairs, the exceptionally high
GC content of haloarchaea (above 60% for most species)
may protect their DNA from denaturation in high salt.

■

Acidic proteins. Most haloarchaeal proteins are highly
acidic, with an exceptional density of negative charges at
their surface. The high negative charge maintains a layer
of water in the form of hydrated potassium ions (K+).
This unusual hydration layer keeps the acidic proteins
soluble in the high salt within the cytoplasm.

The high salt content of haloarchaea provides a convenient way to lyse cell contents for analysis: Simply transfer cells into low-salt buffer, and they fall apart owing to
osmotic shock. This technique provides a quick way for
beginning students to isolate DNA. This and other techniques have made the organism Halobacterium a model
system for molecular biology education (eTopic 19.1).
The properties of diverse halophiles are presented in
Table 19.5. The haloarchaea are generally uniform with
respect to temperature range (mesophilic). With respect to
pH, some halophiles grow at neutral pH, whereas others
are alkaliphiles, growing in soda lakes above pH 9, such as
Lonar Lake, Maharashtra State, India. The cell envelopes of

most haloarchaea contain rigid cell walls of glycoprotein, as
do some of the methanogens. Most species possess flagella
for phototaxis and gas vesicles for maintaining their buoyancy in the upper layer of the water column. Unlike phospholipid vesicles, gas vesicles are made entirely of protein,
and they are filled with air.
Haloarchaeal gas vesicles earned an unusual grant from
the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. Shiladitya DasSarma
at the University of Maryland School of Medicine proposes
to use recombinant gas vesicles of Halobacterium NRC-1
as a delivery vehicle for recombinant vaccines against
typhoid bacteria. The recombinant haloarchaeal vaccine
can be embedded in salt crystals (Fig. 19.34)—a cheap

COURTESY OF PRIYA DASSARMA

adapt to high external NaCl by maintaining a high intracellular concentration of potassium chloride (about 4-M KCl).
Potassium ion concentrations are moderately high in most
microbial cells (commonly 200 mM), but the exceptionally
high KCl concentration within haloarchaea requires major
physiological adaptations:

FIGURE 19.34 ■ Pink-pigmented salt crystals deliver haloarchaeal vaccine. Halobacterium NRC-1 embedded in salt crystals
contains gas vesicles formed of a recombinant protein vaccine.
Crystals are held here by Shiladitya DasSarma.

764

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

and convenient delivery method for developing countries
where typhoid is widespread.
With respect to cell shape, haloarchaea display considerable diversity. Some species form symmetrical rods, as in
Halobacterium NRC-1. Other species form pleomorphic
cells, flattened like pancakes; and still others form regular
cocci (Haloferax mediterranei) (Fig. 19.35A). A few species grow as flattened squares—the only microbial cells
known to be square (Haloquadratum walsbyi) (Fig. 19.35B
and C). The mechanism that maintains the various shapes is
unknown. In oligotrophic (low-nutrient) environments, it is
likely that the greater surface-to-volume ratio gives flattened
cells a competitive edge in obtaining nutrients.

Different Hypersaline Habitats
Support Different Haloarchaea

Not all hypersaline (high-salt) habitats are alike. They differ with respect to pH, temperature, and the presence of
other minerals, such as magnesium ion. Different kinds
of hypersaline habitats support different species of haloarchaea (see Table 19.5), as well as halophilic bacteria. Major
types of habitats include:
■

Thalassic lakes. Thalassic lakes (from the Greek
thalassa, meaning “ocean”), such as the Great Salt
Lake in Utah, contain saturated salts with essentially
the same ionic proportions as the ocean: Na+ and Cl–
(NaCl) predominate, followed by Mg2+, K+, and SO42–.

■

Athalassic lakes. Athalassic lakes, such as the Dead Sea
in Israel, contain higher proportions of magnesium ions.
These habitats favor genera such as Haloarcula, which
require 100 mM Mg2+ for growth and grow best at
magnesium concentrations above 1 M.

■

Solar salterns. These are artificial pools of brine, or
saturated NaCl, that evaporate in sunlight, precipitating
halite (salt crystals) for commercial production. Commercial
evaporation pools for salt actually benefit from the red
microbes, whose light absorption accelerates heating and
evaporation.

■

Brine pools beneath the ocean. Undersea brine pools
collect near geothermal vents, as in the Gulf of Mexico,
Mediterranean Sea, and Red Sea. These hypersaline
regions contain salts brought up by vent water. They
support hyperthermophilic halophiles, most of which
have not yet been cultured.

■

Alkaline soda lakes, such as Lake Magadi in Kenya,
where carbonate salts drive the pH above pH 9. These lakes
support alkaliphilic haloarchaea such as Halobacterium.

■

Underground salt deposits, which contain micropockets
of salt-saturated water where halophiles may survive for
thousands of years.

B. Square haloarchaea

1 µm

Retinal-Based
Photoheterotrophy

M KESSEL AND Y COHEN. "ULTRASTRUCTURE OF SQUARE
BACTERIA..." J. BACTERIOL. 1982 150: 851-860

EYE OF SCIENCE/SCIENCE SOURCE

A. Haloferax mediterranei

Thalassic lakes (also called brine lakes) support genera
such as Halobacterium. Antarctic brine lakes support
growth of cold-adapted halophiles, such as Halorubrum
lacusprofundi, at temperatures as low as –18°C.

5 µm

1 µm

W STOECKENIUS.J. BACTERIOL.
1981 148: 352-360

C. Haloquadratum walsbyi

FIGURE 19.35 ■ Diverse haloarchaea. A. Haloferax mediterranei (SEM). B. Square
haloarchaea (Haloquadratum walsbyi) during their sixth round of cell division, which alternates in vertical and horizontal directions (photomicrograph, Nomarski optics). C. Crosssectioned cells of square haloarchaea show their thinness (TEM).

Most haloarchaea are photoheterotrophs, in which light-directed energy
acquisition supplements respiration on
complex carbon sources. Respiration
occurs with oxygen or anaerobically
with nitrate. A typical habitat for haloarchaea starts out as a pool with moderate salt content, containing a range of
bacterial and archaeal species with varied tolerance to salt. As the pool evaporates, the salt concentrates, and the
various bacteria die and lyse, releasing
cell components that the haloarchaea
can metabolize. The halophiles supplement their utilization of organic substrate energy by using light-driven ion
pumps.
Light is captured by retinalcontaining transmembrane proteins

CHAPTER 19

A. Bacteriorhodopsin proton pump
Outside

H+

■

ARCHAEAL DIVERSITY

■

765

B. Light-absorbing pumps and sensors
Bacteriorhodopsin
Halorhodopsin
H+

ATP synthase

Cl

Sensory
rhodopsin II
(blue light)

Sensory
rhodopsin I
(red light)

–

F0
HtrI

F1
H
ATP

H+

+

Cl–

Cytoplasm

Red light:
motor rotates;
swim ahead

Flagellar
motor
Cytoplasm

HtrII

ADP + Pi

His-kinase

Methylation
helices

His-kinase
Blue light:
reverse motor;
tumble and
change direction
Regulator

H+

FIGURE 19.36

■

Light-driven ion pumps and sensors. A. Bacteriorhodopsin absorbs light and pumps H+ out of the cell (PDB code:

1QKO), whereas light-activated halorhodopsin pumps chloride into the cell (not shown). B. Rhodopsin family molecules in the membrane of
Halobacterium: bacteriorhodopsin, light-driven proton extrusion; halorhodopsin, light-driven chloride intake; sensory rhodopsins I and II, with
their signal transduction proteins HtrI and HtrII. The sensory transduction proteins phosphorylate and dephosphorylate a protein that regulates the direction of rotation of the flagellar motor.

called bacteriorhodopsin and the chloride pump halorhodopsin (Fig. 19.36 ). (The role of light-driven ion
pumps in phototrophy is discussed in Chapter 14.) The
proton pump bacteriorhodopsin was named to indicate
that it is a prokaryotic version of the better-known eukaryotic retinal rhodopsins; the name was chosen before the
domain Archaea was recognized. The chloride pump
halorhodopsin was discovered and named in reference to
the chloride ion (a halide). The two proteins are homologs with similar structure and mechanism. In the cell
membrane, they form complexes that aggregate in patches
called purple membrane.
Each bacteriorhodopsin proton pump contains seven
alpha helices that traverse the membrane (Fig. 19.36A),
surrounding a buried molecule of retinal, the same
light-absorbing molecule found in photoreceptors of the
human retina. Light absorption triggers a conformational
change that enables a proton from the cytoplasmic face to
be picked up by an aspartate residue. The proton is then
transferred stepwise through several other amino acid
residues in the protein, leading to release of the proton
outside the cell. The net result of proton transfer by bacteriorhodopsin is generation of a proton motive force that

can run a proton-driven ATP synthase, storing energy as
ATP (Fig. 19.36B).
Halorhodopsin has a similar structure, in which chloride
(instead of H+) is pumped into the cell instead of outward.
Because chloride is negatively charged, this chloride transport contributes to the proton motive force. Light-driven
chloride pumps are unique to haloarchaea.
Haloarchaea also possess homologs of bacteriorhodopsin that serve as sensory devices: the sensory rhodopsins I and II. These proteins, too, each have seven alpha
helices containing retinal. When the sensory rhodopsins
absorb light, they signal the cell to swim using its flagella
(discussed in Chapter 3). The activated sensory rhodopsin I directs the cell to swim toward red light, the optimum range for photosynthesis. Sensory rhodopsin II is
activated to reverse the flagellar motor and make the cell
swim away from blue and ultraviolet light, which causes
photooxidative damage to DNA. The rhodopsins signal
through the chemotaxis machinery to the flagellar motor,
using histidine kinase enzymes that phosphorylate regulatory proteins (see Fig. 19.36B). This response to light,
or phototaxis, is an important model for archaeal molecular regulation.

CHAPTER 19

The Halobacterium genome reveals homologs for many
genes that encode transporters of organic food molecules
such as sugars and amino acids. In addition, the genome
contains a number of cation and anion transporter genes.
Some transporters move in needed molecules such as phosphate, whereas others pump out harmful substances such
as arsenate. Efflux of inorganic toxins is particularly critical
for growth in evaporating brine, where the concentrations
of trace metals are increasing.

To Summarize
■

■

■

■

■

Haloarchaea are extreme halophiles, growing in at
least 1.5-M NaCl. They are isolated from salt lakes, solar
salterns, underground salt micropockets, and salted
foods.
Haloarchaea show diverse cell shapes, including slender rods (Halobacterium), cocci (Halococcus), and flat
squares (Haloquadratum). The cell envelopes of most
haloarchaea contain rigid cell walls of glycoprotein.
Gas vesicles provide buoyancy, enabling haloarchaea to
remain near the top of the water column.
Molecular adaptations to high salt include DNA of
high GC content and acidic proteins (proteins with a
high number of negatively charged residues).
Retinal-based photoheterotrophy involves the proton pump bacteriorhodopsin or the chloride pump
halorhodopsin. Both pumps contain retinal for light
absorption.

19.6

■

ARCHAEAL DIVERSITY

■

767

Extremophilic
Euryarchaeota and
Deeply Branching Divisions

Besides the methanogens and halophiles, the phylum
Euryarchaeota includes a number of hyperthermophiles
that superficially resemble the crenarchaeotes, although
their genetic divergence from these organisms is deep.
Some of the euryarchaeotes are acidophiles that grow under
the most extreme acidic conditions on Earth.

Thermococcales

A major group of hyperthermophilic euryarchaeotes is the
order Thermococcales, including genera such as Thermococcus and Pyrococcus (Fig. 19.38A). These genera are most
commonly isolated from submarine solfataras, volcanic
vents that emit only gases. Most are anaerobes fermenting
complex carbon sources, such as peptides or carbohydrates.
Their growth is accelerated by the use of elemental sulfur as
a terminal electron acceptor for anaerobic respiration:
2H+ + 2e – + S0 ⎯→ H 2S
Alternatively, these species can oxidize molecular hydrogen
with sulfur:
H 2 + S0 ⎯→ H 2S

BEEDER ET. AL. APPLIED AND ENVIRONMENTAL MICROBIOLOGY,
1994, P. 1227-1231.

GONZALES ET. AL.EXTREMOPHILES, VOL. 2, ISSUE: 2, MAY 20,
1998. PP. 123 - 130.

Most Thermococcus and Pyrococcus species grow at temperatures well above 90°C; Pyrococcus woesei, for example,
grows at temperatures as high as 105°C.
Species of Thermococcales are the source of “vent polymerases” for PCR amplification. They now replace the
enzyme Taq polymerase obtained from the Yellowstone
hot-spring bacterium Thermus aquaticus, which grows only
at temperatures up to 90°C. The Taq enzyme has only limited stability at or above 95°C, but DNA polymerases with
A. Pyrococcus horikoshii
B. Archaeoglobus fulgidus
greater stability at higher temperatures
and increased accuracy in replication
have been produced from vent-dwelling
archaea such as Pyrococcus furiosus and
Thermococcus litoralis. These vent polymerases now allow higher-temperature
denaturation and synthesis of GC-rich
sequences that were difficult to amplify
with the original thermostable enzyme.
The first member of Thermococcales
0.2 µm
whose genome was sequenced was Pyro0.2 µm
coccus abyssi. (Remember to distinguish
Pyrococcus abyssi from the crenarchaeote
FIGURE 19.38 ■ Hyperthermophilic Euryarchaeota. A. Pyrococcus horikoshii,
Pyrodictium abyssi.) The sequence was
isolated from a hydrothermal vent at the Okinawa Trough (TEM). B. Archaeoglobus fulgidus
completed in 1999 by Daniel Prieur,
(TEM), isolated from hot water in the North Sea oil field.

768

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

Patrick Forterre, and colleagues at Genoscope, the French
National Sequencing Center. The genome of Pyrococcus
abyssi reveals an especially high number of eukaryotic homologs for DNA replication, transcription, and protein translation. Examples include the eukaryotic-like primase, helicase,
and endonuclease for generation of Okazaki fragments in
the lagging strand of DNA synthesis. At the same time, the
genome also shows bacterial homologs for cell division and
DNA repair. Thus, P. abyssi offers a striking view of mixed
heritage from the common ancestor of the three domains.
Pyrococcus species possess enzymes conducting most of
the classic conversions of the EMP pathway of glycolysis,

but several steps use enzymes unrelated to those in bacteria.
Examples include two ADP-dependent enzymes—
glucokinase and phosphofructokinase—as well as the phosphate-independent enzyme glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate
ferredoxin oxidoreductase. The glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate conversion is unique in that it sidesteps the use of
inorganic phosphate, which is required at this step by bacterial glycolysis (shown earlier, in Fig. 19.4).
Pyrococcus and other members of Thermococcales have
enzymes requiring tungsten, a metal rarely required outside the archaea. (Tungsten is present in elevated concentrations at hydrothermal vents.) Another unusual feature of

ATP

H+

lactate
dehydrogenase

+

H

ADP + Pi

C

Sulfate
(SO42–)

2H+ + e–

OH

CH3

sulfate
adenylyltransferase

COO–

Adenosine
5′-phosphosulfate

O
CH3 C COO
Pyruvate

H
Lactate

ATP

–

ETS donates
electrons to sulfate.

CO2

2H+ + e–

adenylyl
sulfate
reductase
Sulfite (SO32–)
(as bisulfite HSO3–)
(S4O62–)

O
CH3 C S CoA
2 Acetyl-CoA

dissimilatory
sulfite
reductase

CO dehydrogenase
pathway
(S2O32–)
Hydrogen sulfide (H2S)
CH3

H4MPT

CO

2H+
CH2 H4MPT

FIGURE 19.39 ■ Metabolism of
Archaeoglobus fulgidus. A. fulgidus
gains energy by sulfate respiration
on small organic molecules such as
lactate. This process drives a unique
acetyl-CoA degradation pathway
involving reversal of methanogenesis
(compare with Fig. 19.31A). Source: H. P.
Klenk et al. 1997. Nature 390:364.

Methyl groups are
oxidized to CO2
using cofactor
MPT.

CH

H4MPT

CHO H4MPT

CHO MFR
2H+
CO2

CO2

CHAPTER 19

Pyrococcus is that both proton motive force generation and
the ATP synthase appear to involve a Na+/H+ antiport system. This dependence on sodium is a trait shared with the
methanogens and the halophiles.
Thought Question

19.8 Compare and contrast the metabolic options available
for Pyrococcus and for the crenarchaeote Sulfolobus.

Archaeoglobus Partly Reverses
Methanogenesis

While many archaea reduce sulfur, only one group is
known to reduce sulfate ion (SO42–) without a bacterial
partner. The order Archaeoglobales includes Archaeoglobus
fulgidus, a hyperthermophile with unusual metabolic characteristics. Figure 19.38B shows A. fulgidus isolated from
water at 75°C beneath an oil rig in the North Sea.
The genome of A. fulgidus reveals an exceptionally complex array of metabolic pathways, including an acetyl-CoA
degradation pathway that reverses part of methanogenesis
(Fig. 19.39). A. fulgidus, a deep-sea-vent hyperthermophile,
oxidizes methyl groups back to CO2 using the methanogenic cofactor methanopterin (MPT) (see Fig. 19.31A). The
methyl groups are oxidized by reduction of sulfate. Archaeoglobus is the only archaeon known to reduce sulfate without
a bacterial partner. This archaeon may play an important role
in limiting ocean release of methane from methanogens.
A. fulgidus uses several enzymes and cofactors, such as
MPT, present in methanogens. But instead of generating
methane from CO2, they run the reactions in reverse, converting the methyl group of acetate to CO2. The energy
required is gained through fermentation of carbohydrates
and through anaerobic respiration with sulfate. The sulfate
is successively reduced to sulfite and sulfide. When organic
substrates are available, sulfate reduction yields more energy
than methanogenesis.

ARCHAEAL DIVERSITY

■

769

Thermoplasmatales

The order Thermoplasmatales includes thermophiles and
acidophiles with no cell wall and no S-layer, but only a
plasma membrane. How they maintain their cells against
extreme conditions is poorly understood. An example is the
moderate thermophile isolated from self-heating coal refuse
piles, Thermoplasma acidophilum, growing at 59°C and
pH 2. The cells have flagella and are motile, but it is unclear
how the flagella maintain a torque against the membrane
without a rigid envelope for support. The metabolism of
T. acidophilum, like that of Pyrococcus, is based on S0 respiration of organic molecules.
The genome sequence of T. acidophilum contains just
1.5 million bp—one of the smallest known for a free-living
organism. It shows substantial evidence of horizontal transfer from the crenarchaeote Sulfolobus, a hyperthermophile
that shares the same range of habitats. Horizontal transfer
between distant relatives turns out to be common among
the hyperthermophiles, causing some controversies in their
classification.
Another acidophilic genus of the order Thermoplasmatales is Ferroplasma (Fig. 19.40). Ferroplasma species are
found in mines containing iron pyrite ore (FeS2). Using
dissolved Fe3+ as an oxidizing agent in the presence of
H 2O, they oxidize the sulfur to sulfuric acid. The chemical equation is:
FeS2 + 14Fe3+ + 8H 2O ⎯→ 15Fe2+ + 2SO42– + 16H+
The reaction generates pH values below pH 0 (1-M H+).
This degree of acidity is enough to dissolve a metal shovel
within a day.
The amorphous cells of Ferroplasma acidarmanus grow
in biofilms that form long streamers into water draining
from the mine (Fig. 19.40B). The oxidative disintegration
of iron-bearing ores can be useful for leaching of minerals,
but it also causes acid mine drainage into aquatic systems
(discussed in Chapter 22).

A.

1 μm

K. J. EDWARDS ET AL, 2000. SCIENCE 287:1796.

■ The extreme
acidophile Ferroplasma. A. F. acidiphilum

PIVOVAROVA ET AL. 2002. MICROBIOLOGY VOL. 71 NO. 6: 698-706.

B.

FIGURE 19.40

grows at pH 0 (TEM). B. Streamers of
F. acidarmanus anchored to deposits of
pyrite within the Iron Mountain mine in
California. The stream is about a meter
across, its water about pH 0. This level of
acidity will dissolve a metal shovel in a day.

■

770

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

Thought Question

19.9 Compare and contrast sulfur metabolism in Pyrococcus
and Ferroplasma.

Nanoarchaeota

The smallest known euryarchaeotes are the Nanoarchaeota,
recognized so far for a single species, Nanoarchaeum equitans (Fig. 19.41). The organism consists of exceptionally
small cells that are obligate symbionts of the crenarchaeote
Ignicoccus. The N. equitans cell in Figure 19.41 is attached
to I. hospitalis by a membrane bridge (black arrow). The
host cell may harbor up to four of the smaller cells. Both
host and symbiont genomes have been sequenced, revealing extensive coevolution of the two.
The N. equitans genome is exceptionally small (less than
500 kb) and shows evidence of rapid degenerative evolution. The diminished genome is typical of a dependent
organism that has lost numerous genes for functions now
provided by a host. It remains unclear, however, whether
N. equitans is parasitic on Ignicoccus or if it makes a metabolic contribution to its host (which is able to grow without
the attached N. equitans).

Most deeply branching organisms are uncultivated, and little is known of them other than their rRNA sequence. But
for some organisms, new techniques of genome sequencing
enable us to read most of a genome from a single cell.
An example of a deeply branching division is the Ancient
Archaeal Group (AAG) of hyperthermophiles. AAG
includes the Korarchaeota vent hyperthermophiles isolated
by Susan Barns and Norman Pace. The organisms have not
been isolated in pure culture, but in 2008 the genome of
one korarchaeote was sequenced from an enriched mixed
culture at 80°C–90°C at Obsidian Pool, Yellowstone
National Park. The organism, provisionally named “Candidatus Korarchaeum cryptofilum,” grows in long, thin filaments less than 200 nm wide. Its genes suggest that it gains
energy mainly from anaerobic peptide fermentation, yet we
still do not know enough to culture this organism in the
laboratory.

To Summarize
■

■

Deeply Branching Divisions

We continue to identify emerging clades of archaea through
PCR-amplified rDNA probes. Some of these clades, such as
the Lokiarchaeota, emerge within existing phyla, such as
Euryarchaeota. Others, however, diverge more deeply than
the divergence between Crenarchaeota and Euryarchaeota.

Ignicoccus
hospitalis

■

■

■

Thermococcales includes hyperthermophiles and
acidophiles. Most species use sulfur to oxidize complex
organic substrates.
Pyrococcus and Thermococcus are the source of vent
polymerases for the polymerase chain reaction (PCR).
Thermococcal enzymes notably use tungsten at their
active site.
Archaeoglobus species reduce sulfate. The methyl
group of acetate is oxidized to CO2 by a pathway using
methanogenic cofactors.
Thermoplasmatales includes extreme acidophiles.
Ferroplasma oxidizes iron pyrite ore (FeS2) in a process
that generates concentrated sulfuric acid, causing acid
mine drainage.
Nanoarchaeum equitans is a tiny obligate symbiont of
Ignicoccus hospitalis.

0.5 μm

COURTESY OF REINHARDT RACHEL

Concluding Thoughts

Nanoarchaeum equitans

FIGURE 19.41

■ Nanoarchaeum equitans, a small obligate
symbiont attached to Ignicoccus hospitalis. TEM.

Overall, species of archaea inhabit a wider range of environments than either bacteria or eukaryotes do—from
extreme heat to extreme cold, from high pH to extreme
acid, as well as temperate environments such as the oceans.
Crenarchaeotes are found in all soil and water habitats,
and as endosymbionts of marine animals. Archaea show
unique cell structures such as grappling-hook appendages,
and unique forms of metabolism such as methanogenesis. Methanogens colonize all soil and water environments, as well as the human digestive tract. Yet we probably

CHAPTER 20

■

EUKARYOTIC DIVERSITY

■

773

CHAPTER 20
Eukaryotic Diversity

T

he domain Eukarya encompasses a breathtaking range of size and shape, from giant
whales and sequoias to microbial fungi, algae,
and protists. Fungi include multicellular forms such
as mushrooms, as well as unicellular yeasts and filamentous Penicillium. Algae conduct photosynthesis
using chloroplasts; they include broad sheets of kelp,
as well as unicellular phytoplankton. Protozoa include
amebas and stalked vorticellae. Most protists are
free-living predators that use cilia to catch their prey,
but some are parasites that cause diseases such as
malaria and sleeping sickness.

20.2 Fungi
20.3 Algae
20.4 Amebas and Slime Molds
20.5 Alveolates: Ciliates, Dinoflagellates, and

Apicomplexans
20.6 Parasitic Protozoa

C U R R E N T R E S E A RC H

highlight

Antarctic choanoflagellates form proto-multicellular lifeforms. Choanoflagellates are protists with a single flagellum
surrounded by a collar of interconnected microvilli (tiny cell
extensions). Choanoflagellates may alternate between unicellular free-living and multicellular colonial life stages. The
ability to form complex colonies of interconnected cells suggests that these protists might be showing characteristics of
early-stage transition to multicellular life. Their DNA sequence
and cellular traits suggest that choanoflagellates are the most
appropriate protozoan reference for studies of animal origins.
Source: Wei Li and Rachael Morgan-Kiss, Miami University of Ohio, 2015.

A N I N T E RV I E W W I T H
WEI LI, ANTARCTIC MICROBIOLOGIST, MIAMI UNIVERSITY
OF OHIO

WEI LI, MIAMI UNIVERSITY OF OHIO

20.1 Phylogeny of Eukaryotes

Why is it interesting to find choanoflagellates in a lake in Antarctica?

In the McMurdo Dry Valleys, perennially ice-covered lakes are the only
source of year-round liquid water for
life. Most of the lake food webs are
microbially dominated and virtually
lack metazoa. Microbial eukaryotes
play important roles as primary producers and consumers. Photosynthetic protists represent
the major producers of organic matter in McMurdo lake ecosystems, while heterotrophic flagellates and ciliates are the
predators of bacteria and smaller protists. In Lake Bonney,
heterotrophic flagellates (such as choanoflagellates) are
major bacterivores and a key component in the food web.
How do you think choanoflagellates resemble the earliest
form of animal life?

10 µm

Over 600 million years ago, the multicellular ancestor of
modern animals evolved from a unicellular flagellate. The
transition to multicellularity that triggered the evolution
of metazoa from protozoa is a critical question regarding
animal origins. Recent phylogenetic studies indicate that
metazoa are monophyletic and their common ancestor was
shared by single-celled choanoflagellates.
773

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

When we think of eukaryotes, we think first of plants and
animals consisting of complex multicellular bodies. But
eukaryotes also include vast numbers of microbes, such as
protists (algae and protozoa). How did complex animals
such as ourselves evolve from a protist ancestor? Certain
protists called choanoflagellates show remarkable genetic
similarity to animals. Choanoflagellates can be induced
to form a multicellular colony called a rosette (shown in
the Current Research Highlight). The rosette is formed of
interconnected cells and can grow and fission like a unified organism. Both single-celled and rosette choanoflagellates are ubiquitous in marine and freshwater habitats.
Even in the subfreezing lakes of Antarctica, these protists
grow with their hint of life’s ancient transition to metazoa (multicellular animals). Experiments on algae suggest

20.1

B.

1 µm

TAYLOR ET AL. 2011. PLOS BIOLOGY 9: E1001085, IMAGE CREDIT: ALISON R. TAYLOR

A.

models for the evolution of multicellular life (discussed in
Section 20.3).
In Chapter 20 we present the phylogeny of major
groups of microbial eukaryotes, along with the branching of animals and plants from the microbial family tree.
We explore the form and function of algae, such as the
calcium carbonate–plated coccolithophores that bloom
over vast stretches of ocean (Fig. 20.1A). Fungi range
from yeast to mushrooms to common molds such as Penicillium, our source of penicillin (Fig. 20.1B). Protozoa
include a dozen deep-branching clades, from free-living
amebas to diarrhea-causing parasites such as Giardia
(Fig. 20.1C). We get to know the eukaryotic microbes as
essential partners in ecosystems and as infectious agents
that cause some devastating diseases.

20 µm

C.

FIGURE 20.1

■

2 µm

CDC/JANICE HANEY CARR

Microbial eukaryotes. A. Coccolithus

pelagicus, a marine
coccolithophore, a
single-celled alga that
forms scales of calcium
carbonate (colorized
SEM). B. Penicillium
notatum conidiophore,
an airborne fungus
(colorized SEM).
C. Giardia intestinalis,
a waterborne parasite
(SEM).

DENNIS KUNKEL MICROSCOPY, INC.

774

Phylogeny of
Eukaryotes

With all their diversity, eukaryotic cells share
a common structure defined by the presence
of the nucleus and other membrane-enclosed
organelles (for review, see eAppendix 2). The
extensive compartmentalization of the eukaryotic cell, including the nucleus and endomembrane system, enables eukaryotic cells
to grow a thousandfold larger than prokaryotic cells. Yet these organelles are found
within even the tiniest of eukaryotes, such
as Ostreococcus tauri, a green alga less than
2 μm across (Fig. 20.2). This alga consists of a
flat, disk-shaped cell containing one or two of
each major type of organelle: a mitochondrion,
a chloroplast, and a stack of Golgi, all packed
within the cell’s small volume. The genome of
O. tauri is also downsized; at only 8 Mb, the
genome is barely twice as long as that of the bacterium Escherichia coli. Discovered only recently,
such tiny bacteria-sized eukaryotes are believed
to be the most numerous and ubiquitous forms
of eukaryotic life.
Note that, despite their extraordinary range of
form, the metabolism of eukaryotes is less diverse
than that of either bacteria or archaea. Most
eukaryotes conduct either oxygenic photosynthesis or heterotrophy—or both. All have descended
from an ancestral cell that engulfed a bacterial
endosymbiont, giving rise to mitochondria, the
source of aerobic respiration. And all phototrophs
descended from a cell that engulfed the bacterial
ancestor of chloroplasts.

CHAPTER 20

EUKARYOTIC DIVERSITY

■

775

B.

forms of fungi, protozoa, and
algae came to be included in the
subject of microbiology.
Discoveries in physiology led
us to redefine these organisms.
For example, the motile organisms defined as protozoa often
contain chloroplasts and fit the
Chloroplast
classification of algae. On the
other hand, slime molds, origiGolgi
nally classified with fungi, show
form and motility more typical
of protozoa. By the mid-twenti0.25 μm
Ribosomes
Granules
eth century, naturalists classified
protozoa, unicellular algae, and
FIGURE 20.2 ■ A tiny eukaryote still has organelles. Ostreococcus tauri, visualized by
cryo-EM (A) and in 3D by tomography (B).
undifferentiated colonial forms as
protists. Researchers including
Herbert Copeland, Robert Whittaker, and Lynn Margulis attempted to refine the definition of “protist” to better
distinguish microbial life-forms.
Historical Overview of Eukaryotes
For most of human history, life was understood in terms
Today, molecular phylogeny shows that protists comof macroscopic multicellular eukaryotes: animals (creatures
prise several clades equally distant from each other as
that move to obtain food) and plants (rooted organisms
that grow in sunlight). Fungi (singular, fungus), which lack
photosynthesis, were nonetheless considA.
ered a form of plant because they grow on
FIGURE 20.3 ■
the soil or other substrate. Thus, mycolTraditional views of
ogy, the study of fungi, was often included
fungi and protozoa
(protists).
with botany, the study of plants. But the
A. Basidiomycete
basis of fungal growth was poorly undermushrooms growing
stood, and its mystery was often associin a “fairy ring.” B. A
ated with magic. For example, people were
nineteenth-century
mystified by the sudden growth of mushdepiction of ciliated
rooms in a ring, which they called a “fairy
protozoa, by Rudolf
Leuckart.
ring” (Fig. 20.3A). The mushrooms actually arise as fruiting bodies from the tips
of fungal hyphae (filaments of cells) that
propagate from a single spore and extend
radially underground.
In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, microscopists came to recognize
microscopic forms of fungi such as filamentous hyphae
and unicellular yeasts. Other unicellular life-forms, such as
amebas and paramecia, were motile and appeared more like
microscopic animals. These animal-like organisms were
called protozoa (singular, protozoan) (Fig. 20.3B). The
cellular dimensions of protozoa were typically ten- to a hundredfold larger than those of bacteria, and their form and
motility offered intriguing subjects for observation. So did
single-celled phototrophs such as diatoms and dinoflagellates, which were called algae (singular, alga). Algae were
thought of as unicellular plants, although simple multicelB.
lular algae were known. The unicellular and microscopic
Nucleus

Mitochondrion

THE MBLWHOI LIBRARY

HTTP://WWW.UGAURBANAG.COM/CONTENT/FAIRY-RING

GREGORY P. HENDERSON, LU GAN, AND GRANT J. JENSEN. 3-D ULTRASTRUCTURE
OF O. TAURI. PLOS ONE. 2007; 2(8): E749. 2007 AUGUST 15.

A.

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

Primary algae and green plants
Protists
Fungi and animals
Secondary algae

Viridiplantae:
Plants and primary
algae

Eu

Rhizaria:
Amebas with
filamentous
pseudopods

ae
e
algae
alg
a
g
l
phyte
hyte
te a
p
Charo
o
as
c
phy
u
a
eb
l
oro
G
Chl
am
id
ph
gly

*

■

s
oecid
Bicos
tes
Oomyce
Diatoms
Brown
Opalinids Labyrin
algae
thulids Mo
re al
Cryptoph
gae
ytes
Hapto
phytes
Ja
Acra
ko
sid s
bid
lime
s
mold
Eu
s
g
len
Try
o
ids
pa
no
so
me
s

*

*

*

*

ma

*

s

Metamonada:
Protists lacking
mitochondria

*

nia

Root:
Proposed link
to Bacteria
and Archaea

Heterokonta:
Protists with
dissimilar flagella

ish

Opisthokonta:
Animals; true fungi;
microsporidia

s
an
ex I
l
p
m pI
ico grou
p
A ne
i
ar
M

Le

Mi
cro An
sp ima
ori ls
dia
Fun
gi

*

*

s
ad
on
om salids
pl
Di raba
s
Pa ortamonad
Ret
Oxymonads

Fo
Cer
ra
m
com
ini
Chlo
ona
fe
rara
ra
chni ds
ns
oph
ytes
Radio
larians
Amoebozoa:
Lobos
Amebas; slime
e ame
bas
molds
Dictyostelid slime molds
s
ld
mo
s
ial slime
mold
Plasmod
slime obionts
d
li
e
l
st
Pe
Proto
tes
ella
g
fla
no
oa
Ch

Alveolata:
Protists with
cortical alveoli
Ciliates
Marin
e
Din group I
ofla
gel
late
s

PART 4

Lan
d pl
inop
a
hyte nts
alga
Re
e
da
lga
e

■

Pras

776

Discoba:
Protists having
mitochondria with
discoid cristae

FIGURE 20.4

■ Eukaryotic phylogeny. A phylogenetic tree of major clades based on DNA sequence data. Dotted lines denote emerging
little-known taxa. Green asterisks denote secondary algae whose ancestor engulfed a primary alga with chloroplast. Gray branches indicate
less certain position. Source: Modified from Sandra L. Baldauf. 2003. Science 300:1703.

from animals and plants (Fig. 20.4). In the terminology
used today:
■

Protist refers to single-celled and colonial eukaryotes
other than fungi. Protists include many diverse clades of
algae and protozoa.

■

Protozoa are protists that are single-celled heterotrophs.
They include environmental consumers, as well as medically important parasites such as Giardia.

The algae include two major kinds. Those of the first
kind are derived from a single endosymbiotic event and
are closely related to green plants. These algae are called
primary algae (Viridiplantae in Fig. 20.4). By contrast,
various groups of heterotrophic protists later incorporated
algae in a second event of symbiogenesis. These are secondary algae (green asterisks in Fig. 20.4).

Note:

Medical textbooks also cover invertebrate animal parasites such as worms and mites as eukaryotic agents of disease,
although they are not considered microbes.

Challenges for Classification

Classifying eukaryotes presents a challenge, for several
reasons. Complex eukaryotic cells frequently lose structures through reductive (degenerative) evolution. Thus,

for example, a clade originally defined by possession of flagella often includes members that lack flagella. In addition,
superficially similar forms of organisms have evolved independently in distantly related taxa; this is called convergent
evolution. For example, the “water molds” that grow on
aquarium fish superficially resemble fungi, but they actually
evolved in a clade that includes brown algae and diatoms.
Another challenge for classification is the size and complexity of eukaryotic genomes, which has delayed the
completion of genome sequences. Eukaryotic genomes
are typically severalfold larger than those of bacteria and
archaea, and 50%–90% of their DNA consists of noncoding sequences. Thus, eukaryotic genomes take longer to
sequence and are more challenging to annotate than those
of prokaryotes.
Furthermore, the evolution of eukaryotes includes multiple events of endosymbiosis, in which an engulfed cell
evolved into an essential organelle. An endosymbiotic
incorporation of a proteobacterium by the ancestor of all
eukaryotes gave rise to mitochondria. Later, incorporation
of a cyanobacterium by the ancestor of plants and algae
gave rise to chloroplasts. Much later, several lineages of
protists took up chloroplast-bearing algae, which now show
varying stages of evolution as organelles.
A consensus view of eukaryotic phylogeny (Fig. 20.4)
is based on DNA sequence comparison, protein trees, and

CHAPTER 20

the appearance of specific gene fusions and deletions. The
distinct clades of protists include amebas and slime molds
(Amoebozoa); amebas with needlelike pseudopods (Rhizaria); ciliates and dinoflagellates (Alveolata); oomycetes,

■

EUKARYOTIC DIVERSITY

■

777

brown algae, and diatoms (Heterokonta); and other groups,
such as Metamonada.
We will now look at key traits of each major group.
Table 20.1 summarizes representative clades of

TABLE 20.1*Eukaryotic Microbial Diversity* (Expanded Table Appears in Appendix 2)
Opisthokonta (fungi and metazoan animals). Single flagellum
on reproductive cells. Includes multicellular animals.
Metazoa (animals). Multicellular organisms with motile cells
and body parts. Includes colonial animals, both invertebrates and
vertebrates. Homo sapiens.
Choanoflagellata. Single flagellum and collar of microvilli.
Resemble sponge choanocytes. Possible link to common ancestor
of multicellular animals.
Eumycota (fungi). Cells form hyphae with cell walls of chitin.
Ascomycota. Fruiting bodies form asci containing haploid
ascospores. Includes opportunistic pathogens and breadmaking yeasts. Penicillium, Aspergillus, Saccharomyces
cerevisiae, Stachybotrys. Lichens are a mutualism between
an ascomycete and green algae (Trebouxia) or cyanobacteria
(Nostoc).
Basidiomycota. Basidiospores form primary and secondary
mycelia; some generate mushrooms. May be edible
(Lycoperdon) or toxic (Amanita). Plant pathogens (Ustilago
maydis causes corn smut). Human pathogens (Cryptococcus
neoformans).
Chytridiomycota. Motile zoospores with a single flagellum.
Saprophytes or anaerobic rumen fungi. Allomyces. Frog
pathogens (Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis), bovine rumen
digestive endosymbionts (Neocallomastix).
Glomeromycota. Mutualists of plant roots, forming arbuscular
mycorrhizae, filamentous networks that share nutrients with and
among diverse plants.
Microsporidia. Single-celled parasites that inject a spore through
a tube into a host cell, causing microsporidiosis. Encephalitozoon
species. Commonly infect AIDS patients.
Zygomycota. Sexual hyphae (1N) grow toward each other and
fuse to form the zygote (zygospore). Saprophytes or insect
parasites. Some form mycorrhizae.
Viridiplantae (primary endosymbiotic algae and plants).
Includes green algae and multicellular land plants. Chloroplasts
arose from a primary endosymbiont.
Charophyta. Multicellular algae with rhizoids that adhere to
sediment. Spirogyra.
Chlorophyta (green algae). Chlorophyll a confers green color.
Inhabit upper layer of water.
• Unicellular with paired flagella. Chlamydomonas, Volvox
(colonial).
• Multicellular. Ulva grow in sheets; Cymopolia forms calcified
stalks with filaments.
Glaucophyta. Unicellular algae whose chloroplasts have
peptidoglycan.
• Picoeukaryotes. Ostreococcus and Micromonas are unicellular
algae.
• Siphonous algae. Caulerpa species consist of a single cell with
multiple nuclei, growing to indefinite size.
*Bulleted terms are representative groups within the phylum.

Rhodophyta (red algae). Phycoerythrin obscures chlorophyll,
colors the algae red. Absorption of blue-green light enables
colonization of deeper waters. Porphyra forms sheets edible by
humans; Mesophyllum is a coralline alga, hardened by calcium
carbonate crust; resembles coral.
Amoebozoa (amebas and slime molds). Lobe-shaped (lobose)
pseudopods driven by sol-gel transition of actin filaments.
Amebas. Unicellular. No microtubules to define shape. Life cycle is
primarily asexual. Predators in soil or water. Giant free-living
amebas (Amoeba proteus); parasites (Entamoeba histolytica).
Mycetozoa. Slime molds. Cellular slime molds (Dictyostelium). Upon
starvation, amebas aggregate to form a fruiting body, which produces
spores. Plasmodial slime molds (Physarum polycephalum) undergo
meiosis, producing spores that germinate to ameboid gametes.
Rhizaria (amebas with filament-shaped pseudopods).
Filament-shaped (filose) pseudopods. Some species have a
test (shell) of silica or other inorganic materials.
Possess flagella or pseudopods (Cercozoa); form spiral tests
(Foraminifera); form thin pseudopods called filopodia (Radiolaria).
Alveolata (having cortical alveoli). Cortex contains flattened
vesicles called alveoli, reinforced below by lateral microtubules.
Ciliophora. Common aquatic predators. Undergo sexual exchange
by conjugation, in which micronuclei are exchanged, then
regenerate macronuclei. Covered with cilia (Paramecium); mouth
ringed with cilia (Vorticella); suctorians (Acineta).
Dinoflagellata. Secondary or tertiary endosymbiont algae, from
engulfment of primary or secondary algae. Cortical alveoli contain
stiff plates. Pair of flagella, one wrapped around the cell. Freeliving aquatic (Peridinium); zooxanthellae, endosymbionts of coral
(Symbiodinium).
Apicomplexa (formerly Sporozoa). Parasites with complex life
cycles. Lack flagella or cilia; possess apical complex for invasion of
host cells. Vestigial chloroplasts. Plasmodium falciparum causes
malaria; Toxoplasma gondii causes feline-transmitted toxoplasmosis;
Cryptosporidium parvum is a waterborne opportunistic parasite.
Heterokonta. Paired flagella of dissimilar form, one much
shorter than the other.
Diatoms (Bacillariophyceae); kelps (Phaeophyceae); golden algae
(Chrysophyceae); coccolithophores (Prymnesiophyceae); water
molds (Oomycetes).
Discoba (having disk-shaped cristae). Disk-shaped cristae of
mitochondria.
Free-living flagellates (Euglenida); trypanosomes (Trypanosoma
brucei, sleeping sickness; T. cruzi, Chagas’ disease).
Metamonada (vestigial mitochondria). Parasitic or symbiotic
flagellates. Mitochondria and Golgi degenerated through
evolution.
Human intestinal parasites (Giardia intestinalis, or G. lamblia);
symbionts of termite gut (Pyrsonympha).

778

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY
EF-1𝛂 peptide sequence alignment
Insertion within EF gene

197

Opisthokonts

Animals

Fungi

Homo
Drosophila
Acmaea
Caenorhabditis
Hydra
Anemonia
Sordaria
Trichoderma
Histoplasma
Schizosacch.
Candida

Microsporidians Glugea
Plants
Protists

Triticum
Arabidopsis
Dictyostelium
Plasmodium
Entamoeba
Trypanosoma
Euglena
Giardia

265

P I S GWNGD N M L E P S A N – M P W F K G W K V T R K DG – – – – – N A S G T T L L E A L D C I L P P T R P T D K P L R L P L
P I S GWHGD N M L E P S T N – M P W F K G W E V G R K E G – – – – – N A DG K T L V D A L D A I L P P A R P T D K A L R L P L
P I S G Y NGD N M L E K S P N – M P W Y K G W K V E Q K D D K GN A S T V T G D T L T Q A L D S I Q P P K R P T D K A L R L P L
P I S G F NGD N M L E V S S N – M P W F K G W A V E R K E G – – – – – N A S G K T L L E A L D S I I P P Q R P T D R P L R L P L
P V S GWHGD N M I E P S P N – M S W Y K G W E V E Y K D T G – – – – K H T G K T L L E A L D N I P L P A R P S S K P L R L P L
P I S GWHGD N M L E K S D K – M P WWNG F E L F N K S QG – – – – S K T G T T L F DG L D D I N V P S R P T D K A L R L P L
P I S G F NGD N M L E A S T N – C P W Y K G W E K E T K A G – – – – – K S T G
P I S G F NGD N M L T P S T N – C P W Y K G W E K E T K A G – – – – – K F T G

K T L L E A I DA I EQP K R P T D K P L R L P L
K T L L E A I DS I E P P KRP T DK P L R L P L

P I S G F E GD N M I E P S P N – C T W Y K G WN K E T A S G – – – – – K S S G

K T L L DA I DA I E PP T RP TDKP L R L P L

P V S G F QGD NM I E P T T N – M P W Y QG WQ K E T K A G – – – – – V V K G K T L L E A I D S I E P P A R P T D K P L R L P L
P I S GWNGD N M I E P S T N – C P W Y K G W E K E T K S G – – – – – K V T G

K T L L EA I DA I E PP T RP TDKP L R L P L

P I S G Y L G I N I V E K G D K – F E W F K G W K P V – S G A – – – – – GD S I

F T L EGA L N SQ I P P P R P I D K P L RMP I

P I S G F E GD N M I E R S T N – L D W Y K G

– – – – – – – ––––––––––

P T L L E A L DQ I N E P K R P S D K P L R L P L

P I S G F E GD N M I E R S T N – L D W Y K G

– – – – – – – ––––––––––

P T L L E A L DQ I N E P K R P S D K P L R L P L

P
P
P
P

–
–
–
–

RT
RT
PT
PT

I
I
I
I

S GWNGD N M L
S G F E GD N L I
S G F QGD N M I
S GWQGD N M I

E R SD K – M EWY KG
E K SD K – T PWY KG
E P S T N – M PWY KG
E K S E K – M PWY KG

–
–
–
–

–
–
–
–

–
–
–
–

–
–
–
–

–
–
–
–

–
–
–
–

–
–
–
–

–––––––––
–––––––––
–––––––––
–––––––––

L
L
L
L

L E A L DA I V E P K R PHD K P L R I P L
I E A L D T NQ P P K R P Y D K P L R I P L
I GA L D S V T P P E R P V D K P L R L P L
L E A L DM L E P P V R P S D K P L R L P L

P I S GWNGD N M I E A S E N – M GW Y K G

– – – – – – – ––––––––––

L T L I GA L DN L E P P K R P S D K P L R L P L

P T S GW T GD N I M E K S D K – M P W Y K G

– – – – – – – ––––––––––

P C L I D A I DG L K A P K R P T D K P L R L P I

FIGURE 20.5 ■ Alignment of peptide sequences for EF-1 reveals insertion in opisthokont species. A DNA insertion encoding 11–17 amino acid residues appears in the EF-1α sequence of animals, fungi, and microsporidians (known collectively as opisthokonts) but
not in plants or most protists. This finding suggests that opisthokonts have a common ancestor that branched early from the eukaryotes and
diverged later to animals and fungi. Source: Modified from Sandra L. Baldauf. 2003. Science 300:1703.

microbial eukaryotes. For a more extensive table, see
Appendix 2.

Opisthokonts: Animals and Fungi

Where do humans and other multicellular animals fit
into this taxonomy? The position of animals (“metazoa”) among the eukaryotic microbial clades is of interest
because it suggests which contemporary microbes most
closely resemble our own cells. The degree of relatedness
can help define microbial model systems for probing key
questions of human cell biology. For example, the baker’s yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae shares so much of its
genetic machinery with humans that it provides a model
for cancer, cell-trafficking defects, and even the basis of
human aging.
As we saw in Chapter 17, the first measure of species relatedness is based on DNA sequences encoding
ribosomal RNA, particularly small-subunit rRNA. For
eukaryotes, however, rRNA sequences yield ambiguous results, in part because of differing rates of change
among different clades. So researchers have searched
the genomes for stronger clues to relative divergence—
that is, which clade diverged earliest from the others.
A particularly strong clue would be the appearance of a
gene insertion or deletion unique to a particular clade.
Such a sequence indicates that all species containing the
gene insertion or deletion must have diverged after their

common ancestor branched from the outgroup (most distantly related taxon).
Surprisingly, genomic analysis relates animals more
closely to fungi (such as yeasts) than to motile microbial eukaryotes (such as paramecia or amebas). The true
fungi, or Eumycota, are heterotrophs, either singlecelled or growing in nonmotile filaments of cells called
hyphae. Nevertheless, animals and fungi share several
key gene insertions and deletions, as discovered by Sandra Baldauf and colleagues. Baldauf focused on a short
sequence insertion in a key gene encoding a protein translation factor, elongation factor 1α (EF-1α) (Fig. 20.5).
The inserted DNA, encoding 12 amino acids, appears
in all sequenced genomes of animals and fungi and is
absent from all plants and most protists. It is present in
organisms, such as microsporidians, that were previously
considered protists but whose genomes now indicate classification under fungi. The EF-1α gene sequence, as well
as several others, supports the grouping of animals and
fungi (including microsporidians) together in one clade
(see Fig. 20.4).
Animal and fungal cells also share a structural feature distinguishing them from protists: the presence of an
unpaired flagellum. Both animals and fungi include species whose life cycle has a uniflagellar stage, in contrast to
other microbial eukaryotes whose flagella are paired (for
example, euglenas). In the case of humans, the uniflagellar
stage is the spermatozoan. Similarly, some species of fungi

CHAPTER 20

■

EUKARYOTIC DIVERSITY

■

779

A. Choanoflagellate
Pores

COURTESY OF D. MORAN

Collar

Water
flow

Spicule

Nucleus
Flagellum
5 µm

Choanocyte

Porocyte

Amebocyte

B. Sponge body wall

FIGURE 20.6

■ Choanoflagellates resemble sponge choanocytes. A. A choanoflagellate, Acanthocorbis unguiculata. B. Sponge choanocytes resemble choanoflagellates. Within the sponge, choanocytes assist the circulation of water and the uptake of nutrients.

generate uniflagellar reproductive cells called zoospores.
As a whole, the clade including single-flagellum members is
termed “opisthokont,” based on the Greek words meaning
“backward-pointing pole,” because the flagellum points
backward like an oar.
Among opisthokonts, the microbes that diverged most
recently from animals (600 million years ago) appear to
be the choanoflagellates. Genetic studies of choanoflagellates reveal several genes found only in animals. The prefix
“choano-” (meaning “funnel”) refers to the collar of filaments surrounding the flagellum. The collared cells of
choanoflagellates closely resemble the choanocyte cells of
colonial sponges, an ancient form of animal (Fig. 20.6).
Furthermore, choanoflagellates form colonies that crudely
resemble the colonial structure of sponges. Thus, choanoflagellates may represent a “missing link” between animals
and the microbial eukaryotes.

Note:

Eukaryotic flagella are whiplike organelles composed
of microtubules and surrounded by a membrane; their action is
powered by ATP along the entire filament. Distinguish them from
bacterial and archaeal flagella, which are rotary helical filaments
composed entirely of protein subunits; their rotation is powered at
the base by proton motive force.

Fungi (Eumycota) consist of cells with chitinous cell
walls that grow in chains called hyphae (singular, hypha).
Fungi range from single-celled organisms, such as yeasts, to
complex multicellular forms such as mushrooms. The deepest-branching clade of fungi, Chytridiomycota, produces
the uniflagellar zoospores that define opisthokonts. Other
fungi, however, generate nonmotile reproductive cells, a
result of reductive evolution.
Several taxa that historically were grouped with fungi
(for example, slime molds) are now classified genetically
as protists. Slime molds generate populations of cells that
migrate into a unified structure called a fruiting body to
make reproductive cells. Slime molds are now grouped with
amebas (Amoebozoa, discussed in Section 20.4). Water
molds, which are plant and animal pathogens of the class
Oomycetes, are now recognized as heterokont protists (see
eTopic 20.1).

Algae Evolved by Engulfing Phototrophs

Algae are commonly defined as single-celled plants and
simple multicellular plants lacking true stems, roots,
and leaves. Algal cells contain chloroplasts, membraneenclosed organelles of photosynthesis that evolved from a

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

A. Green algae and red algae:
primary algae

B. Cryptophyte algae:
secondary algae
Membrane derived
from engulfed algal
cell membrane

Primary-host
nucleus

Thylakoids

Chloroplast
outer
membrane

Cryptophyte

Nucleomorph from
engulfed primary alga
Cryptophyte
nucleus

Thylakoids

FIGURE 20.7

C.

Chloroplast evolution: primary and secondary endosymbiosis. A. Green algae (Chlorophyta) and red

Chrysophyte
5 μm

■

algae (Rhodophyta) contain chloroplasts (green) that evolved from
engulfed cyanobacteria. B. Cryptophyte algae contain chloroplast
(green), vestigial primary-host cytoplasm (yellow), and vestigial
nucleus or nucleomorph (brown) from the engulfed primary endosymbiont. C. Cryptophyte and chrysophyte algae from Antarctic
Lake Fryxell.

cyanobacterium (Fig. 20.7). In Earth’s biosphere, algae
plus bacterial phototrophs feed all marine and freshwater
ecosystems, producing the majority of oxygen and biomass
available for Earth’s consumers.
How did ancestral algae get their chloroplasts? The
“green plants” (Viridiplantae) include primary algae
descended from a common ancestor containing a chloroplast. The chloroplast evolved by endosymbiosis between an
ancient protist and a cyanobacterium (discussed in Chapter 17). In primary algae, the chloroplast is enclosed by two
membranes (Fig. 20.7A): the inner membrane (from the
ancestral phototroph’s cell membrane) and the outer membrane (from the host cell membrane as it enclosed its prey).
Both green algae (chlorophytes) and red algae (rhodophytes) are primary algae. Their chloroplasts diverged from
their common ancestor to utilize pigments absorbing different ranges of the light spectrum.
Surprisingly, several other taxa traditionally considered to be algae evolved through a secondary endosymbiosis with a second protist host. The symbiotic history of
these secondary algae is most evident in the cryptophytes
(Fig. 20.7B), which still retain a vestigial nucleus, or
nucleomorph, derived from the engulfed alga. In secondary algae, the chloroplast is surrounded by two extra membranes, one from the primary algal cell membrane and one
from the secondary host. Other secondary algae include
the chrysophytes, such as kelps and diatoms. The dinoflagellates, of the protist clade Alveolata, are secondary or
tertiary algae, descended from a flagellate that consumed
one or more types of algae. Dinoflagellates also engage in

“kleptoplasty,” or “chloroplast stealing,” in which the chloroplast of a digested prey is retained long enough to derive
some photosynthetic energy, but ultimately consumed. The
variety of endosymbiosis among protists provides clues as
to how the original chloroplast evolved within the ancestral algae.

Note:

“Algae” may refer to primary algae, or “true algae,” as
well as secondary algae that derive from protist clades. Fungi (the
“true fungi,” or Eumycota) are opisthokonts. Several fungus-like
organisms have been reclassified within protist clades.

Protists Include Many Divergent Clades

The protists actually include several distantly related categories of eukaryotes (see Table 20.1). All protists are
heterotrophs, commonly predators or parasites, although
many also conduct photosynthesis as primary or secondary algae. Protists are important producers and consumers in marine, freshwater, and soil food webs. In ecology,
phototrophic protists are termed “phytoplankton” and
heterotrophs are termed “zooplankton,” although many,
in fact, are “mixotrophs” that act as both producers and
consumers.
Amebas are unicellular organisms of highly variable
shape that form pseudopods, locomotory extensions of
cytoplasm enclosed by the cell membrane. Their size can
reach several millimeters, and they can eat small invertebrates. There are two major groups of amebas: Amoebozoa and Rhizaria (see Table 20.1). The Amoebozoa, the
most familiar kind of amebas, have lobed pseudopods, pseudopods that extend lobes of cytoplasm through cytoplasmic streaming. Most lobed amebas are free-living in aquatic
habitats, but some cause human diseases such as dysentery.
Still other kinds of lobed amebas are cellular slime molds,
in which individual amebas converge to form a fruiting
body. Amebas of the second group, Rhizaria, have thin,

WEI LI AND RACHAEL MORGAN-KISS, MIAMI
UNIVERSITY OF OHIO

780

CHAPTER 20

filamentous pseudopods, often radially arranged like a star,
as in heliozoan amebas. Some Rhizaria, such as the foraminiferans, form inorganic shells called tests. Fossil foraminiferan tests are common in rock formations derived from
ancient seas. Foraminiferan shells formed the White Cliffs
of Dover in Britain and the stone used to build the Egyptian pyramids.

■

■

781

single unpaired flagellum (if any). Flagellated heterokonts
possess two flagella of unequal length and different structure. They include many voracious zooplankton. Other heterokonts include the oomycetes, or water molds (formerly
classified with fungi), as well as diatoms and kelps (secondary endosymbiotic algae with chloroplasts). Diatoms are
single cells with unique bipartite shells that fit together like
a petri dish. The shells of diatoms form an infinite variety of different patterns for different species. Kelps, also
known as brown algae, extend multicellular sheets floating
at the water’s surface.
The Discoba include free-living protists such as euglenas,
as well as parasites showing extensive evolutionary reduction. Most Discoba have mitochondria with distinctive
disk-shaped cristae (membrane pockets). Parasitic Discoba
include the trypanosomes that cause sleeping sickness and
Chagas’ disease. A related clade, Metamonada, includes the
waterborne parasite Giardia intestinalis (G. lamblia). In
metamonads the mitochondria have lost their genomes and
degenerated into mitosomes (discussed in Section 20.6).

Note:

DNA sequencing led to reclassification of the filamentous amebas as Rhizaria (formerly Cercozoa). “Cercozoa” now
denotes a subgroup under Rhizaria.

Alveolates (Alveolata) include ciliated protists (ciliates), dinoflagellates, and apicomplexans. An example is
the ciliated protist Paramecium (Fig. 20.8A). Alveolates
are known for their complex outer covering, or cortex.
The cortex contains networks of vesicles called cortical
alveoli (Fig. 20.8B). Alveoli store calcium ions, and in
some species protective plates form from them. Organisms
equipped with paired flagella or cilia are known as flagellates and ciliates, respectively. Flagella (singular, flagellum) and cilia (singular, cilium) are essentially equivalent
organelles composed of microtubules and enveloped by
the cell membrane (Fig. 20.8C). Cilia are shorter than
flagella and more numerous, and usually cover a broad
surface. Alveolata also includes a major group of parasites
whose major forms lack flagella, the apicomplexans. A
well-known apicomplexan parasite is Plasmodium falciparum, which causes malaria.
Heterokonts (Heterokonta) are named for their pairs of
differently shaped flagella (see Table 20.1). Heterokonts
are thus distinguished from opisthokonts, which possess a

Emerging Eukaryotes

Are there still eukaryotes that we haven’t yet discovered?
Genes from natural communities continually reveal new
species of microbial eukaryotes in previously unknown
divisions. Many of the new isolates are single cells as small
as bacteria, designated nanoeukaryotes (3–10 μm) and
picoeukaryotes (0.5–3 μm).
Genetic analysis shows that similar miniaturized eukaryotes branch deeply from all groups in the phylogenetic tree,

B. Cortex of a Paramecium

A. Paramecium (an alveoate)

EUKARYOTIC DIVERSITY

C. Cilium
Cilium

FIGURE 20.8

■

Alveolus

COURTESY OF G. BRUGEROLLE.

50 µm

COURTESY OF G. BRUGEROLLE.

Cilia
Cell
membrane

Central
microtubules
Outer
microtubule
doublet

0.5 µm

The cortex of an alveolate contains alveoli. A. The alveolate

Paramecium is covered with cilia. B. Cortex of Paramecium tetraurelia with cilium and
alveoli (thin section, TEM). C. A cilium is composed of doublet microtubules enveloped
in cell membrane. Flagellar structure is similar, but usually much longer.

Plasma
membrane
Basal body
(structurally identical
to centriole)

782

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

potentially doubling the known number of major eukaryotic
taxa. Furthermore, our metagenomic analysis reveals eukaryotes in environments previously believed to be restricted to
bacteria and archaea, such as anaerobic submarine sediments,
and the hyperacidic Tinto River in Spain. In every new habitat tested, new deep-branching clades of eukaryotes emerge,
with new implications for ecology and global cycling (discussed in Chapters 21 and 22). The wealth of new genomic
data is reshaping our understanding of the domain Eukarya.

filaments called mycorrhizae extend the root systems of
most plants, forming a nutritional “internet” that interconnects the plant community (discussed in Chapter 21).
Mycorrhizae may have inspired the fictional underground
tree network depicted in the film Avatar (2009).
Within the ruminant digestive tract, fungi ferment plant
materials. On the other hand, pathogenic fungi infect
plants and animals, and they contribute to the death of
immunocompromised human patients. Still other fungi
produce antibiotics such as penicillin, as well as food products such as wine and cheeses (discussed in Chapter 16).

To Summarize
■

■
■

■

■

Opisthokonta includes true fungi (Eumycota) and multicellular animals (Metazoa), as well as certain kinds of
protists.

Shared Traits of Fungi

Viridiplantae includes green plants and primary algae.

■

Protist groups include Amoebozoa, the unshelled amebas with lobe-shaped pseudopods; Rhizaria, the filopodial amebas; Alveolata, ciliates and flagellates with
complex cortical structure; Heterokonta, the kelps, diatoms, and flagellates with nonequivalent paired flagella;
and Discoba and Metamonada, primarily parasites.

Absorptive nutrition. Most fungi cannot ingest particulate food, as do protists, because their cell walls cannot
part and re-form, as do the flexible pellicles of amebas
and ciliates. Instead they secrete digestive enzymes and
then absorb the broken-down molecules from their
environment.

■

Hyphae. Most fungi grow by extending multinucleate
cell filaments called hyphae (Fig. 20.9A). As a hypha
extends, its nuclei divide mitotically without cell division, generating a multinucleate cell. Later, septa may
form to partition the hypha into cells. Hyphae grow
by cytoplasmic extension and branching. A branched
mass of extending hyphae is called a mycelium (plural,
mycelia).

■

Cell walls contain chitin. Chitin is an acetylated
amino-polysaccharide of immense tensile strength,
stronger than steel (Fig. 20.9B). Its strength derives
from multiple hydrogen bonds between fibers. Chitinous cell walls enable fungi to penetrate plant or animal
cells, including tough materials such as wood. Inhibitors
of chitin synthesis, such as the polyoxins and nikkomycins, are used as antibiotics against fungal infections.

Most fungi share these distinctive traits:

Many protists are phototrophs as well as heterotrophs, based on secondary or tertiary endosymbiosis
derived from engulfed algae.
Metagenomic analysis reveals new clades of microbial
eukaryotes. New kinds of microbial eukaryotes emerge
from all habitats.

20.2

Fungi

Fungi provide essential support for all communities of multicellular organisms. Fungi recycle the biomass of wood
and leaves, including substances such as lignin, which other
organisms may be unable to digest. Underground fungal
A. Mycelium

B. Chitin

Hypha

O HO

H3C

HOCH2

C O
NH

O

OH

CH2
O
HO

H3C

O
NH
C O

n

10 µm

FIGURE 20.9

■

Fungi grow hyphae with cell walls of chitin. A. Fungal hyphae extend and form branches, generating a mycelium.

B. Chitin consists of beta-linked polymers of N-acetylglucosamine.

CHAPTER 20

■

Membranes contain ergosterol. Ergosterol is an analog
of cholesterol not found in animals or plants. Ergosterol
is so distinctive to fungi that its presence can be used
as a measure of fungal content in plant material such as
grains. Inhibitors of ergosterol biosynthesis, such as the
triazoles, are used to treat fungal infections. Another
antifungal agent, nystatin, specifically binds ergosterol
and forms membrane pores that leak K+ ions.

Fungal Hyphae Absorb Nutrients

How do fungal hyphae grow and form colonies of “mold”?
A fungal hypha expands at the tip. Cytoplasmic expansion
A.

Golgi

THE EMBO JOURNAL (1997) 16, 3025–3034

Vesicles

Mitochondria

■

EUKARYOTIC DIVERSITY

■

783

is driven by turgor pressure against the chitin cell wall—
the force that enables fungi to penetrate tough materials
such as wood. Fungal hyphae can extend as fast as half a
centimeter per hour.
The cytoplasmic turgor pressure is regulated by uptake of
hydrogen ions in exchange for potassium ions (Fig. 20.10).
Loss of turgor pressure—for example, by puncture of the
hypha—leads to accelerated K+ uptake and water influx,
restoring turgor. Molecules that cause loss of K+, such as
nystatin, serve as antifungal agents.
At the hypha’s growing tip, turgor pressure pushes the
cell membrane forward, and the membrane expands by
incorporating vesicles generated from the endoplasmic
reticulum (as seen in Fig. 20.10A). The ER and mitochondria store Ca 2+, whose release triggers vesicle fusion with
the plasma membrane. The fused vesicles provide phospholipids and proteins to extend the membrane surface area as
the cytoplasm expands.
Just behind the hypha’s growing tip lies its absorption
zone (Fig. 20.10B). The absorption zone takes in nutrients from the surrounding medium, such as the cytoplasm
of an invaded animal cell. Behind the absorption zone,
the older part of the hypha collects and stores nutrients.
As the storage zone expands, the nucleus divides multiple
times. Septa form across the hypha, partly compartmentalizing the cytoplasm. As the older part of the hypha ages, its
tubular form begins to lyse, releasing cell constituents. This

1 µm

B.
Transport of glucose
and other nutrients

Reactions
within
hypha

Glycogen
Lipid
Amino acids
Polyphosphate

ATP synthase spends
ATP to drive
H+
H+ export.

ATP
1. Cytoplasm
moves.

Structure
of hypha

K+ uptake restores
lost turgor pressure.

ADP

2. Ca2+ released;
induces vesicle fusion.

Vacuole
Nucleus

Storage zone

K+
3. Turgor pressure
drives hyphal extension.

4. Vesicles fuse;
expand tip
membrane.

Mitochondrion

Absorption zone

Vesicles

Apical growth zone

FIGURE 20.10 ■ Cellular basis of hyphal extension. A. Section through the growing tip of a hypha (TEM). Vesicles collect at the tip,
where they fuse into the cell membrane, enabling extension. B. The absorption zone takes in nutrients. Cytoplasm moves toward the tip of the
apical growth zone, driven by turgor pressure. Turgor pressure is regulated by H+ export and K+ uptake. Ca2+ released by the ER and mitochondria induces vesicles to fuse and to expand the plasma membrane at the growing tip.

784

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

aging part of the hypha is called the senescence zone (not
shown in the figure).
As hyphae grow, branches extend from their sides. The
hyphae branch and extend radially, forming the mycelium.
The mycelium forms the characteristic round, fuzzy colony
of a fungus or “mold.” On a substrate such as wood or agar,
mycelia grow in two forms: aerial mycelium, which extends
out into the air; and surface mycelium, which grows into
and along the surface of the substrate.

Unicellular Fungi

Despite the advantages of multinucleate hyphae, some
fungi are unicellular, known as yeasts. Yeast forms evolved
in many different fungal taxa. The yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae (Fig. 20.11A) is used to leaven bread and to brew
wine and beer (for more on food microbiology, see Chapter 16). S. cerevisiae reproduces by budding, in which mitosis of the mother cell generates daughter cells of smaller
size. The mother cell acquires a bud scar where the smaller

B. Yeast alternation of generations

A. Saccharomyces cerevisiae

Mating
(cell fusion and
nuclear fusion)

Bud scar

EYE OF SCIENCE/SCIENCE SOURCE

Bud

Shmoos
in contact

2 µm

Vegetative
cell
(n)

Budding
cell

Ascus with
ascopores

Mated shmoos
(zygote) budding

n 2n
(Haploid) (Diploid)

Vegetative
cell (2n)

Budding
cell

n 2n
Sporulation
and meiosis

C. Yeast as a model system
Vesicular trafficking
and fusion

Lysosomal and
peroxisomal function

Apoptosis
(programmed cell
death)

Lipid biology
Cell cycle

G2

Protein folding, quality control,
and degradation

Baker’s yeast,
Saccharomyces cerevisiae,
serves as a model for many
human cell processes.

FIGURE 20.11

M
S

G1 G0

Mitochondria and
oxidative stress

Yeasts are nonmycelial fungi. A. Saccharomyces cerevisiae, or baker’s yeast, reproduces by budding (SEM). Upper cell
shows six bud scars. B. In the life cycle of S. cerevisiae, haploid cells reproduce many generations by budding. C. S. cerevisiae serves as a model
for human cell processes. Source: Part C modified from Vikram Khurana and Susan Lindquist. 2010. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 11:436–449.
■

CHAPTER 20

one pinched off (Fig. 20.11A). After generating a limited
number of buds, the mother cell senesces and dies. Thus,
yeasts provide a unicellular model system for the process of
aging.
Other yeasts, such as Candida albicans, are important
members of human vaginal f lora but can cause opportunistic infections. Some are important opportunistic
pathogens, occurring frequently in AIDS patients; for
example, Pneumocystis jirovecii (formerly P. carinii) is a
yeast-form ascomycete, whereas Cryptococcus neoformans
is a yeast-form basidiomycete (discussed shortly). Pathogens such as Candida albicans can grow either as single cells (yeast form) or as mycelia; because they exist
in two different forms, these are known as “dimorphic”
fungi. The yeast form grows normally in the mucosa, but
germination of mycelia leads to disease. A very different dimorphic fungal pathogen is Blastomyces dermatitidis, the cause of blastomycosis, a type of pneumonia.
B. dermatitidis forms a mycelium in culture and in soil
environments, but it grows as a yeast within the infected
lung.
Yeast as a model organism for research. The yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae is a model organism for research
in eukaryotic biology (Fig. 20.11C). Its cells grow rapidly, in haploid and diploid forms, and are amenable to
genetic recombination and transformation. The yeast
genome of 6,000 genes includes many human homologs,
such as the ras proto-oncogene (a gene involved in cancer). Often entire networks of proteins interacting in yeast
have human homologs; thus, S. cerevisiae has been called a
“single-celled human.” Susan Lindquist at the Whitehead
Institute for Biomedical Research uses yeast as a model
for brain neuronal diseases such as Alzheimer’s (Special
Topic 20.1).

Thought Question

20.1 Why would yeasts remain unicellular? What are the

■

EUKARYOTIC DIVERSITY

■

785

of generations allows an organism to respond genetically
to environmental change by reassorting its genes through
meiosis, and by recombining them through fertilization.
Gene reassortment and recombination provide new genotypes, some of which may increase survival in the changed
environment.
In baker’s yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae), haploid spores
divide and proliferate by mitosis. Under environmental signals such as starvation, mating factors induce the haploid
cells to differentiate into gamete forms called “shmoos”
(see Fig. 20.11B). Gametes of two different mating types
fuse, and their nuclei combine to form a zygote. In the diploid generation, the zygote divides mitotically, generating
a population of diploids that appear superficially similar
to haploid cells. Under stress, particularly desiccation, the
diploids undergo meiosis to reassort their genes for combinations that may better survive the changed environment.
Meiosis generates an ascus (plural, asci) that contains four
haploid spores.
Many fungi and protists undergo modified versions of
alternation of generations, utilizing a wide variety of haploid and diploid structures to accomplish essentially the
same genetic tasks. In many fungi, the haploid form predominates; for example, ascomycetes such as Aspergillus and Neurospora form mainly haploid mycelia. In some
fungi, no sexual reproduction has been observed, probably
because the inducing conditions are unknown. Species that
lack a known sexual cycle are called mitosporic fungi, also
known as “imperfect” fungi. Mitosporic species are found
in many different clades. An example is the famous Penicillium mold, an ascomycete, from which we discovered the
antibiotic penicillin.

Thought Question

20.2 Why would some fungi conduct asexual reproduction
under most conditions? What are the advantages and limitations of sexual reproduction?

relative advantages and limitations of hyphae?

Mycelia, Mushrooms, and Mycorrhizae
Yeast reproductive cycles. Some yeasts are asexual,

whereas others can undergo sexual alternation of generations (Fig. 20.11B). This life cycle alternates between
generation of a haploid population, with a single copy of
each chromosome (n), and a diploid population, with a diploid chromosome number (2n). The haploid form develops gametes to fertilize each other, making a 2n zygote.
After vegetative (nonsexual) divisions, the 2n form undergoes meiosis, regenerating the haploid form. (The process of meiosis is reviewed in eAppendix 2.) Alternation

Different species of fungi show vastly different forms, from
the familiar mushrooms (fruiting bodies that can weigh
several pounds) to the mycelia of pathogens and the symbiotic partners of algae in lichens. Major clades of fungi
include Chytridiomycota, Zygomycota, Ascomycota, and
Basidiomycota.

Note:

The major groups of fungi are also known by names with
the alternative suffix “-etes”: Chytridiomycetes, Zygomycetes,
Ascomycetes, Basidiomycetes.

786

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

SPECIAL TOPIC 20.1* * Yeast: A Single-Celled Human Brain?

FIGURE 1 ■ Susan Lindquist develops yeast models of
human disease.

Chytridiomycota: motile zoospores. The deepest-branch-

ing clade of fungi is Chytridiomycota (the chytrids), which
possess motile, flagellated reproductive forms called zoospores. The zoospore form has been lost by other fungi.
Chytrid species include bovine rumen inhabitants whose
hyphae penetrate tough plant material, facilitating digestion. An example is Neocallomastix (Fig. 20.12A). Unlike
most fungi, Neocallomastix is an obligate anaerobe whose

ntr
o
Ve
c

tor

co

n
tei
pro
st
Ye
a

Be

ta-

am

ylo

id

l

returns through endocytosis to the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) for trafficking—just as it does in a human cell. So what
happens to the yeast? The yeast grows more slowly because
beta-amyloid disrupts ER trafficking (Fig. 2). The controls—a
yeast protein expressed on a plasmid, and a plasmid vector
expressing no protein—grow normally.
The disruption of trafficking by beta-amyloid was consistent with its proposed role in Alzheimer’s disease. But to
strengthen the connection—and to reveal other parts of the
process—Lindquist used her yeast model to screen for yeast
proteins that could overcome beta-amyloid interference. So
she transformed her yeast model strain with a library of yeast

SEBASTIAN TREUSCH ET AL. 2011. SCIENCE 334:1241

© SAM OGDEN FOR NATURE

The yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae provides a model for
human diseases such as cancer because it shares so many
homologs of our genes. Most of these genes encode fundamental parts of cells, such as actin and cell growth regulators.
But of course the single-celled fungus lacks the differentiated parts and connectors of human cells such as neurons. So
yeast could not serve as a model for complex diseases of the
brain. Or could it?
Neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s can
result from disorders of cell function, such as lysosomal storage and degradation. A possible cause is that a protein called
beta-amyloid gets cleaved to a peptide that is secreted; the
secreted peptide returns to the cell by endocytosis. The endocytosed beta-amyloid peptide then interferes with intracellular trafficking by an unknown mechanism. To investigate the
mechanism of beta-amyloid toxicity, Susan Lindquist at the
Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research (Fig. 1) developed a yeast model.
First, Lindquist and her students constructed a yeast strain
that expresses beta-amyloid peptide from a plasmid. (We
describe methods to construct such strains in Chapter 12.)
In this yeast strain, the beta-amyloid gets secreted, but it

FIGURE 2

■

Yeast expresses human beta-amyloid peptide.

Yeast cultures were serially diluted (vertical direction) and
spread on agar to grow patches. A plasmid expressing beta-amyloid (left) causes slower growth (thinner patches) than a plasmid
expressing a normal yeast protein or no protein (vector control)
(middle and right, respectively).

mitochondria have evolved into hydrogenosomes, organelles that ferment carbohydrates in a pathway generating
H 2. Hydrogenosomes are a unique adaptation of certain
anaerobic fungi and protists.
Other chytrids are aerobic animal pathogens. Figure 20.12B shows the skin of a frog infected by the
chytridiomycete Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis. B. dendrobatidis has caused a widespread die-off of frogs in

CHAPTER 20

B. Yeast expresses beta-amyloid

EUKARYOTIC DIVERSITY

■

787

C. Yeast expresses
beta-amyloid + YAP1802

5 µm

SEBASTIAN TREUSCH ET AL. 2011. SCIENCE 334:1241

A. Control

■

FIGURE 3

■ Beta-amyloid disrupts traffic of yeast protein. A. A yeast protein fused to yellow fluorescent protein (YFP) is trafficked normally to the vacuole (fluorescence microscopy). B. Beta-amyloid expression interferes with transport. C. YAP1802 expression
restores transport. .

genes that were “overexpressed” (that is, expressed on a plasmid at levels severalfold greater than normal). She identified
23 suppressors, genes whose overexpression suppressed the
effect of beta-amyloid and restored normal yeast growth. The
suppressors also restored normal trafficking of a reporter
protein, a fluorescent YFP fusion protein expressed by the
yeast genome (Fig. 3). The control cells showed reporter protein fluorescence localized normally to the vacuole (Fig. 3A).
Beta-amyloid expression prevented trafficking to the vacuole
(Fig. 3B), but expression of the suppressor protein YAP1802
restored movement to the vacuole (Fig. 3C).
Are these suppressors of the yeast model relevant to
humans? Six of the suppressor genes turned out to have
homologs in the human genome already identified as possible risk factors for Alzheimer’s disease. The YAP1802 human
homolog is a protein called PICALM. Lindquist tested whether
PICALM overexpression could protect rat brain neurons from
beta-amyloid toxicity. She provided PICALM to the neurons by
expression on a lentiviral vector—that is, a gene therapy vector derived from HIV virus (discussed in Chapter 11). Remarkably, PICALM restored normal growth to neurons that had

Central and South America, in an epidemic associated with
global warming. The mycelium of B. dendrobatidis grows
within the frog skin, producing capsules full of diploid
zoospores called zoosporangia. Each zoosporangium protrudes through the skin surface, ready to expel zoospores
in search of a new host.
The life cycle of a chytrid includes mycelia that are haploid (gametophyte) or diploid (sporophyte) (Fig. 20.12C).

taken up beta-amyloid. For the future, Lindquist and her colleagues are using the yeast model to reveal possible therapeutic agents for neurodegeneration.

RESEARCH QUESTION
How would you go about using the yeast model to identify
therapeutic agents for Alzheimer’s disease?
Treusch, Sebastian, Shusei Hamamichi, Jessica L. Goodman, Kent E. S. Matlack, Chee Yeun Chung, et al. 2011.
Functional links between Ab toxicity, endocytic trafficking, and Alzheimer’s disease risk factors in yeast. Science
334:1241–1245.
Matlack, Kent E. S., Daniel F. Tardiff, Priyanka Narayan,
Shusei Hamamichi, Kim A. Caldwell, et al. 2014. Clioquinol
promotes the degradation of metal-dependent amyloid-β
(Aβ) oligomers to restore endocytosis and ameliorate Aβ
toxicity. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
USA 111:4013–4018.

Haploid mycelia produce motile gametes that detect each
other by sex-specific attractants. The gametes fuse to produce a motile zygote. The zygote forms a cyst, a cell with
arrested metabolism that can persist for long periods. In
a favorable environment, the cyst germinates to form a
diploid mycelium, or sporophyte. The sporophyte generates zoosporangia full of zoospores. There are two alternative forms of zoosporangia: those that produce diploid

788

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

A. Chytridiomycete fermenter in sheep rumen

C. Chytridiomycete life cycle

Male

Female

COURTESY OF KAZUNARI USHIDA

Motile Motile
gamete gamete
(male) (female)

Cyst

Haploid
sexual cycle

Cell fusion
and nuclear
fusion

Gametophyte
mycelium

n
2n

Zoospore
(haploid)
Meiosis

Motile zygote
100 µm

Cyst

SCHOOL OF PUBLIC HEALTH AND TROPICAL MEDICINE,
JAMES COOK UNIVERSITY

B. Chytridiomycete infection of frog skin

Sporophyte
mycelium
(diploid)

Zoosporangium

Zoosporangium
discharge tubes

Cyst

Diploid
asexual cycle

Zoosporangium

Zoospore
(diploid)

5 µm

FIGURE 20.12

■ Chytridiomycete form and life cycle. A. Chytrids such as Neocallomastix species ferment complex plant material
for ruminant animals such as cattle and sheep. B. A pathogenic chytrid, Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis, infects the skin of a frog. Frog skin
cells are penetrated by discharge tubes of diploid zoosporangia about to release zoospores. C. Life cycle of a chytrid. The diploid mycelium
produces motile zoospores that form cysts in a poor environment. Alternatively, the diploid mycelium undergoes meiosis to form a haploid
mycelium (gametophyte) that produces motile gametes.

zoospores, which form cysts and regenerate the diploid
mycelium; and those that undergo meiosis to produce haploid zoospores. The haploid zoospores generate a haploid
mycelium (gametophyte) capable of producing haploid
gametes.
Zygomycota: nonmotile sporangia. The zygomycetes
and other nonchytridiomycete fungi generate nonmotile
spores. Nonmotile spores require transport by air or water,
or ballistic expulsion (expulsion under pressure) from a
spore-bearing organ, called the sporangium (plural, sporangia). A common zygomycete is the bread mold Rhizopus
(Fig. 20.13A). Most zygomycetes, such as Mucor species,
are soil molds that decompose plant material or other fungi
or the droppings of animals (Fig. 20.13B). These modest
molds fi ll important niches in all terrestrial ecosystems.
Like chytrids, the life cycle of a zygomycete alternates
between haploid (n) and diploid (2n) forms (Fig. 20.13C).
The mechanics differ, however, owing to the lack of motile
gametes. The haploid spore (sporangiospore) is disseminated through air currents. A sporangiospore does not

directly undergo sexual reproduction; it grows into a haploid mycelium. The haploid mycelium then forms special
hyphae whose tips differentiate into gamete cells. The gametes cannot separate from the filament; instead, two gamete-bearing hyphae must grow toward each other in order
to fuse and form a zygospore. The zygospore undergoes
meiosis and generates the sporangium, a haploid structure
that releases sporangiospores.

Thought Question

20.3 What are the advantages and limitations of motile gametes, as compared to nonmotile spores?

Ascomycota: mycelia with paired nuclei. The ascomy-

cete fungi are famous in the history of science, as well as
in the culinary arts (Fig. 20.14). The bread mold Neurospora was used by George Beadle and Edward Tatum in
the 1940s to formulate the one gene–one protein theory.

CHAPTER 20

EUKARYOTIC DIVERSITY

■

■

C. Zygomycete life cycle

A. Bread mold, Rhizopus

Sporangiospores
germinate
to form mycelium.

GREGORY G. DIMIJIAN / SCIENCE SOURCE

Mycelium
Special hyphae
form gametes.

Sporangiospores
Sporangium
forms
sporangiospores.

2n

n

n

Sporangium

B. Mucor diploid hyphae form zygospores

Meiosis
Zygospore

Zygospore

FIGURE 20.13
COURTESY OF DR. DAVID ELLIS

(+) and (–) gametes

■

(+) and (–) gametes
grow toward each
other and fuse.

Zygomycete fungi form nonmotile sporangia.

A. Rhizopus (bread mold) haploid sporangia contain sporangiospores.
B. Diploid hyphae of Mucor species terminate in zygospores. C. The
life cycle of zygomycetes involves primarily haploid mycelia. Special
hyphae form gametes at their tips. Gametes of different mating types
fuse to form the diploid zygospore. The zygospore undergoes meiosis,
regenerating haploid cells that form sporangia. The sporangia release
sporangiospores, which germinate to form new mycelia.

20 µm

A. Asci containing ascospores
20 µm

C. Ascomycete life cycle

Nuclear fusion

Hyphae containing
paired nuclei grow
into mycelia.

n + n 2n

ED RESCHKE/PETER ARNOLD/GETTY IMAGES

Asci develop
within fruiting body.

n+n
n

Cytoplasmic
fusion

Pairing
of nuclei
Male
gamete

B. Morel (an ascomycete fruiting body)

Female
gamete

Antheridium

ED RESCHKE/PETER ARNOLD/GETTY IMAGES

Ascogonium

FIGURE 20.14

Mycelium grows
from germinated
ascospore.

2n
n

Meiosis

Meiosis forms linear
ordered tetrads of
ascospores in asci.

Ascospores
Ascus
Some species pack
asci in fruiting bodies.

Ascomycetes produce large fruiting bodies. A. Ascomycete
asci containing ascospores (stained red). B. The culinary delicacies known as morels are
fruiting bodies of the species Morchella hortensis. The dark pits of the morel are lined
with asci. C. The life cycle of an ascomycete alternates between the diploid and haploid
forms. The diploid mycelium produces asci, within which the haploid ascospores are
formed.
■

789

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

In Neurospora, meiosis produces pods (asci) of ascospores
aligned in rows that reflect the ordered tetrads of meiotic
division (Fig. 20.14A). The tetrad patterns were used by
geneticists to demonstrate the segregation and independent
assortment of chromosomes. In other species, by contrast,
the asci are packed in large mushroom-like fruiting bodies
known as morels (Morchella hortensis) (Fig. 20.14B) and
truffles (Tuber aestivum). The ascospores of such fruiting
bodies are spread by animals attracted by their delicious
flavor. Human collectors traditionally use muzzled pigs to
detect and unearth the famous underground truffles.
The ascomycete life cycle (Fig. 20.14C) includes a phase
in which each cell possesses a pair of separate nuclei, one from
each parent (chromosome number is designated n + n). The
“dikaryotic” (paired-nuclei) phase is generated by haploid
mycelia in which male and female reproductive structures fuse,
followed by migration of all the male nuclei into the female
structure. The paired nuclei then undergo several rounds of
mitotic division while migrating into the growing mycelium.
In the mycelial tips, the paired nuclei finally fuse (becoming
2n), and the mycelial tips develop into asci. Each ascus then
undergoes meiosis in which the haploid products segregate in
the same order that the meiotic chromosomes separated.
Some ascomycetes, such as Aspergillus and Penicillium species, form small asexual fruiting bodies called conidiophores
for airborne spore dispersal (Fig. 20.15A). Penicillium is
known for producing penicillin, the first antibiotic in widespread use; forms of penicillin are still used today (discussed
in Chapter 1). Aspergillus (Fig. 20.15A and B) is a growing
medical problem as an opportunistic pathogen of immunocompromised patients. Aspergillus can produce toxins (called
mycotoxins) such as aflatoxin. Aflatoxin poisoning commonly

Thought Question

20.4 Compare the life cycle of an ascomycete (Fig. 20.14C)
with that of a chytridiomycete (Fig. 20.12C). How are they
similar, and how do they differ?

B.

5 µm

DR. DAVID M. PHILLIPS / VISUALS UNLIMITED

A.

FIGURE 20.15

affects livestock and, in some cases, agricultural workers; the
toxin causes liver damage, immunosuppression, and cancer.
Conidiophore-forming ascomycetes such as Aspergillus
and Stachybotrys are the major form of mold associated with
dampness in human dwellings; for example, they caused
massive damage to homes flooded in the wake of Hurricane Katrina in 2005 (Fig. 20.15C). The flooding of
homes full of drywall made ideal conditions for the growth
of mold, which commonly consists of airborne ascomycete
mycelia. Mold grew not only on materials submerged, but
also on the surface above, exposed to water-saturated air,
up to 3 feet above the flood line (the highest level submerged). Unfortunately, most homeowner insurance policies covered damage only “up to the flood line.”
Many ascomycetes are pathogens of animals or plants. For
example, Microsporum and Trichophyton species cause ringworm skin infection, whereas Magnaporthe oryzae causes rice
blast, the most serious disease of cultivated rice. Other species, however, are beneficial symbionts of plants, including
crop plants such as beans, cucumbers, and cotton. Trichoderma species grow on the roots, or in some cases within the
vascular tissue, of the plant. The fungi share nutrients with
the plant, and they induce plant defenses against pathogens.
Trichoderma even has a commercial use in cloth processing;
the fungus is used to make “stonewashed jeans,” as its cellulase enzymes partly digest the cotton.

C.

JOAN SLONCZEWSKI

■

SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY/SCIENCE SOURCE

790

Ascomycete molds. A. Aspergillus forms a microscopic asexual fruiting structure called a conidiophore, containing
spores in its spherical tip. B. Colony of Aspergillus nidulans on an agar plate. C. Black mold (such as Stachybotrys) grows above the flood line on
a kitchen wall. An undergraduate volunteer shows the presence of mold in New Orleans, 6 months after flooding caused by Hurricane Katrina.
■

CHAPTER 20

EUKARYOTIC DIVERSITY

■

791

B. Aleuria

BRUCE FUHRER

A. Amanita

■

FIGURE 20.16 ■ Mushrooms and other
basidiomycetes form large, complex fruiting bodies. A. Amanita phalloides makes one
FRED STEVENS

of the most dangerous toxins known: alphaamanitin, an inhibitor of RNA polymerase II.
B. Aleuria mushrooms releasing spores from
their gills, to be carried on the wind.

Basidiomycota: cells with paired nuclei form mushrooms.

The basidiomycetes form large, intricate fruiting bodies
known as “true” mushrooms (Fig. 20.16). Mushrooms
produce some of the world’s deadliest poisons, such as
alpha-amanitin, which inhibits RNA polymerase II. Alphaamanitin is produced by the amanita, or “destroying angel”
(Fig. 20.16A), a taste of which is usually fatal. (The amanita’s own RNA polymerase is insensitive to the toxin.) Other
mushroom species include some of the world’s most prized

A. Basidiomycete (mushroom) life cycle

B.

Basidiospore

Meiosis

2n

n

Basidium
(true zygote)
2n
n+n

Nuclear
fusion

Basidia line the gills on the
underside of mushrooms. They
burst to release basidiospores.

n+n
Gametes fuse cytoplasm
only; fused cell contains
two nuclei.
Fruiting body
(mushroom)

FIGURE 20.17

culinary delights, such as the portobello. Many grow in
soil, while others, such as Piptoporus, grow on tree bark.
Some mushrooms have evolved elaborate insect-attracting
structures and odors, such as the “starfish stinkhorn,” with
its ring of bright red horns.
The mushroom itself is only the fruiting body of the
basidiomycete, whose life cycle involves transitions among
n, n + n, and 2n (Fig. 20.17A) similar to those of ascomycetes (see Fig. 20.14C). In the basidiomycete, however,

n

Primary mycelium
Mycelia surrounding
root (cross section)
Cytoplasm
fusion

Secondary mycelium

■ Mushroom life cycle. A. Haploid basidiospores generate primary mycelium underground, where they form gametes.
Gametes of opposite mating types fuse their cytoplasm only, forming secondary mycelium. The parental nuclei remain separate throughout
many generations of mitosis during development of the fruiting body (mushroom). As the mushroom matures, the basidia undergo nuclear
fusion and meiosis, forming progeny basidiospores. B. The underground secondary mycelia of some mushrooms form mycorrhizae with tree
roots. Mycorrhizae enhance and extend the absorptive power of the tree roots, while obtaining plant sugars for the fungus.

792

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

the fruiting body consists largely of cells with paired nuclei
(n + n). A few of the paired nuclei fuse to form diploid
cells (2n) called basidia (singular, basidium), which line
the gills of the mushroom. The basidia undergo meiosis to
form haploid basidiospores (n). Some types of basidia can
release basidiospores under pressure, whereas other basidiospores are dispersed by wind (see Fig. 20.16B).
The basidiospores germinate to form underground
mycelium. This haploid “primary mycelium” generates
gametes that ultimately fuse to form n + n “secondary
mycelium.” The primary and secondary mycelia may radiate
underground, unseen, until their tips generate mushrooms
aboveground, at points approximately equidistant from the
origin. The result is a mysterious “fairy ring” of mushrooms
(see Fig. 20.3A). In a forest, these invisible underground
hyphae of basidiomycetes and glomeromycota contribute

USDA

A.

Arbuscule

B.

mycorrhizae (singular, mycorrhiza) that gain sugars from
trees while extending the tree root systems (Fig. 20.17B).
Glomeromycota form arbuscular mycorrhizae. A remarkable phylum of fungi is the Glomeromycota, all of which are
obligate mutualists of plants. These fungi, such as Glomus
species, form extensive networks of fi lamentous connections with plant roots similar to the mycorrhizae formed by
basidiomycetes; but unlike the basidiomycete mycorrhizae,
the mycorrhizae formed by glomeromycota are arbuscular
mycorrhizae, in which the fungal fi laments actually penetrate plant cells in a most intimate symbiosis (Fig. 20.18).
Mycorrhizae expand the roots’ absorptive capacity, while
obtaining plant sugars for the fungus. More than 90% of
all land plants, including trees, depend on these fungal
interconnections, which share nutrients among many unrelated plants, as well as the fungi (discussed in Chapter 21).
In arbuscular mycorrhizae, a fungal hypha first grows
in between plant cells without breaching the plant cell wall
(Fig. 20.18B). Next, the hypha branches into the plant
cytoplasm; the plant cell membrane invaginates to accommodate the branch, while maintaining a “periarbuscular
space” between the plant cell membrane and the fungal
plasma membrane. This highly regulated invaginating
branch is called an “arbuscule”—hence the term “arbuscular mycorrhiza.” Arbuscular formation is regulated by plant
hormones called strigolactones. The arbuscule expands the
surface area to exchange sugars from the plant for ammonium and phosphate from the fungus.

Emerging Fungal Pathogens

The dominant role of fungi in our biosphere is positive—
as decomposers, recyclers, and symbiotic partners within
Fungal cell wall
lichens and mycorrhizae (discussed further in Chapter 21).
Plant cell membrane
But some fungi are important pathogens, such as Histoplasma capsulatum, an ascomycete fungus that
infects healthy people who inhale contaminated
dust, causing a deadly pneumonia. And as
human demographics shift and climate
Fungal plasma
change increases, a growing number of
membrane
Plant
human, animal, and plant pathogens
Periarbuscular space
cytoplasm
emerge (Table 20.2). For immunoPeriarbuscular membrane
compromised patients, especially the
elderly confined to hospitals, a growing threat is Aspergillus species, which
can colonize the lungs and other tissues. In 2012, contaminated steroid
injections led to an outbreak of infecFIGURE 20.18 ■ Arbuscular mycorrhiza. A. Glomeromycota fungi invade corn root cells, tions by Exserohilum rostratum and
as part of a mutualistic symbiosis to exchange nutrients. B. The fungal hypha grows between
other previously rare opportunists.
the plant cells, and then into a plant cell to form an arbuscule. The arbuscule expands surface
Other fungal pathogens cause massive
area for exchange while maintaining the plant cell wall intact. Source: Part B modified from Martin
mortality of animals and plants.
Parniske. 2008. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 6:763.
Fungus

Fungal
cytoplasm

CHAPTER 20

■

EUKARYOTIC DIVERSITY

■

793

TABLE 20.2*Emerging Fungal Pathogens
Species

Phylum

Host

Disease

Aspergillus fumigatus

Ascomycota

Humans
(immunocompromised)

Aspergillosis of lung, and elsewhere in
the body

Cryptococcus neoformans

Basidiomycota

Humans
(immunocompromised)

Meningitis and meningoencephalitis

Encephalitozoon intestinalis

Microsporidia

Humans with AIDS

Microsporidiosis (intestinal)

Exserohilum rostratum

Ascomycota

Humans

Wound and skin infections;
contaminated injections

Histoplasma capsulatum

Ascomycota

Humans, dogs, cats

Histoplasmosis (lung)

Pneumocystis jirovecii

Ascomycota

Humans
(immunocompromised)

Pneumocystis pneumonia

Stachybotrys chartarum

Ascomycota

Humans

Black mold disease; respiratory damage

Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis

Chytridiomycota

Amphibians (frogs and toads)

Chytridiomycosis

Fusarium solani

Ascomycota

Sea turtles (loggerheads)

Hatch failure

Geomyces destructans

Ascomycota

Brown bats

White nose disease

Puccinia graminis

Basidiomycota

Wheat

Wheat stem rust

Magnaporthe oryzae

Ascomycota

Rice

Rice blast disease

Nosema species

Microsporidia

Honeybees

Colony collapse disorder

Several parasitic organisms originally classified as protozoa because of their superficial appearance have now been
shown to be fungi or fungus-related, based on their genome
sequence and biochemistry. The reclassification has important consequences for research, taxonomy, and therapy. An
example is the ascomycete Pneumocystis jirovecii. The organism was first described in 1909, when it was thought to be
a life stage of a trypanosome causing Chagas’ disease (discussed in Section 20.6). When the organism was recognized as a distinct species of protists infecting animals, it
was named Pneumocystis carinii. In the 1970s, a strain of
Pneumocystis was renamed P. jirovecii for causing pneumonia
in immunocompromised humans. In the 1980s, the rise of
AIDS led to a sudden increase in infections. Sequencing the
organism’s genome revealed it to be an ascomycete fungus.
As a result, the organism’s name was called into question by
fungus researchers; its developmental forms and biochemistry were reevaluated, and medical research was redirected to
culture and treat the organism based on fungal physiology.
A major clade of parasites now shown to be fungi is Microsporidia. Microsporidia have relatively small genomes; their
mitochondria have lost their DNA and are nonfunctional.
Microsporidia form spores as small as a few micrometers
in size, which can infect animal cells. The microsporidian
spore extrudes a specialized invasion complex called the
polar tube that penetrates the host cell, typically a macrophage. In humans, microsporidians are opportunistic
pathogens, such as the intestinal parasite Encephalitozoon
intestinalis, emerging with the rise of AIDS and the growth
of elderly and immunocompromised populations.

Other taxa originally assigned as fungi, based on superficial appearance, are now classified as protists, based on
genetic similarity. The oomycetes, or “water molds,” were
originally classified as fungi because of their fungus-like
filaments, which infect plants and animals. Oomycete Phytophthora infestans devastated Irish potato crops in the
1840s, causing the Great Irish Famine, in which a million
people died. Today, a related species, Phytophthora ramosum, causes “sudden oak death,” a disease killing tens of
thousands of oaks and other trees in the western United
States. Oomycetes are discussed further in eTopic 20.1.

To Summarize
■

■

■

■

Fungi form hyphae with cell walls of chitin. Hyphae
absorb nutrients from decaying organisms or from
infected hosts. Some fungi remain unicellular; these are
called yeasts or mitosporic fungi.
Chytridiomycete fungi have motile zoospores. Motile
reproductive forms are a trait shared with animals. Flagellar motility has been lost by other fungi through
reductive evolution.
Zygomycete fungi form haploid mycelia. Hyphal tips
differentiate into gametes and grow toward each other
to undergo sexual reproduction. Some zygomycetes
form mycorrhizae that connect the roots of plants.
Ascomycete fungal mycelia form paired nuclei.
Within the hyphal cells, the paired nuclei fuse, followed

794

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

by meiosis and development of ascospores. Some ascomycetes form fruiting bodies called conidiophores.
■

■

■

Basidiomycete fungi form mushrooms. Cells with
paired nuclei (secondary mycelium) form large fruiting bodies called mushrooms. The paired nuclei fuse
to form the diploid basidium, which generates haploid
basidiospores. The basidiospores develop underground
hyphae or mycorrhizae that interconnect plant roots.
Glomeromycota form arbuscular mycorrhizae. These
fungi form intimate mutualistic networks of connections
with plant roots, exchanging minerals for plant sugars.
Emerging fungal pathogens threaten humans, plants,
and animals.

20.3

Other photosynthetic eukaryotes, or secondary endosymbiotic algae, arose from protists that engulfed a primary
or secondary alga. Secondary algae often show “mixotrophic” nutrition, involving both phototrophy and heterotrophy. For example, dinoflagellate “algae” are voracious
predators of smaller protists. The heterokont algae (diatoms,
coccolithophores, and kelps) are covered in this section.
Dinoflagellates are covered under alveolates (Section 20.5).

Primary Algae

The primary endosymbiotic algae include two major clades:
Chlorophyta, or green algae; and Rhodophyta, or red algae—
although not all members of each group appear green or red,
respectively. Rhodophyta that appear red have a secondary pigment called phycoerythrin, in addition to green chlorophyll.
Green algae (Chlorophyta). Many green algae are unicellu-

Algae

Algae are CO2-fixing producers in all ecosystems, most
crucially freshwater and marine habitats. In freshwater and
marine ecology, the algae, together with photosynthetic
bacteria, are known as phytoplankton (see Chapter 21).
All algae possess chloroplasts.
The primary algae are products of a single ancestral endosymbiosis that also gave rise to land plants. The biochemistry
and cell structures of true algae and land plants are similar;
thus, the alga Chlorella was the model organism of choice
for pioneers of photosynthesis research Martin Kamen, Melvin Calvin, and others (discussed in Chapter 15).

A.

lar. An important model system for genetics and phototaxis
is Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, a unicellular chlorophyte
common in freshwater systems as well as Antarctic pools.
The genetics of cell cycle regulation in C. reinhardtii provides clues to formation of human tumors.
C. reinhardtii has a symmetrical pair of flagella—a common pattern for green algae and their gametes (Fig. 20.19A).
The alga swims forward by bending its flagella back toward
the cell, like a breaststroke. Chlamydomonas cells are mostly
haploid, reproducing by asexual cell division (Fig. 20.19B).
For sexual reproduction, opposite mating types fuse to form a
zygote, which loses flagella and grows a spiny protective coat.
The zygote undergoes meiosis to regenerate haploid cells.

B.
Zoospores

–

Meiosis
n

–
+

+

2n

Flagella
DR. PETER SIVER / VISUALS UNLIMITED

Swimming
direction

Nucleus
Haploid
asexual
reproduction

Chloroplast
Zygote

n
2n

10 µm

FIGURE 20.19

n

Fusion of
gametes

A single-celled green alga:
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. A. Chlamydomonas has a green chloroplast

Sexual
reproduction

Mature cell

+

■

and grows as a photoautotroph. A symmetrical pair of flagella pulls the cell
forward. B. Alternation of generations. Chlamydomonas reproduces asexually as haploid cells. Alternatively, the alga generates gametes that fuse into a
zygote that immediately undergoes meiosis to regenerate haploid cells.

+

–

+
–

Gametes

CHAPTER 20
A.

■

EUKARYOTIC DIVERSITY

■

795

B.

Cytoplasm
Eyespot

Contractile
vacuole
Chloroplast
Nucleus
Mitochondrion

Pyrenoid

Cell
membrane
Cell wall

2 µm

DARTMOUTH ELECTRON MICROSCOPE FACILITY, DARTMOUTH COLLEGE/WIKIMEDIA
COMMONS

Flagella

FIGURE 20.20

■ Cell structure of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. A. The cell membrane is surrounded by a cell wall of cellulose and glycoproteins. The single chloroplast fills much of the cell and wraps around the nucleus. Within the chloroplast lies a pyrenoid, a structure for concentrating bicarbonate ion for conversion to CO2. The pyrenoid is surrounded by starch bodies that store high-energy compounds. A contractile vacuole maintains constant osmotic pressure. B. Electron micrograph of C. reinhardtii shows the nucleus, chloroplast, pyrenoid, and other organelles.

© HAN PHAM

WIM VAN EGMOND/VISUALS UNLIMITED

The cell ultrastructure of Chlamydomonas is typical of
algal cells (Fig. 20.20). The nucleus is cupped by a single
chloroplast, which is surrounded by
a double membrane. The double A. Volvox
B.
membrane indicates primary algae;
the inner membrane derives from
the ancestral bacterium, and the
outer membrane derives from the
engulfing host. Within the chloroplast is a pyrenoid, an organelle that
concentrates bicarbonate (HCO3 –)
and converts it to CO2 for fixation.
The pyrenoid is surrounded by one
or more starch bodies, which are
used for energy storage. The starch
is broken down to sugars as needed,
followed by glycolysis and respiraC. Evolution of multicellularity
tion in the mitochondria. Osmolarity is maintained by the contractile
vacuole. The Chlamydomonas cell is
Offspring
encased in a cell wall composed precolonies
dominantly of glycoprotein. Other
green algae have cellulose cell walls
similar to those of plants.
Chlamydomonas Gonium
Pandorina
Eudorina
Pleodorina
While C. reinhardtii is unicelEquivalent mating
Male and female
lular in nature, an exciting experitypes (+/–)
gametes
Volvox
ment showed that this alga can
quickly evolve into a multicellular
FIGURE 20.21 ■ Volvox is multicellular. A. Volvox forms a spherical colony of cells (1–3 mm)
form. In 2013, William Ratcliff at
that generates offspring colonies within. B. William Ratcliff, who studies origins of multicellularity,
the Georgia Institute of Technology with his own multicellular offspring. C. Different types of algae suggest a model for the evolution
(Fig. 20.21B) and Michael Travi- of multicellularity from a unicellular ancestor (like Chlamydomonas) to a multicellular colony with
sano at the University of Minnesota female and male gametes (Volvox).

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

showed that C. reinhardtii could undergo selection by
repeated subculturing in a standing tube. In each culture, a
few cells would clump at the bottom, and the clumps were
selectively cultured further. Eventually, a strain was isolated
that grew regularly in connected cell clusters that alternated
with dispersal.
Some marine and freshwater algae that resemble Chlamydomonas grow naturally in intricate multicellular colonies.
Colonial algae such as Volvox (Fig. 20.21A) generate geodesic
spheres of biflagellate cells. Their flagella point outward from
the colony, propelling it forward and drawing nutrients across
its surface. Each cell of Volvox connects by cytoplasmic bridges
to five or six of its neighbors. The colony reproduces by generating daughter colonies within the sphere, which grow until
the outer sphere falls apart, liberating the daughters.
A survey of algal diversity from Chlamydomonas through
Volvox suggests a model for the progression of evolving
multicellularity (Fig. 20.21C). First, cells might have
evolved to grow in small ordered structures, as is seen for
Gonium and Pandorina species. The structures then might
have evolved into hollow spheres of cells with some differentiation, as seen in Eudorina. Male and female gametes
then evolved (Pleodorina), and ultimately colonies that generate colonial offspring (such as Volvox).
Other species of algae grow as multicellular filaments. An
example is Spirogyra, a common pond dweller known for its
spiral chloroplasts (Fig. 20.22A). As with Chlamydomonas,
the haploid form predominates; but unlike the unicellular
alga, Spirogyra forms neither flagellated gametes nor zoospores. Instead, its sexual reproduction requires alignment
of two filaments of opposite mating type (Fig. 20.22B).
Cells conjugate (form cytoplasmic bridges) between the two

Thought Question

20.5 What are the relative advantages of being unicellular or
multicellular?

B.

50 µm

WIM VAN EGMOND / VISUALS UNLIMITED

A.

filaments. The “male” gametes are those whose cytoplasm
inserts through the conjugation bridge to join that of the
“female” gamete. As the gametes fuse, a row of empty cell
walls is left behind (Fig. 20.22C). The zygote eventually
hatches and germinates a new chain of cells.
Some marine algae grow in undulating sheets. An example familiar to beach bathers is the “sea lettuce” Ulva
(Fig. 20.23A). Sheets of Ulva can extend over many
square meters, although they are only two cells thick (see
Fig. 20.23A inset). The Ulva life cycle shows classic alternation of generations between haploid and diploid forms
(Fig. 20.23B). Haploid sheets of cells (the gametophyte) produce symmetrically biflagellate gametes, similar to unicellular Chlamydomonas. But when Ulva gametes fuse, the zygote
grows into an immense diploid sheet of cells. This sporophyte
(diploid multicellular body) appears similar in form to the
gametophyte. The sporophyte eventually undergoes meiosis,
releasing haploid zoospores with two pairs of flagella. The
zoospores undergo mitosis and regenerate the gametophyte.
Algae serve as symbiotic partners for many important living systems. For example, certain algae grow in intimate association with fungi to form unified structures called lichens,
important colonizers of dry and cold habitats (discussed in
Chapter 21). A form of algal-fungal ground cover similar to
lichens is cryptogamic crust, common on desert soil. Still
other algae grow within the cells of paramecia and hydras,
providing photosynthetic nutrition in exchange for protection.

C.

100 µm

50 µm

FIGURE 20.22 ■ Filaments with spiral chloroplasts: Spirogyra. A. Spirogyra species grow in long multicellular filaments, typically
25 μm wide and several centimeters long. Each cell contains one or more chloroplasts that spiral around the cytoplasm. B. Sexual reproduction involves conjugation between cells of two mating types. The cytoplasm from each male cell exits from its cell wall and enters the female
cell. C. Gamete fusion is complete, generating zygotic spores.

M. I. WALKER/SCIENCE SOURCE

■

WIM VAN EGMOND / VISUALS UNLIMITED

796

CHAPTER 20

■

EUKARYOTIC DIVERSITY

■

797

A.

BIOPHOTO ASSOCIATES/ SCIENCE SOURCE; INSET: BOBINDUBIGEON, ET. AL, J SCI FOOD AGRIC 1997, 75, 341-351

Sheet of cells,
two cells thick

Gamete fusion

B.

FIGURE 20.23

■

Haploid
gametes

Multicellular algae: Ulva. A. Ulva

Diploid zygote
Mitosis

species generate large, undulating sheets of cells in double
layers (inset). B. Ulva undergoes symmetrical alternation
of generations. The haploid and diploid forms appear very
similar. Source: Part B modified from Christine Bobin-Dubigeon et al.

Sporophyte
(2n)

1997. J. Sci. Food Agric. 75:341–351.

n

Red algae (Rhodophyta). Red algae, or rhodophytes,

are colored red by the photopigment phycoerythrin.
Phycoerythrin absorbs efficiently in the blue and green
range, which green algae fail to absorb. Because the red
algae absorb wavelengths missed by the green algae, they
can colonize deeper marine habitats below the green algal
populations.
Rhodophytes include unicellular, filamentous, and multicellular forms. Several kinds are human food sources. Porphyra forms large sheets that are harvested in Japan for use
as nori for wrapping sushi, a delicacy that includes rice, vegetables, and uncooked fish (Fig. 20.24). Red algae contain valuable polymers called sulfated polygalactans (sugar
polymers with sulfate side chains). Sulfated polygalactans
include agar, used to solidify microbial growth media; agarose, a processed sugar derivative used to form electrophoretic gels; and carrageenan, an additive used in processed
foods.

Gametophyte
(1n)
Mitosis

Haploid
zoospores

Secondary Algae: Diatoms and Kelps

■

More than two membranes surround the chloroplast. The extra membranes derive from the cell membrane of the engulfed alga.
Metabolism of secondary algae includes
heterotrophy. By contrast, the primary
algae are near-obligate autotrophs, catabolizing only the simplest substrates,
such as acetate.

FOODCOLLECTION / SUPERSTOCK

UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN - MADISON, PLANT TEACHING
COLLECTION. BOTIT.BOTANY.WISC.EDU/

B.

Meiosis

Many kinds of secondary algae arose from ancestral protists that once engulfed a primary endosymbiotic alga (see
Fig. 20.7). Secondary algae show two traits that distinguish them from primary algae:

■

A.

FIGURE 20.24

Red algae: Porphyra. A. Porphyra forms large, red, multicellular sheets.
B. When the sheets are harvested and toasted, they are known as “nori.” Nori are used to wrap
sushi, a Japanese delicacy.
■

2n

Several major groups of secondary algae are heterokonts
(stramenopiles). These include
the diatoms (Bacillariophyceae);
the brown algae (Phaeophyceae), such as kelps; the golden
algae (Chrysophyceae), mainly
flagellates; the yellow-green
algae (Xanthophyceae); and

798

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

10 µm

BIOPHOTO ASSOCIATES/GETTY IMAGES

A.

JAN HINSCH/SCIENCE SOURCE

B.

FIGURE 20.25

■ Diatoms of various species. A. Stephanodiscus astraea, a centric diatom. B. Diverse centric and pennate
diatoms.

other less-studied forms of phytoplankton. Flagellated species of heterokont algae generally show a pair of differently
shaped flagella. Typically, the flagellum that drives the cell
through the environment is brush-like with lateral hairs,
while the other is usually shorter and sometimes missing
altogether. In some cases it functions like a rudder.
Diatoms (Bacillariophyceae). Diatoms

are unicellular
algae found ubiquitously in both fresh and marine waters
(Fig. 20.25). They conduct a fi fth of all photosynthesis
on Earth, and they fi x as much biomass as all the terrestrial rain forests. A diatom grows a unique kind of bipartite
shell called a frustule. The frustule is composed of silica
(cross-linked silicon dioxide, SiO2). The silicate frustules
protect diatoms from many kinds of predators. Diatoms

are nonetheless consumed by flagellates and amphipods
(shrimplike invertebrates) and are infected by viruses.
Frustules of different species form an extraordinary range of shapes with intricate pore formations
(Fig. 20.25A). The shapes fall into two classes: centric,
with radial symmetry; or pennate, with bilateral symmetry (Fig. 20.25B). Frustules of decomposed diatoms
eventually sediment on the ocean floor, where they build
sedimentary rock strata more than a kilometer thick. This
“diatomaceous earth” is used in insulation material and in
toothpaste. Diverse species of diatoms are highly sensitive
to environmental factors such as pH, and the frequency of
their shells in sediment can be used to track a lake’s environmental history.
Diatoms pose a unique challenge to cell division
(Fig. 20.26). As the diatom grows and fissions, each
daughter cell receives one parental half of the frustule
while forming a new half fitting within the parental half,
like the bottom dish of a petri plate. Thus, each generation results in an inexorable decline in size of the organism. As its cell size reaches a critical point, the diatom
must undergo meiosis to generate gametes. Maria Vernet
at the Scripps Institution of Oceanography studies diatoms of the polar oceans, such as the Antarctic diatom
Corethron criophilum. Centric diatoms such as Corethron
form egg cells and flagellated sperm. When the gametes
fuse, they form a special kind of zygote called an auxospore. The auxospore generates a frustule of the same size
as the original diatom.
Coccolithophores (Prymnesiophyceae). Coccolithophores
are secondary algae of the phylum Haptophyta (phylogeny shown in Fig. 20.4). Coccoliths superficially resemble
diatoms in that their cells have a solid mineral exoskeleton
(Fig. 20.27). Instead of silicate, however, their exoskeleton
is composed of calcium carbonate (CaCO3). The calcium
carbonate grows in multiple scales (unlike the unitary exoskeleton of a diatom). The plates may extend radially in all
directions, such as the “trumpet” shapes of Discosphaera
tubifera (Fig. 20.27), or form multiple layers of flat, oval
shapes encasing the cell, as in Emiliana huxleyi. These
scales are the “coccoliths” that give coccolithophores their
name. The calcium carbonate scales protect the tiny cell
from some predators. Coccolithophores such as E. huxleyi
generate huge, milky blooms that appear in NASA satellite
images. The blooms are dissipated by predation or by virus
infection.
Coccolithophores are increasingly recognized as major
players in the ocean’s carbon cycle (discussed in Chapter 22). They sequester large amounts of carbon from CO2
into their carbonate shells. Unfortunately, their calcium
carbonate is sensitive to acidification caused by the global
rise in CO2. For this reason, intensive research is focused

CHAPTER 20

EUKARYOTIC DIVERSITY

■

■

799

Gametes of different
mating types fuse.

Fertilization:
fusion between
gametes of different
mating types

n 2n

Male
gametes

PHOTO BY WENDY KOZLOWSKI

Fusion

10 µm

Zygote
(auxospore)
Female gametes
Meiosis

n
2n
Initial cell
Vegetative cell
division (mitosis)

Frustule
develops.

10 µm

Cell fissions.

Each division gives
an offspring of smaller
size until fertile cell
size is reached.

FIGURE 20.26 ■ Life cycle of a centric Antarctic diatom, Corethron criophilum. Maria Vernet (upper left) studies the life cycle of diatoms in the Southern Ocean.

10 µm

Each vegetative cell division (lower right) requires formation of an in-fitting frustule
half. Successive divisions result in progressive decrease in size (lower left). At a critical
size limit, the diatom must undergo meiosis to form eggs and sperm. As gametes fuse,
they form an auxospore (upper right), which regenerates a frustule of the original size.

PHOTO BY WENDY KOZLOWSKI

Fertile
cell

on understanding the response of coccolithophores such
as E. huxleyi to pH change. In 2011, a large-scale study
conducted by several European universities concluded that
increasing CO2 levels correlate with a decline in the overall mass of marine coccoliths. At the same time, however,
certain strains of Emiliana were shown to grow despite low
pH, so many uncertainties remain.
Brown algae (Phaeophyceae). Brown algae, such as kelps,

possess vacuoles of leucosin, a polysaccharide for energy
storage whose color gives the organism a brown or yellow

FIGURE 20.27

■

A coccolithophore, Discosphaera tubifera.

The tiny cell is surrounded by a much larger volume of trumpetshaped coccoliths. From the Alboran Sea, western Mediterranean.

5 µm

MARKUS GEISEN/NHMPL

PHOTO BY WENDY KOZLOWSKI

Frustule
Vegetative cell

PHOTO BY ADRIAN CEFARELLI

Auxospore emerges.

800

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

Sargassum weed

MASA USHIODA/VISUALS UNLIMITED

■

FIGURE 20.28

■ Sargassum forests. Sargassum natans
forms the basis of the Sargasso Sea. The brown alga forms stalks
with leaflike blades and round gas bladders to keep the alga afloat.
Sargassum forests support animals such as the sea turtle.

tint. Kelps are familiar to ocean bathers as the long, dark
brown blades that root near the beach until the surf rips the
blades off and tosses them ashore. Kelps support important
communities of multicellular organisms known as kelp forests. Another type of marine “forest” is the unrooted sargassum weeds that float on the Sargasso Sea. Sargassum
consists of stalks with photosynthetic blades and round gas
bladders to keep the organism afloat (Fig. 20.28). Sargassum supports a complex food web of invertebrate and
vertebrate animals, including worms, crabs, fi sh, and sea
turtles.

To Summarize

■

■

■

Chlorophyta (green algae) grow near the top of the
water column. Green algae include unicellular, filamentous, and sheet forms. They offer models for research on
the evolution of multicellularity.

20.4

Amebas and Slime Molds

The ameba (alternative spelling “amoeba”) is familiar to most of us as an apparently amorphous form of
microscopic life, capable of engulfing and consuming
prey in a dramatic fashion. While the ameba’s shape is
exceptionally variable, the pseudopods, or “false feet”
(Fig. 20.29), that it extends are complex structures that
undertake highly controlled movements. Most amebas
are free-living predators in soil or water, engulfing prey
by phagocytosis. They range in size up to 5 mm, large
enough to phagocytose bacteria, algae, ciliates, smaller
amebas, and even invertebrates such as rotifers. A few are
dangerous parasites of humans or animals. Furthermore,
free-living amebas can harbor bacterial pathogens such as
Legionella pneumophila, which contaminates water supplies and air ducts. The bacteria cause legionellosis, an
often fatal form of pneumonia. The host ameba enables
the pathogen’s persistence and transmission to human
hosts.
Free-living amebas such as Acanthamoeba species are
common predators in the soil microbial community.
They cause problems when they contaminate contact lens
cleaning solutions, causing keratitis (infection of the cornea). Wearers of contact lenses have an increased risk of
Acanthamoeba keratitis.

Thought Question

20.6 What can happen when an ameba phagocytoses algae?

Rhodophyta (red algae) have the accessory photopigment phycoerythrin, which absorbs green and
longer-wavelength blue light, enabling growth at greater
depths. Red algae include species of diverse forms, many
of which are edible for humans.

Pseudopod

M. I. WALKER/SCIENCE SOURCE

■

Kelps are heterokonts that grow in long, sheetlike
fronds. Kelps play an important role in the ecology of the
coastal ocean, as well as the ecology of marine beaches.

Secondary algae are derived from protists that had
engulfed primary algae. They are mixotrophs, combining phototrophy and heterotrophy.
Diatoms are heterokonts with silicate shells called
frustules. Diatoms replicate by an unusual division cycle
generating successively smaller frustules.

FIGURE 20.29
pseudopods.

■

Amoeba proteus moves by extending its

CHAPTER 20

Note:

The taxonomy of amebas and slime molds remains problematic, with diverse views as to the number of clades, their relatedness, and their degree of divergence.

Pseudopod Motility

■

EUKARYOTIC DIVERSITY

■

801

pushing the membrane forward and extending the pseudopod. As the gel is pushed backward, it resolubilizes to
continue the cycle.
Amebas can have one nucleus or multiple nuclei. They are
usually haploid and reproduce asexually by nuclear mitosis,
without dissolution of the nuclear membrane, followed by
fission of the cytoplasm. Some species do have developmental alternatives, such as cyst formation, gamete fusion and
meiosis, and even growth of flagella in a favorable habitat.

Many different species form ameba-like cells. Some species persist as an ameba throughout all or most of the life
cycle. Others can convert to flagellated forms, particularly
when the habitat fills with water—a low-viscosity condition
favoring flagellar motility. Still other protist species, such as
Thought Question
dinoflagellates, never become fully ameboid, but they can
extend a pseudopod to engulf prey.
20.7 What kind of habitat would favor a flagellated ameba?
Different kinds of amebas have different kinds of
pseudopods. “Classic” amebas (Amoebozoa) have lobeshaped pseudopods (Fig. 20.29). Lobe-shaped pseudoAmeba genetics is poorly understood, but at least one
pods have the most variable shape. A different form is
ameba genome has been sequenced—that of the intestinal
the sheetlike pseudopod, or lamellar pseudopod, used
parasite Entamoeba histolytica. The sequence contains 20
by dinoflagellates. Lamellar pseudopods are extended
Mb of DNA in 14 chromosomes; some of these are linby dinoflagellates. Similar lamellar pseudopods are genear, whereas others are circular. Closely related strains show
erated by human white blood cells such as leukocytes.
considerable variation in organization, suggesting that
Finally, needlelike pseudopods, or filopodia, are thin
ameba genomes undergo extensive rearrangement.
extensions reinforced by parallel actin filaments. These
are typical of Rhizaria amebas, although some Rhizaria
instead make long, thin pseudopods supported by microSlime Molds
tubules. The most famous protists with microtubuleSome amebas conduct a life cycle in which thousands of
supported pseudopods also have mineralized supporting
individuals (all members of one species) aggregate into a
structures, such as Foraminifera (spiral shells) and Radiocomplex differentiated fruiting body (Fig. 20.31A). Such
laria (radial-form “skeleton”).
an organism is called a cellular slime mold. A cellular
The extension of lobe-shaped and lamellar pseudoslime mold forms from ameboid cells that aggregate into
pods has been studied closely for its relevance to human
a multicellular “slug.” Slime molds, as the name implies,
white blood cells (for more on white blood cells as host
were originally classified with fungi because their fruiting
defenses, see Chapter 23). The mechanism of pseudobodies superficially resemble fungal reproductive forms.
pod motility remains poorly
understood, but it is known
1. Cytoplasmic streaming
Nucleus
to involve a sol-gel transition
brings actin dimers
Ameba cross section
between cortical cytoplasm
forward (sol).
(just beneath the cell surface)
Contractile
vacuole
and the cytoplasm of the
Pseudopod
formation
deeper interior (Fig. 20.30).
The tip of a pseudopod con2. Dendritic
tains a gel of polymerized
polymerization
of actin (gel).
Cell membrane
actin beneath its cell memand cortex
brane. From the center of
Microtubules
the ameba, liquid cytoplasm
(sol) containing actin sub4. Small membrane
units streams forward along
projections help cell
3. Actin polymer
adhere to surface.
microtubular “tracks,” powrolls over like a
ered by ATP hydrolysis.
tank tread.
The actin subunits stream
into the pseudopod, where FIGURE 20.30 ■ Pseudopod motility. A pseudopod extends by flow of liquid cytoplasm
they polymerize, forming a (sol state) followed by actin polymerization (gel state). As actin polymerizes, the cell rotates down
gel. The gel region grows, toward the substrate like a tank tread.

802

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

A.

OWEN GILBERT

on top of each other to form a slug as long as 1 mm. The
slug then migrates, attracted by light and warmth, to find
an appropriate place to form a fruiting body and disperse
its spores.
The slug at last differentiates into a fruiting body, a
spherical sporangium supported on a stalk of largely empty
cells that emerges from a basal disk. The sporangium then
releases spores (also called cysts), which are dispersed on
air currents and can remain viable for several years. When a
spore detects chemical signals from bacteria, it germinates
an ameba to feed on them.
Note that the entire reproductive cycle just described
is asexual; the amebas and their differentiated structures
remain haploid throughout. D. discoideum amebas do have
a sexual alternative (illustrated in Fig. 20.31B), in which
500 µm
cells of opposite mating type can fuse to form a diploid
zygote and then undergo meiosis, restoring haploid
amebas.
A different kind of slime mold is the plasStarvation
modial slime mold, in which an ameba
0h
undergoes mitosis without cell division,
forming a multinucleate single cell. A
plasmodial slime mold such as Physarum
cAMP
waves
Gamete
4h
fusion
polycephalum develops from a single dipAggregation
loid ameba. As the ameba grows, its nuclei
multiply, forming a plasmodium (plural,
8h
plasmodia), a giant multinucleate cell that
can spread over an area of many square centimeters. Out of the plasmodium arise fruit12 h
ing bodies whose sporangia undergo meiosis,
producing haploid spores. Two spores then fertilize
each other to form a diploid ameba that can develop again
Tipped aggregate
into a plasmodium. A large plasmodium can occasionally
be seen as a yellow mass of slime spreading over decaying
wood.

B.

Cyst

Ameba
n

Fruiting
body
24 h
Meiosis

2n

Macrocyst

18 h

16 h
14 h
Slug

FIGURE 20.31

n

■ A cellular slime mold: Dictyostelium discoideum. A. Fruiting bodies of D. discoideum (composite SEM). B. Life

cycle of D. discoideum.

A well-studied example of a cellular slime mold is Dictyostelium discoideum, historically an important model
system for multicellular development (Fig. 20.31). D. discoideum amebas are relatively small, about 10 μm, but
large enough to consume bacteria. They can be cocultured on a plate with Escherichia coli. As the haploid amebas consume bacteria, they divide asexually until their
food runs out. At this point, a few amebas begin to emit
the aggregation signal molecule cyclic AMP (cAMP). An
ameba emitting cyclic AMP attracts other amebas nearby,
which move toward the center and begin emitting cyclic
AMP as well. Successive waves of cyclic AMP continue to
attract thousands of amebas to the center, where they pile

Note:

Distinguish the term “plasmodium” (a large multinucleate cell) from the genus Plasmodium (an apicomplexan parasite,
such as Plasmodium falciparum, which causes malaria).

Filamentous and Shelled Amebas

Amebas of a distinct clade (Rhizaria) form needlelike
pseudopods. Most of these amebas are encased by mineral
shells called tests. A major group of shelled amebas is the
radiolarians, whose skeleton-like tests are made of silica
perforated with numerous holes through which pseudopods appear to radiate in all directions (Fig. 20.32A).
Many different kinds of radiolarians exist today, and
many can be recognized in fossil rock. A second group
of shelled amebas is the foraminiferans (Fig. 20.32B).
The foraminiferans, or forams, generate shells of calcium

CHAPTER 20

EUKARYOTIC DIVERSITY

carbonate as chambers laid down in helical succession.
Their pseudopods all extend from one opening in the
most recent chamber.
Radiolarians and shelled forams grow in marine and
freshwater habitats. Their shells make up a large part of reef
formations, sedimentary rock, and beach sand. Forams, in
particular, are used in geological surveys as indicators of
petroleum deposits.

To Summarize

■

■

■

Amebas move using pseudopods. In different species,
pseudopods are lobe-shaped, lamellar, or filamentous
(filopodia).
Cytoplasmic streaming through cycles of actin polymerization and depolymerization drives the extension
and retraction of pseudopods.
Slime molds show an asexual reproductive cycle in
which a fruiting body produces spores. In cellular slime
molds, amebas aggregate to form a slug. In plasmodial
slime molds, a single ameba develops into a multinucleate cell.
Radiolarians have silicate shells penetrated by filamentous pseudopods.
Foraminiferans have calcium carbonate shells with helical arrangement of chambers. The most recent chamber
opens to extend filamentous pseudopods.

EYE OF SCIENCE/SCIENCE SOURCE

100 µm

■

803

B. A foraminiferan

500 µm

■

■

FIGURE 20.32

■

CUSHMAN FOUNDATION FOR FORAMINIFERAL RESEARCH, INC., 1987.

A. Radiolarian tests

■

Filamentous and shelled amebas.

A. Shells (tests) of radiolarians (stereoscope). B. A live
foraminiferan, Globigerinella aequilateralis (dark-field).

20.5

Alveolates: Ciliates,
Dinoflagellates, and
Apicomplexans

The Alveolata include voracious predators such as the ciliated protists (Fig. 20.33A), as well as a major group of
algae, and perhaps the most successful group of parasitic
microbial eukaryotes. Alveolates are named for the flattened
vacuoles called alveoli (singular, alveolus) within their outer
cortex (Fig. 20.33B; see also Fig. 20.8A). Some alveoli
contain plates of stiff material, such as protein, polysaccharide, or minerals. Besides alveoli, most alveolate protists
possess other kinds of cortical organelles, such as extrusomes for delivery of enzymes or toxins, bands of microtubules for reinforcement, and whiplike cilia or flagella. The
alveolate cell form is highly structured, in contrast to the
amorphous shape of amebas. Major groups of alveolates
include ciliates, dinoflagellates, and apicomplexans.

Ciliates

A diverse group of alveolates known as Ciliophora, or ciliates, possess large numbers of cilia, short projections containing [9(2)+2] microtubules. Their whiplike action is
driven by ATP (for review, see eAppendix 2). The cilia beat
in coordinated waves that maximize the efficiency of motility. Cilia serve two functions:
■

Cell propulsion. Coordinated waves of beating cilia,
usually covering the cell surface, propel the cell forward.

■

Food acquisition. By generating water currents into
the mouth of the cell, a ring of cilia around the mouth
brings food into the cell.

804

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

A.

Ciliate cell structure. Paramecium is one of the most stud-

Didinium

BIOPHOTO ASSOCIATES/SCIENCE SOURCE

Paramecium

50 µm

B.

Alveolus
Cilium

Microtubules

ied ciliates. Paramecia feed on bacteria and in turn are consumed by other ciliates, such as Didinium (Fig. 20.33A).
They can also take up smaller particles through endocytosis by specialized pores in their cortex, called parasomal
sacs (Fig. 20.33B).
The cell structure of Paramecium includes an oral
groove for uptake of food driven by the beating cilia
(Fig. 20.33C). Once ingested through the oral groove, a
food particle travels within the digestive vacuole in a circuit
around the cell. The digestive vacuole ultimately empties
into the cytoproct, a specialized vacuole for the discharge
of waste outside the cell. Paramecia maintain osmotic balance by means of a contractile vacuole, a vacuole that
withdraws water from the cytoplasm to shrink it or
contracts to expand it. Contractile vacuoles are
widespread among protists and algae, but their
mode of action has been most studied in
paramecia.
Genetics and reproduction. Most ciliates

Mitochondria
C.

M. I. WALKER / SCIENCE SOURCE

Digestive vacuole

Oral groove

50 µm

FIGURE 20.33 ■ Ciliated protists. A. Didinium, consuming
Paramecium (SEM). B. Cortical structure of a ciliate. Beneath the
outer cell membrane lie flattened sacs called alveoli. The cilia, composed of [9(2)+2] microtubules, are rooted in a complex network of
microtubules. Parasomal sacs take up nutrients and form endocytic
vesicles. C. A Paramecium has digestive vacuoles and an oral groove
for ingestion (differential interference contrast, colorized).

have a complex genetic system involving
one or more micronuclei and macronuclei. The micronucleus contains a diploid
set of chromosomes that undergoes meiosis for sexual exchange (a process reviewed
in eAppendix 2). For gene expression, however, one of the micronuclei develops into
a macronucleus that forms hundreds of copies of its DNA. The DNA copies in the macParasomal
sac
ronucleus are rearranged and fragmented to small
segments. The small DNA segments generate a large
number of “telomeres,” chromosome ends. In humans,
telomere shortening is associated with aging; thus, ciliate macronucleus formation provides a model system for
study of human aging (eTopic 20.2).
In ciliates, only macronuclear genes are transcribed to
RNA and translated to protein. When a ciliate reproduces
asexually, the micronucleus undergoes mitosis, whereas
the macronucleus divides by a different mechanism that
is poorly understood. Cell division occurs across the long
axis, necessitating generation of a new oral groove for the
posterior daughter cell and a new cytoproct for the anterior
daughter cell—again, a process poorly understood.
Most ciliates are diploid and never produce haploid
gamete cells. Instead, their sexual reproduction involves
exchange of micronuclei. The two ciliates of a mating pair
exchange haploid micronuclei by conjugation. In conjugation, two cells of opposite mating type form a cytoplasmic bridge and exchange their nuclear products of meiosis
(Fig. 20.34). While the cells connect, the micronucleus
of each cell undergoes meiosis to form four haploid nuclei.
Three out of four of the haploid nuclei disintegrate, as

CHAPTER 20
FIGURE 20.34

A. Conjugating paramecia

EUKARYOTIC DIVERSITY

■

805

B. Conjugation between ciliates
50 μm

Micronucleus (2n)
Macronucleus
MICHAEL ABBEY/VISUALS UNLIMITED

■ Conjugation. A. Two
paramecia conjugating (LM). B. In conjugation,
two paramecia of opposite mating type form
a cytoplasmic bridge. The 2n micronucleus
of each cell undergoes meiosis. Each macronucleus, as well as three out of four meiotic
products, disintegrates. The haploid micronuclei undergo mitosis, forming two daughter
micronuclei. Daughter nuclei from each cell are
exchanged across the cytoplasmic bridge and
then fuse with their respective counterparts,
restoring 2n micronuclei. The micronuclei
fission several times, and one transforms into
a new macronucleus.

■

Conjugation

Meiosis

does the entire macronucleus. The haploid micronuclei
then undergo mitosis, and one of each daughter nuclei is
exchanged across the cytoplasmic bridge. Each transferred
nucleus then fuses with its haploid counterpart, restoring
diploidy. The two cells come apart, and each recombined
micronucleus fissions several times. One of the daughter
micronuclei then transforms into the new macronucleus.
Thought Questions

Three of four meiotic
products disintegrate,
leaving one
micronucleus (n).

Macronuclei disintegrate.

Haploid micronuclei
replicate and
divide (mitosis).

20.8 Compare and contrast the process of conjugation in
ciliates and bacteria (see Chapter 9).

20.9 For ciliates, what are the advantages and limitations of
conjugation, as compared with gamete production?

Stalked ciliates. Some ciliates adhere to a substrate and use

their cilia primarily to obtain prey. Stalked ciliates such as
Stentor and Vorticella have a ring of cilia surrounding a large
mouth (Fig. 20.35A). The ciliary beat is specialized to draw
large currents of water and whatever prey it carries. Stalked
ciliates are commonly found in pond sediment and in wastewater during biological treatment by microbial digestion,
where they are attached to flocs of fi lamentous bacteria.
Another group of stalked ciliates, the suctorians
(Fig. 20.35B), possess cilia for only a short period after a
daughter cell is released by the stalked cell. The daughter
cell swims by ciliary motion until it finds a good habitat in
which to settle, whereupon its cilia are replaced by knobbed
tentacles similar to the filopodia of shelled amebas. Suctorians prey on swimming ciliates such as paramecia.

Dinoflagellates Are Phototrophs
and Predators

Figure
Ch20(fig34)
The dinoflagellates (Dinoflagellata) are a major
group
of
08/05/16
marine phytoplankton, essential to marine food
webs.
Like
Dragonfly Media Group
ciliates, they are highly motile, but instead of
numerous
MICROB4
WWNorton
short cilia, dinoflagellates possess just two long
flagella,

Haploid micronuclei
exchange.

Haploid micronuclei fuse,
becoming diploid (2n).

Micronucleus fissions; one
transforms into macronucleus.

806

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY
B. Acineta (suctorian)

one of which wraps along a crevice encircling the
cell (Fig. 20.36A). Some dinoflagellates possess elaborate hornlike extensions (Fig. 20.36B).
The cell extensions increase the range of nutrient
uptake, and they may deter predation.
Dinoflagellates are secondary or tertiary algae.
They have a chloroplast derived from a red alga,
which in some species was later replaced by a heterokont alga, itself a secondary alga (Fig. 20.36C). Some
dinoflagellates possess carotenoid pigments that confer a red color. Blooms of red dinoflagellates cause the
famous red tide, which may have inspired the biblical story of the plague in which water turns to blood
(Fig. 20.36D). Dinoflagellates release toxins that
can be absorbed by shellfish, poisoning consumers.
The armor-plated appearance of a dinoflagellate
results from its stiff alveolar plates, composed of cellulose (Fig. 20.36C). The complex outer cortex includes various
extrusomes (organelles that extrude a defensive substance) and
endocytic pores, as well as a species-specific pattern of alveolar plates. Dinoflagellates supplement their photosynthesis by
COURTESY OF PETER OMODEO

Oral cilia

FIGURE 20.35

■ Stalked ciliates. A. Stentor, a ciliate with a
flexible stalk, 1.5–2.0 mm in length (phase contrast). The oral ring of
cilia generates currents drawing food into the mouth. B. The suctorian Acineta replaces cilia with knobbed tentacles (LM).

A. Gymnodinium (dinoflagellate)

B. Ceratium sp.

FIGURE 20.36

20 µm

C. Dinoflagellate cell structure
Triple membrane
surrounds
chloroplast.

100 µm

Thylakoids

Nucleolus
Nucleus
Mitochondria

Extrusome
Osmotic vesicle
(expels water)

Flagellum
Transverse flagellum
wraps around cell.

BILL BACHMAN / SCIENCE SOURCE

Alveolus
Plate

■

Dinoflagellates.

A. Gymnodinium sp., a dinoflagellate,
with one of its two flagella wrapped
around the cell (colorized SEM).
B. Ceratium sp., dinoflagellates with
“horns.” C. Diagram of a dinoflagellate. Protective plates of protein or
calcified polysaccharides are formed
within cortical alveoli. The chloroplast
is surrounded by a triple membrane.
D. “Red tide,” caused by a bloom of
dinoflagellates.

DENNIS KUNKEL MICROSCOPY, INC.

DR. DAVID M. PHILLIPS / VISUALS UNLIMITED

COURTESY OF THE OLYMPUS MICROSCOPY RESOURCE CENTER/ HOFFMAN GALLERY

A. Stentor (stalked ciliate)

D. Red tide

CHAPTER 20
CHAPT
0

predation, extending a special type of pseudopod to engulf
lf
prey. Many dinoflagellates have evolved to lose their chlorooplasts altogether, becoming obligate predators or parasites.
Some dinoflagellates inhabit other organisms as endo-symbionts, providing sugars from photosynthesis in
n
exchange for a protected habitat. Their hosts includee
shelled amebas, sponges, sea anemones, and, most imporrtant, reef-building corals. Coral endosymbionts, known as
zooxanthellae (singular, zooxanthella), are vital to reef
growth. The zooxanthellae are temperature sensitive, and
their health is endangered by global warming. Rising temperatures in the ocean lead to coral bleaching (the expulsion of zooxanthellae), after which the coral dies.

■

EUKARYOTIC DIVER
DIVERSITY

■

807

Nucleus

Rhoptry

Red blood
cell

Apical
complex
Endoplasmic
reticulum
Dense
granules

Apicomplexans Are
Specialized Parasites

Apicomplexans include many human parasites, such as the
intestinal parasite Cryptosporidium, which infected hundreds of people in the United States in 2013. Apicomplexan
cells have an apical complex, a highly specialized structure
that facilitates entry of the parasite into a host cell. Another
important apicomplexan is Toxoplasma gondii, a parasite
commonly carried by cats and transmissible to humans,
where it can harm a developing fetus. Like the ciliates and
dinoflagellates, apicomplexans possess an elaborate cortex composed of alveoli, pores, and microtubules. But as
parasites, apicomplexans have undergone extensive reductive evolution, losing their flagella or cilia. They possess a
unique organelle called the apicoplast, derived by genetic
reduction from an endosymbiotic chloroplast. No capacity
for photosynthesis remains, but the apicoplast provides one
essential function in fatty acid metabolism.
The best-known apicomplexan is Plasmodium falciparum,
the main causative agent of malaria, the most important
parasitic disease of humans worldwide. Figure 20.37 shows

Ring stage

10 µm

FIGURE 20.37

■

THE SCRIPPS RESEARCH INSTITUTE

Schizont

Plasmodium falciparum, a cause of malaria.

Red blood cells infected with P. falciparum, which is stained purple
with a dye that interacts with DNA (LM). One late-stage infected
blood cell (schizont) can be seen bursting, unleashing parasites on
surrounding cells.

FIGURE 20.38

■ Merozoite form of Plasmodium falciparum
invades a red blood cell. The apical complex facilitates invasion

and then dissolves as the merozoite transforms into an intracellular
form.

red blood cells in the early “ring stage” of infection, and in
the “schizont” stage, which bursts, releasing progeny parasites. P. falciparum is carried by mosquitoes, which transmit
the parasite to humans when the insect’s proboscis penetrates the skin. The disease is endemic in areas inhabited by
40% of the world’s population; it infects hundreds of millions of people and kills half a million African children each
year.
The transmitted parasites invade the liver and then
develop into the merozoite form that invades red blood
cells (Fig. 20.38). The merozoite first contacts a red blood
cell with its apical complex. The apical complex contains
secretory organelles called rhoptries that inject enzymes
to aid entry by the parasite. The cone-like tip of the apical complex penetrates the host cell, enabling secretion of
lipids and proteins that facilitate invasion. Eventually, the
entire merozoite enters the host cell, leaving no traces of
the parasite on the host cell surface. Thus, the internalized
parasite becomes invisible to the immune system until its
progeny burst out.
P. falciparum acquires resistance rapidly, and many
strains no longer respond to drugs, such as quinine, that
nearly eliminated the disease half a century ago. The life
cycle and molecular properties of P. falciparum have been
studied extensively for clues to aid in the development of

808

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

new antimalarial drugs and vaccines. The elaborate life
cycle of P. falciparum and other apicomplexan parasites
involves several common features:

followed by cell separation). The cell products of schizogony are called merozoites. The merozoites from the liver
then invade red blood cells, where they feed on hemoglobin. An early infected blood cell appears as a “ring
■ Schizogony, mitotic reproduction of a haploid
stage” (Fig. 20.39). The parasite multiplies, filling the
form (in the mammalian host) to achieve a large
host cell, now called a “schizont.” The schizont bursts,
population within a host tissue. Usually, the nuclei
liberating progeny merozoites that invade another round
multiply first, followed by separation of individual
of red cells. The bursting of red blood cells also releases
nucleated cells.
cell fragments that trigger the cyclic fevers characteristic
■ Gamogony, the differentiation of haploid cells into male
of malaria.
and female gametes capable of fertilization.
Some of the merozoites in the bloodstream develop
into
pre-gamete cells, or gametocytes. The gametocytes
■ Mitosis and meiosis of the diploid zygote (within the
are
acquired
by bloodsucking mosquitoes and then mulinsect) turns it into a haploid, spore-like form transmistiply and mature (gamogony) in the mosquito’s midgut.
sible to the next host.
The gametocytes develop into female eggs and thin male
In the case of malaria (Fig. 20.39 ), whip-shaped
cells with flagella (this is the only stage in the apicomsporozoites injected by the mosquito invade the liver,
plexan life cycle that has flagella). The male cells fertilize
where they undergo schizogony (nuclear multiplication
the egg cells, and the resulting zygotes undergo meiosis
and differentiate into sporozoites, which enter the mosquito’s salivary gland for transmission to the next human
host.
The nuclear genome of P.
Red blood cells
falciparum
consists of 24 Mb
3. Merozoites
repeatedly invade
contained in 14 chromosomes.
red blood cells.
Sequence annotation and expression studies predict 5,300
Human
Ring
Schizogony:
liver cells
protein-encoding open readstage
mitosis to form
ing frames (ORFs), comnumerous
merozoites
parable to the number
Schizont
in a yeast genome. The
parasite has lost many
Gamogony:
genes encoding enzymes
mitosis and
maturation
and transporters while
of gametes
2. Sporozoites
expanding its repertoire
4. Gametocytes form
travel to the liver.
and are transmitted
of proteins involved in
Human host
to mosquito.
antigenic diversity. In
Mosquito vector
addition, the parasite
contains two smaller
Female
1. Mosquito salivary gland
gamete
nonnuclear
genomes:
transmits sporozoites to
that of its mitochondria
human bloodstream.
and that of the chloron 2n
n
Male gametes
plast-derived apicoplast.
2n
How can we treat
6. Zygote undergoes
5. Fertilization
malaria and eradicate the
meiosis to form
sporozoites.
disease? The malarial genome
reveals promising targets for
Zygote
drug design. For example, the
fatty acid biosynthesis within the
apicoplast is targeted by triclosan and
other antibiotics. Other promising targets
Oocyst
Mosquito midgut
for antimalarial drugs are the unique proteases
required to digest hemoglobin within the P. falciparum
FIGURE 20.39 ■ Malaria: cycle of Plasmodium falciparum
transmission between mosquito and human.
food vacuole.

CHAPTER 20
B. Leishmania major

To Summarize

■

809

Ciliates are covered with numerous cilia. Cilia provide
motility and help capture prey. Ciliates undergo complex
reproductive cycles involving exchange of micronuclei
through conjugation.
Dinoflagellates are phototrophic predators. Dinoflagellates are tertiary endosymbiotic algae. Their alveoli
contain calcified plates; they have paired flagella, one of
which is used for propulsion. Predation occurs by extension of a lamellar pseudopod.
Apicomplexans are parasites that penetrate host cells.
The apicoplast is a specialized organ for cell penetration.
Apicomplexans such as Plasmodium falciparum conduct
complex life cycles within mammalian and arthropod
hosts.

20.6

Parasitic Protozoa

Surprisingly, many protists harmlessly inhabit the human
gut as commensals. Such commensals include members of diverse clades, such as Entamoeba coli (an ameba),
Blastocystis (a heterokont), and Retortamonas intestinalis
(a metamonad). Such protists might provide positive benefits to their host. Nevertheless, closely related organisms,
such as Entamoeba histolytica, may cause deadly disease.
The previous section introduced apicomplexan parasites
of major importance, especially those that cause malaria.
Other major clades of parasites (and related harmless protozoa) are the trypanosomes and metamonads. The human
intestine harbors many kinds of protozoa, including both
harmless symbionts and deadly parasites.

10 µm

Trypanosomes

5 µm

EYE OF SCIENCE/SCIENCE SOURCE

Trypanosomes.

DENNIS KUNKEL MICROSCOPY, INC.

■

A. Patient suffering from Leishmania infection (leishmaniasis). B. Cluster of L. major
undergoing schizogony within the sand fly
(colorized SEM). C. Trypanosoma brucei, seen
here among red blood cells, cause of African
sleeping sickness (colorized SEM).

■

■

Trypanosome

FIGURE 20.40

■

EUKARYOTIC DIVERSITY

C. Trypanosoma brucei

COURTESY OF CDC/DR. D.S. MARTIN

A. Leishmania infection

■

The group Euglenida includes flagellated protists such as
Euglena, with chloroplasts arising from secondary endosymbiosis. Like other algal protists, euglenas combine photosynthesis and heterotrophic nutrition. The Euglenida,
however, also include a group of obligate parasites called
trypanosomes. Trypanosomes consist of an elongated cell
with a single flagellum. The trypanosome has a unique
organelle called the “kinetoplast,” consisting of a mitochondrion containing a bundle of multiple copies of its circular genome, usually placed near the base of the flagellum.
Trypanosomes cause some of the most gruesome and
debilitating conditions known to humanity, such as leishmaniasis (Fig. 20.40A). Leishmania major (Fig. 20.40B)
causes skin infections that may enter the internal organs. If
untreated, leishmaniasis can lead to swelling and decay of
the extremities (Fig. 20.40A) and eventually death. Carried by sand flies, Leishmania infects 1.5 million people
annually, in South America, Africa and the Middle East,
and southern Europe. Leishmania often infects Americans
serving in Iraq; for this reason, returning veterans from
Iraq are permanently restricted from donating blood.
Another major disease caused by trypanosomes is trypanosomiasis, also known as African sleeping sickness. The
parasite, Trypanosoma brucei (Fig. 20.40C), is carried by
the tsetse fly. T. brucei multiplies in the bloodstream of the
host animal, causing repeated cycles of proliferation and
fever that ultimately lead to death, if untreated. This trypanosome is known for its extraordinary degree of antigenic variation. Its genome includes 200 different active
versions of its variant surface glycoprotein (VSG), the antigen inducing the immune response, as well as 1,600 different “silent” versions that can recombine with “active”
VSG to make further variations. In effect, the trypanosome overwhelms the host immune system by continually

810

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

A.

B.
Central
mitosome

Nucleolus
Nucleus
Peripheral mitosome

DR. TONY BRAIN/SCIENCE SOURCE

Basal body
Median body

2 µm

Adhesive disk

C.

Peripheral
vesicle
Replication

Trophozoite

Flagella
Intestinal
epithelium

Excystation

Nucleus
Nuclei

FIGURE 20.41 ■ Giardia intestinalis (G. lamblia), a diplomonad flagellate and
common intestinal parasite. A. Trophozoite form of Giardia, which attaches to the intes-

Cyst

Encystation

tinal epithelium (colorized SEM). B. The trophozoite form contains two nuclei, four pairs of
flagella, an adhesive disk, and mitosomes (genome-less degenerate mitochondria). C. Under
stress, the trophozoite encysts (differentiates into a cyst) that can survive extended periods
outside the host. Source: Parts B and C modified from Johan Ankarklev. 2010. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 8:413.

generating new antigenic forms until the host repertoire of
antibodies is exhausted. In order to infect its human host,
the trypanosome needs to interconvert among several different forms of its life cycle. The molecular basis of conversion offers targets for drug therapy. An example of research
on the trypanosome life cycle is described in eTopic 20.3.
A related trypanosome, T. cruzi, is carried by reduviid bugs, a kind of blood-feeding insect. T. cruzi causes
Chagas’ disease, a debilitating infection of the heart and
other internal organs. Chagas’ disease is prevalent in South
and Central America, and global warming is expected to
expand its range north.

Metamonads

The Metamonada are another major group of parasites and symbionts. The metamonad parasites include
the diplomonads (named for their double nuclei), such as

Giardia intestinalis (G. lamblia), a common intestinal parasite (Fig. 20.41). Giardia is a frequent nemesis of daycare centers, but it also occurs in freshwater streams visited
by bears and other wildlife. Giardia occasionally contaminates community water supplies in the United States and
has become endemic in major Russian cities. Giardia and
other metamonads are noted for their anaerobic metabolism and their degenerated organelles, reflecting their adaptation to the anaerobic intestinal environment.
The Giardia life cycle alternates between two major
forms: the trophozoite and the dormant cyst. The trophozoite (Fig. 20.41B) has two nuclei (and, therefore, 4n chromosomes). There are four pairs of flagella, and an “adhesive
disk” enabling the parasite to adhere to the intestinal epithelium. The cell body contains no Golgi, and its mitochondria have degenerated to “mitosomes.” Mitosomes lack
mitochondrial genomes. When the trophozoite experiences
stress conditions, such as high levels of bile and a high pH,

CHAPTER 20

C. Balantidium coli

To Summarize
■

■

Trypanosomes include free-living euglenas, as well as
the important parasites Leishmania (cause of leishmaniasis), Trypanosoma brucei (cause of African sleeping sickness), and Trypanosoma cruzi (cause of Chagas’ disease).
Metamonads include parasites such as Giardia
intestinalis, a frequent contaminant of natural freshwater
environments, and frequently transmitted among
children.

5 μm

D. Tubulinosema (microsporidian)

20 μm

FIGURE 20.42

■

811

B. Cryptosporidium parvum

5 μm

CHARLES STRATTON/VISUALS UNLIMITED, INC.

Giardia is just one of many unpleasant intestinal visitors acquired by humans and animals. The ameba Entamoeba histolytica
grows in the human colon, causing amebiasis
(Fig. 20.42A). The disease includes diarrhea
and possible damage to the intestinal wall; in
some cases, the parasite can invade the blood
and internal organs. Worldwide, E. histolytica kills tens of thousands of people per year.
The organism is challenging to diagnose, as it
appears very similar to a harmless ameba, Entamoeba dispar, which grows normally in the
intestine.
The apicomplexan Cryptosporidium parvum (Fig. 20.42B) commonly contaminates
water supplies in the United States; it caused
the nation’s largest waterborne disease outbreak
to date, sickening more than 400,000 people in Milwaukee, in 1993. Cryptosporidium is
especially dangerous to immunocompromised
patients.
An important ciliate parasite is Balantidium
coli (Fig. 20.42C). Balantidium is transmitted by a fecal-oral route, most commonly in malnourished
individuals whose stomach acid is low, thus failing to kill
the pathogen. Infection may be without symptoms, or it
can lead to diarrhea and damage the colon.
Microsporidians (Fig. 20.42D) were once thought to
be protozoa, but genetically and physiologically they are
fungi (see Section 20.2). Encephalitozoon intestinalis is an
obligate fungal parasite of the intestine, causing problems
especially for immunocompromised patients. More discussion of intestinal pathogens is found in Chapters 23 and 26.

■

BIOPHOTO ASSOCIATES/SCIENCE SOURCE

DR. GARY GAUGLER/VISUALS UNLIMITED, INC.

Intestinal Parasites

A. Entamoeba histolytica

EUKARYOTIC DIVERSITY

■

2 μm

EYE OF SCIENCE/SCIENCE SOURCE

the organism encysts (Fig. 20.41C). The cyst
detaches from the intestine and is expelled
from the host. It remains dormant until ingestion by a new host, where stomach acid triggers differentiation into a trophozoite.

■

Human intestinal protozoa.

Other intestinal parasites include the ameba Entamoeba histolytica, the apicomplexan Cryptosporidium
parvum, the ciliate Balantidium coli, and the microsporidian (fungal parasite) Encephalitozoon intestinalis.

Concluding Thoughts
The microbial eukaryotes, including fungi, algae, and many
kinds of protozoa, serve many diverse roles in our ecosystems. A survey of protozoa may leave an impression that
most exist primarily to parasitize humans. However, recent
genetic surveys based on DNA sequence analysis of environmental communities suggest the existence of twice as
many protozoan clades in nature as we have studied to date.
Most of these unknown clades have no direct connection
with humans, yet they may fill crucial niches in the ecosystems on which human existence depends. Chapters 21 and
22 emphasize the interconnections among many kinds of
microbes that form the foundations of Earth’s biosphere.

CHAPTER 21

■

MICROBIAL ECOLOGY

■

815

CHAPTER 21
Microbial Ecology

M

21.1 Metagenomes—and Beyond

icrobes dominate all habitats on Earth, from
the Antarctic Southern Ocean to the human
intestine. Microbial communities form functional components of all plants and animals, including
human beings. While most microbes cannot be cultured, we reveal their secrets by sequencing the DNA
of their metagenomes, and by fluorescence microscopy of their biofilms. For their plant and animal
hosts, microbes provide nutrition, enhance development, and even control behavior. Chapter 21 explores
how microbes interact with each other and with their
many diverse habitats on Earth.

21.2 Functional Ecology
21.3 Symbiosis
21.4 Animal Digestive Microbiomes
21.5 Marine and Freshwater Microbes
21.6 Soil and Plant Microbial Communities

highlight

A N I N T E RV I E W W I T H

Crab farms chemolithoautotrophic bacteria. A male specimen of the yeti crab (Kiwa tyleri) was found at a depth of
2.5 kilometers at the Antarctic Southern Ocean hydrothermal
vents of the East Scotia Ridge. Bacteria (white tufts) grow on
the crab’s legs and pincers. The bacteria oxidize sulfides from
the vent and fix CO2 into biomass. The crab waves its claws
through the vent water but keeps enough distance to avoid
scalding by the superheated fluid. As its bacteria grow, the
crab grazes on them.
Source: Sven Thatje et al. 2015. PLoS One 10:e0127621.

SVEN THATJE, MARINE ECOLOGIST, NATIONAL
OCEANOGRAPHY CENTRE, SOUTHAMPTON

SVEN THATJE, UNIVERSITY OF
SOUTHAMPTON, UK

C U R R E N T R E S E A RC H

Why do chemosynthetic bacteria
associate with the yeti crab? How
does each partner benefit?
The yeti crab Kiwa tyleri feeds entirely
on chemosynthetic bacteria. The
association has not yet been proved to
benefit the bacteria, although the crab
keeps the bacteria within a region of
survivable temperature.

What aspect of the yeti crab ecology do you find most
surprising?
Yeti crabs need the warm water surrounding the hydrothermal vents to survive. The surrounding deep sea is freezing
cold (around 0°C) and crabs cannot survive under such conditions. Their chemosynthetic way of life and the need for
warm water constrains the crabs to a very limited habitat
of a few cubic meters of seawater at each chimney system.

1 cm

815

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

Microbes have evolved to colonize every habitat of our biosphere, including soil, water, air, and the bodies of plants
and animals. The yeti crab characterized by Sven Thatje,
Katrin Linse, and colleagues shows a dramatic example of
microbial interaction with an animal partner (see the Current Research Highlight). The crab exhibits a distinctive
behavior of “dancing” into vent waters to obtain the reduced
nutrients for its bristle bacteria to grow (Fig. 21.1). Katrin
Linse, senior biodiversity biologist at the British Antarctic Survey (Fig. 21.1A), leads an interdisciplinary team
investigating the ecology and biogeochemistry of invertebrate-associated vent microbes (discussed in Section 21.5).
To obtain evidence that the crab actually consumes its
bacteria as food, Linse analyzed the crab tissues for their
isotope ratios (a method introduced in Chapter 17). She
found that the crab’s biomass isotope ratios were consistent with those of the bacteria. The bacteria’s biomass isotope ratios resulted from their mechanisms of CO2 fixation
with chemolithoautotrophy (discussed in Chapter 15). The
crab’s partner chemolithoautotrophs include various species of bacteria, like the Proteobacteria Sulfurovum species of sulfur oxidizers (a form of metabolism described in
Chapter 14). To identify the bacterial species, Linse studied
the crab’s metagenome, the collective DNA sequences of
the crab’s associated bacteria. Metagenomic analysis is our
focus in Section 21.1.
Chapter 21 explores the unique roles of microbes in their
ecosystem. “No man is an island,” nor is any microbe. All
organisms evolve within an ecosystem, which consists of
populations of species plus their habitat or environment. A
population is a group of individuals of one species living
in a common location. The sum of all the populations
of different species constitutes a community. Microbial

DR. KATRIN ZWIRGLMAIER

A.

FIGURE 21.1

communities critically impact other organisms in all habitats, from oceans and forests to the interstices of rock.
Microbes recycle organic material in aquatic and terrestrial
ecosystems, providing resources for plants and animals;
and deep below Earth’s surface, microbes shape the rock of
Earth’s crust.
The first problem of microbial ecology is: How do we
find and identify a habitat’s microorganisms? The great
eighteenth-century taxonomist Carl von Linné (known
also as Carolus Linnaeus) called microbes “chaos” because
he thought we would never be able to distinguish one from
another (see Chapter 1). In the nineteenth century, Robert
Koch developed techniques of pure culture, and Sergei
Winogradsky developed enrichment culture methods that
isolate microbial species and reveal their metabolic traits
(discussed in Chapters 1 and 4). Yet the vast majority of
microbes remain uncultured, and perhaps undiscovered. In
2015, a single publication by Jill Banfield’s group revealed
35 new phyla, expanding the domain of all known bacteria
by 15% (see Chapter 18).
To find the microbes in a particular habitat, we need
specialized tools. Section 21.1 begins with the tools of
metagenomic analysis—and beyond, the new emerging
tools of microbial ecology. In subsequent sections, we evaluate the functions of those microbes in their habitats and
microbiomes, including symbioses with partner animals
and plants, as well as the larger communities found in the
oceans and Earth’s crust.

Note:

This chapter presents the interactions of microbes and
partner organisms within communities. Chapter 22 presents the
role of microbes in global fluxes of nutrients and climate change.

B.

C.

100 µm

100 µm

■ Bacteria farmed by a crab. A. Katrin Linse studies the hydrothermal vent ecosystem. B. Bristles (setae) of Kiwa sp. crab
from East Scotia Ridge, Southern Ocean. C. Epibiotic (surface-colonizing) bacteria revealed by SYBR green fluorescent stain for DNA.

KATRIN ZWIRGLMEIER, ET. AL. 2015. MICROBIOLOGY OPEN 4:136.

■

KATRIN ZWIRGLMEIER, ET. AL. 2015. MICROBIOLOGY OPEN 4:136.

816

CHAPTER 21

21.1

Metagenomes—and Beyond

A major breakthrough in microbial ecology was the discovery that we can identify uncultured microbes by their
DNA. In 1991, one of the first to sequence genes from
environmental samples was Norman Pace, then at Indiana
University, who cloned ribosomal RNA genes from plankton (floating microbes) filtered from the Pacific Ocean.
The small-subunit (SSU) rRNA sequence became the
standard for identifying environmental taxa (discussed in
Chapter 17). But SSU rRNA is just one highly conserved
gene, which tells us little about the rest of the organism.
In 1998, Jo Handelsman and colleagues, then at the University of Wisconsin–Madison, used shotgun sequencing
to analyze large portions of genomes from a soil microbial community—a mixture of species that was previously thought impossible to interpret. Handelsman coined
the term “metagenome” to refer to the DNA sequence
obtained directly from a mixture of genomes.

■

MICROBIAL ECOLOGY

■

817

Today, with advanced sequencing technologies, we are
addressing exciting questions:
■

Who is there? What microbes inhabit a given environment or human body part?

■

What are they doing? What function do the microbes
contribute? Do they fix carbon, break down toxic waste,
or produce antibiotics?

■

How do the microbes vary under different conditions? As climate changes, what happens to the microbial community structure of forests and soil?

Examples of metagenomic studies are listed in
Table 21.1. For instance, in 2013 an international consortium sequenced the metagenome of human intestinal microbiomes from 207 individuals in three countries.
They found that individual gut microbiomes show distinctive species profiles that are stable over time. This finding
suggests that understanding individual microbiomes could
help fine-tune drug therapies for different patients.

TABLE 21.1+Examples of Metagenomes
Microbial target
community

Discovery

Sequencing analysis

Reference

Rumen microbiome
of fistulated cows fed
switchgrass

Assembled 15 bacterial genomes with
27,700 carbohydrate-digesting enzymes.

Genome libraries; Illumina
sequencing by synthesis.

Matthias Hess et al. 2011.
Science 331:463.

Human gut microbiomes
of 22 individuals from
four countries

Microbial genomes vary with human age;
taxa clusters are shared by all human
subjects.

Genome libraries; ABI
capillary sequencer.

Manimozhiyan Arumugam
et al. 2011. Nature 473:174.

Antarctic and Arctic
microbial mats

Antarctic mats show more osmotic
stress genes, while Arctic mats show
more copper response (pollution related).

Roche 454 pyrosequencer;
MG-RAST functional
annotation.

Thibault Varin et al. 2012.
Appl. Environ. Microbiol.
78:549.

Soils sampled from Antarctic
desert, hot desert, and
temperate regions

Desert soil genomes show more
osmotic stress genes but fewer
antibiotic resistance genes than
nondesert genomes.

10 Mb per sample, Illumina
sequenced; MG-RAST
functional annotation.

Noah Fierer et al. 2012.
PNAS 209:21390.

Human gut microbiomes
of 207 individuals from
three countries

High coverage reveals within-species
1.5 terabases (1012 base
variation; human individuals possess
pairs); Illumina sequenced.
distinct microbial strains, stable over time.
May lead to personalized chemotherapies.

Siegfried Schloissnig et al.
2013. Nature 493:45.

Global ocean microbiome
sampled at 68 locations

Ocean microbial catalog compiled; core
genes vary with depth and temperature.

7.2 terabases, Illumina
sequenced; MOCAT
assembly.

Shinichi Sunagawa et al.
2015. Science 348:1261359.

River sediments, Rifle,
Colorado

Rare organisms (<0.1%) in new candidate
phyla detected from diverse communities.

Illumina: multi-kb reads
compared to short reads.
Long-read sequencing
improves genome assembly.

Itai Sharon et al. 2015.
Genome Res. 25:534.

Coal-based methane wells,
Queensland, Australia

Archaeal phylum Bathyarchaeota contains
previously unknown methanogens.

Illumina sequence;
MetaBAT multisample
assembly reveals referenceindependent genomes.

Paul Evans et al. 2015.
Science 350:435.

818

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

Sampling the Environment

Metagenomic sequencing poses challenges far beyond
those of sequencing a single intact genome. To sequence a
metagenome requires a series of steps, each of which presents important choices. Our first choice is to define a
target community from which to obtain DNA. Extreme
environments offer attractive targets because their communities often show low diversity (thus a less complex metagenome) and because the native microbes are likely to show
novel traits. Such environments may pose safety threats for
researchers; for example, the acid mine drainage site sampled
by Banfield (Fig. 21.2A) is acidic enough to dissolve an iron
shovel. Nonetheless, Banfield sequenced community DNA
including the genome of the hyperacidophile Leptospirillum
(Fig. 21.2B). Other target communities require interaction

Sampling the target community. Sequencing a metage-

nome requires several steps (Fig. 21.3). The cells of the
target community must be separated from their surroundings without loss of DNA (Fig. 21.3, step 1). For example,
sampling a soil community requires removal of humic acids
(wood breakdown products), which inhibit DNA polymerases. Suppose the target community inhabits a host plant
or animal; what additional separation is required? Before
DNA extraction, we need to dislodge host-associated
microbes from their host. Otherwise, the host DNA could
contaminate the microbial DNA pool.

B.

1 μm

FIGURE 21.2

2 μm

■ Sampling a target community of microbes. A. Jillian
Banfield samples “pink slime” of archaea growing in acid mine drainage at
Iron Mountain, California, one of the largest Superfund cleanup sites.
B. Leptospirillum sp., bacteria whose genome emerged out of Banfield’s
metagenomic analysis. C. An undergraduate student samples rumen contents
from a fistulated (cannulated) cow. The closable opening (see the plug sitting
on the cow’s back) does not harm the animal. D. Ruminococcus albus bacteria
digest plant fibers within the rumen of a cow.

DENNIS KUNKEL MICROSCOPY, INC./VISUALS UNLIMITED, INC.

D.

PROFESSOR MIGUEL LICONA, NEW MEXICO STATE UNIVERSITY

C.

Filtering the sample. A different problem arises

CHRISTOPHER BELNAP/UC BERKELEY

PAUL WILMES, UC BERKELEY

A.

with a host animal, such as the rumen (fermentation organ)
of a cow (Fig. 21.2C and D). The microbes associated with
a host animal or plant are called the microbiome. Every
multicellular organism possesses a microbiome.

when sampling a large, dilute target community,
such as an ocean. Which community interests
you—the protists and small invertebrates? the bacteria and archaea? the viruses? If you sample the
entire community, one fraction may yield most of
the DNA but overwhelm other community members. To manage the complexity, you may decide
to fi lter or fractionate the target community
(Fig. 21.3, step 2). Filtering can be physical—for
example, by pore size or by cell sorting through
flow cytometry. But bacteria, protists, and even
viruses may overlap considerably in size. Alternatively, later, after we’ve sequenced the DNA, we
can use “computational fi ltration” to eliminate
sequences. For example, when we are focusing on
bacteria, we can fi lter out the sequences known
to come from protists. However, computational
fi ltering may also exclude bacterial sequences of
interest because they are new and match nothing
reported before in the databases. Every procedure
has trade-offs.
Isolating DNA. Once separated from the physical

habitat, the cells of the target community must be
opened in such a way that all of the DNA is released
with minimal breakage of the strands (Fig. 21.3,
step 3). We can lyse the cells by “bead beating” or
by sonication (methods discussed in Chapter 3).
The DNA can then be purified by precipitation
with phenol and ethanol, or by binding to special
fi lters. But—unlike the analysis of a single-species
genome—for a metagenome we must account for
different species that possess different kinds of
enzyme inhibitors, as well as envelope, sheath, and
S-layers of diverse composition.

CHAPTER 21

■

MICROBIAL ECOLOGY

■

819

How can we ensure that our protocol will be optimal for
all the thousands of species in the community? In fact, no
single best way exists to extract metagenomic DNA. Different researchers argue for one of two main approaches:

1. Sampling the microbial
target community

■

Use a single, universally applied method of DNA
extraction for all target communities. If all research
groups sample metagenomes using a common DNA
extraction method, then results may be compared across
all projects.

■

Use multiple DNA extraction methods for each target. If a research group uses multiple DNA extraction
methods to sample one target community, then they
have the best chance to maximize coverage of all the
microbial genomes in the sample.

2. Filtering the sample

3. Breaking open cells
and isolating DNA

Thought Question

21.1 Suppose you are conducting a metagenomic analysis of
soil sampled from different parts of a wetland. Your budget
for soil analysis covers only ten sample analyses. Would you
use one DNA extraction method or multiple methods?

4. Cloning DNA fragments
or amplifying by PCR

Metagenome Sequencing and Assembly

© 2016 ILLUMINA, INC. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.

5. Reading the DNA
sequence

6. Building scaffolds and
assembling genomes

FIGURE 21.3 ■ Sequencing a metagenome. Select a target
community to sample, from a habitat such as soil, water, or host
plant or animal. Remove the sampled microbes from their environment (step 1) and filter the desired class of organisms (step 2). Lyse
the cells and isolate pure, intact DNA (step 3). Copy the DNA, either
by cloning or by PCR amplification (step 4). Read the DNA sequence
using a high-throughput sequencer (step 5). Use computational
software to build scaffolds and assemble genomes (step 6).
Source: John Wooley et al. 2010. PLoS Computational Biol. 6:e1000667.

Once the DNA samples are obtained, how do we sequence
them? In most cases, the sample DNA must be amplified
(Fig. 21.3, step 4) followed by high-throughput sequencing (step 5). The choice of sequencing method depends on
several factors.
■

DNA concentration. How concentrated are the DNA
samples relative to other cell components? Samples such
as a human tissue biopsy, or groundwater, will contain
DNA in such small quantities that it must be amplified.
Amplification is achieved by cloning or PCR, either of
which can introduce sequence errors and sample loss.

■

Sample diversity. Species in the community may differ in their fractional representation by several orders of
magnitude. How important are the community’s rarest
members? This question is hard to answer without first
taking a trial run at the genome to establish a rarefaction
curve (discussed shortly).

■

Functional interest. Is our aim a complete description
of the target community, such as the microbiota inhabiting the human stomach? Or do we focus on a narrower goal, such as identifying soil actinomycete genes
that produce novel antibiotics? A narrower focus allows
quicker analysis of the DNA—unless those organisms
are among the community’s rarer members.

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

Assessing diversity. Before investing in large-scale DNA

sequencing, we may perform a preliminary screen for
sequence diversity of the sample by sequencing amplified
SSU rRNA genes (discussed in Chapter 17). For bacteria or
archaea, this process is commonly called 16S rRNA amplicon analysis or iTAG analysis. (For eukaryotic microbes,

SAUL LOEB/AFP/GETTY IMAGES

A.

B.

100%

Nonplume
(May)

Plume
(May)

Plume
(June)

Plume
(Sept.)

Relative abundance

80%
60%
40%
20%
0%

Oceanospirillales
Other
Cyanobacteria
Chloroflexi
Actinobacteria
Planctomycetes
SAR406
Other Bacteroidetes
Flavobacteriales
Deltaproteobacteria
Other Alphaproteobacteria

18S rRNA primers would be used.) An advantage of 16S
rRNA amplicon sequencing is that we may quickly identify
many taxa present in a community, including relatively rare
members that do not yield full genomes when large-scale
sequencing is performed. SSU rRNA gene similarity is used
to defi ne operational taxonomic units (OTUs), a working metagenomic defi nition of “species.” SSU rRNA gene
sequencing reveals the general categories of microbes found
in a community, their relative abundance in a community,
and the overall diversity of the sample.
An example of diversity analysis was an assessment of seawater following the Deepwater Horizon oil well blowout,
which released 4 million barrels of oil into the Gulf of Mexico in 2010 (Fig. 21.4; eTopic 21.1). During several months
that followed the spill, Molly Redmond and David Valentine from UC Santa Barbara sampled microbes from Gulf
seawater. They used PCR to amplify 16S rRNA, as well as
genes from water contaminated by the plume of oil rising
from the leak and from uncontaminated Gulf seawater. The
collection of amplified sequences shows the relative abundance of various marine taxa at different times after the spill
(Fig. 21.4B). A sample of nonplume (uncontaminated)
water, taken in May, showed a broad range of diverse taxa,
including Proteobacteria, Cyanobacteria, and Bacteroidetes.
By contrast, samples of oil-contaminated water, taken in
May and again in June, showed a marked shift to particular taxa: a novel clade of Oceanospirillales (bright blue bars),
and the genus Colwellia (blue-gray bars), a benthic gammaproteobacterium that catabolizes propane and benzene. By
September, when the most digestible parts of the oil had dissipated, the range of diversity had been partly restored.
In assessing diversity, how much DNA do we need to
sequence? How do we know how much of the actual diversity our sampled SSU rRNA reads represent? We can estimate the degree of diversity sampled by using a rarefaction
curve (Fig. 21.5). A rarefaction curve plots the number of

Colwellia
SAR11
Rhodobacterales
Other Gammaproteobacteria
Cycloclasticus
Other Oceanospirillales
DWH Oceanospirillales
Colwellia
Methylophilaceae
Methylophaga
Methylococcaceae

FIGURE 21.4 ■ Bacterial diversity shifts following the Deepwater Horizon oil spill. A. Petroleum from the Deepwater Horizon

1,000
Species observed

820

Urban air
microbial
community

750

Soil-1

Soil-2

500
Water

250

Indoor air-1
0

Indoor air-2

well blowout in 2010 contaminated the Louisiana coast. B. Bacterial
relative abundance in 16S rRNA genome libraries. Samples were
obtained from the plume of oil spreading through seawater, and
from nonplume seawater. During May and June, major taxa shifted
to oil-consuming Oceanospirillales and Colwellia. By September,
after bacteria had consumed much of the oil, the taxon distribution
appeared more similar to that before the oil spill. Source: Modified from

FIGURE 21.5

Molly C. Redmond and David L. Valentine. 2012. PNAS 109:20292–20297.

Source: Modified from Susannah Tringe et al. 2008. PLoS One 3:e1862.

0

500

1,000 1,500 2,000 2,500 3,000 3,500
Clones sequenced

■ Rarefaction curves of indoor air, outdoor
soil, and river water were sampled from Singapore.

Rarefaction curves show the number of species, or OTUs, found as
a function of the number of clones sequenced for the metagenome.

CHAPTER 21

■

MICROBIAL ECOLOGY

■

821

different OTUs (species) found, as a Alignment of short reads
function of increasing sample size. If
ACGCGATTCAGGTTACCACG
GCGATTCAGGTTACCACGCG
resampling continues to reveal new
GATTCAGGTTACCACGCGTA
OTUs, then the community diverTTCAGGTTACCACGCGTAGC
CAGGTTACCACGCGTAGCGC
sity has not yet been fully sampled.
GGTTACCACGCGTAGCGCAT
Aligned
reads
On the other hand, if the number
TTACCACGCGTAGCGCATTA
of OTUs reaches a plateau, then the
ACCACGCGTAGCGCATTACA
CACGCGTAGCGCATTACACA
community diversity may be well
CGCGTAGCGCATTACACAGA
represented. Figure 21.5 shows
CGTAGCGCATTACACAGATT
TAGCGCATTACACAGATTAG
rarefaction curves for metagenomes
Consensus
contig
A
C
G
C
G
A
T
T
C
A
G
G
T
T
A
C
C
A
C
G
C
G
TAGCGCATTACACAGATTAG
from samples of urban office interiors (indoor air-1, indoor air-2) compared to those from nearby samples
Reference genome sequence
of soil and river water (soil-1, soil-2,
water). Indoor air microbiology is
of interest because indoor microbes
may colonize human occupants—
and because human occupants may
“mark” the room with their own
Aligned
telltale microbes. In Figure 21.5, reads
the curves for outdoor soil and
water show a continual increase in
OTUs with resampling, implying
high diversity beyond the samples
Contigs
obtained. However, the indoor air
samples approach a plateau after
about 2,500 clones. Thus, the
Gap of known length
indoor-air microbial diversity is well
Scaffold
represented by the air samples.
FIGURE 21.6 ■ Assembly of reads into contigs and scaffolds. Overlapping reads
A limitation is that SSU rRNA
generate a contig. Contigs matched to a reference genome generate a scaffold. Scaffolds may
sequences show taxa only down to still contain gaps of unknown sequence.
the level of genus. Furthermore, the
so-called “universal” primers for
read, and the accuracy of the sequence (discussed in Chapbacteria and archaea miss many uncharacterized taxa, such
ter 7). The classic sequencing method, ABI capillary technolas the ultrasmall bacteria discovered by Banfield in subogy, is based on Sanger dye termination. Sanger sequencing
surface water (discussed in Chapter 18). An improvement
provides the longest sequence reads (600–900 bp) and the
over single-gene analysis is to select a collection of marker
most accurate base calls. But Sanger sequencing is impractical
genes that are widespread in numerous taxa, and then comfor the high volumes required for metagenomes. The method
bine the data to achieve a consensus diversity survey. Such
of choice for metagenome sequencing is Illumina sequenctools, however, require large-scale DNA sequence informaing by synthesis (described in Chapter 7). Illumina generates
tion, comparable to the sequence volumes required for full
short sequence reads (150–300 bp) but offers a 1,000-fold
metagenomes.
greater volume of data for comparable cost. The shorter reads
are more challenging to assemble, typically requiring largescale computation on a supercomputer (discussed next).
Thought Question

21.2 Could you use DNA sequences to identify human
occupants of a room, based on the room’s airborne microbiome?
For background, read James Meadow, 2015, PeerJ 3:e1258.

Sequencing technologies. Different methods of DNA

sequencing (Fig. 21.3, step 5) differ with respect to the
amount of PCR amplification, the length of the sequence

Assembling genomes. Once we obtain a large volume of
Illumina DNA sequence (typically from 109 to 1012 bp),
how do we assemble the short reads into genomes
(Fig. 21.3, step 6)? Recall from Chapter 7 that reading the
genome of a single organism requires assembly of overlapping fragments into contigs, regions of contiguous DNA
sequence without gaps (Fig. 21.6). If the contigs show
high relatedness to the genome of a known organism, this

822

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

developed by a team at Keio University. One
common technique is to align the contigs and
scaffolds with known reference genomes.
Gap between
scaffolds
Reference genomes can be effective at
“pulling out” genomes of organisms present in low abundance.
An example of a metagenome study
is offered by the cow rumen microbiome, a highly diverse community
sequenced by Matthias Hess and colleagues at the Joint Genome Institute (see Table 21.1). Hess’s study
yielded 15 partial genomes (OTUs)
ranging from 60% to 93% estimated
completeness; 12 are listed in Figure 21.7. The completeness of each
genome was estimated from the number of “core genes” identified. Core
genes are defined as those genes found
in nearly all members of a given taxonomic order, such as the order Clostridiales
for the group of genomes (genome bin) APb
(highlighted row in Fig. 21.7). The fraction of
the core genes found, divided by those expected
for the order, gives an estimate of completeness of
the genome sequence.
The OTUs that Hess found, however, account for only
a tiny fraction of the species present, out of 268 gigabases
(billions of base pairs) sequenced. Each partial genome
assembled from the rumen community represents a bin—
that is, a set of sequence reads from closely related members
of one taxonomic unit, showing a given level of similarity. Since no two individual organisms possess exactly the
same sequence, the investigator must decide how much difference to allow in defining a taxon. Binning, the sorting
of sequences into taxonomic bins, requires further computational analysis. Factors for computation may include, for
example, similarity of base composition and similarity to
reference database sequences.
Figure 21.7 shows an example of a binned partial
genome, APb, as a ring composed of scaffolds matched to
a Clostridiales reference genome. Between the scaffolds,
there remain unsequenced gaps. In the wheel, the jagged
trace represents the degree of coverage—that is, the number of sequence reads that cover a given region. Multiple
copies of overlapped sequence represent a reliable assembly; typically, 30-fold coverage is considered good. But the
remainder of the rumen sequences are unattached scaffolds and single-copy reads out of thousands of unknown
genomes. These unattached sequences encode tens of thousands of novel enzymes for carbohydrate digestion, and are
of great interest to the biofuel industry.

Number of
sequence reads
Genome bin APb
55 scaffolds
2.41 Mb
Genome Genome
bin
size (Mb)
AFa
AMa
AIa
AGa
AN
AJ
AC2a
AWa
AH
AQ
AS1a
APb

FIGURE 21.7

2.87
2.21
2.53
3.08
2.02
2.24
2.07
2.02
2.52
1.91
1.75
2.41

Scaffold

Phylogenetic
order

Estimated
completeness

Spirochaetales
Spirochaetales
Clostridiales
Bacteroidales
Clostridiales
Bacteroidales
Bacteroidales
Clostridiales
Bacteroidales
Bacteroidales
Clostridiales
Clostridiales

92.98%
91.23%
90.10%
89.77%
78.50%
75.96%
75.96%
75.77%
75.45%
71.36%
70.99%
64.85%

Partial genomes assembled from a cow
rumen microbiome. Map of genome bin APb (order Clostridi■

ales) showing assembled scaffolds. Inner rings indicate fold coverage (number of sequence reads) backward and forward; red lines
indicate 25-fold coverage. Center: Genome bins were matched to
orders by comparison with reference sequences. Source: Modified from
Matthias Hess et al. 2011. Science 331:463.

reference genome may be used to match contigs together
in scaffolds containing gaps of presumed length. In effect,
the assembly of contigs resembles a jigsaw puzzle with
thousands of pieces. But a metagenome requires assembly
of thousands of jigsaw puzzles, whose pieces are all jumbled
together. In practice, metagenomes rarely yield complete
genomes of individual species, but they can yield partial
genomes of previously unknown organisms with interesting properties. These partial genomes are called operational taxonomic units (OTUs).
Genome assembly requires a computational pipeline,
a linear series of programs that combine mathematical
tools with biological assumptions to propose assembled
genomes. A mathematical tool commonly used is the de
Bruijn graph, which compiles overlaps between sequences
of symbols. One of the first pipelines to use the de Bruijn
graph approach for metagenomes is MetaVelvet assembler,

CHAPTER 21
Limitations of metagenomic analysis. Metagenomic analy-

sis is limited by the challenge of assigning DNA sequence
reads correctly to their shared genomes. All computational
pipelines must choose assumptions about binning, sequence
gaps, and other sequence characteristics. For this reason,
different pipelines often predict different partial genomes.
An improvement is the method of long-read assembly, in
which portions of sample DNA are isolated and Illuminasequenced separately and then the sequences are assembled
into long reads for further assembly into OTUs. Long-read
Illumina assembly improves accuracy and reveals rare community members that would otherwise be missed because
of low sequence coverage. For example, long-read assembly
enabled Jill Banfield’s group to sequence genomes of rare
Chloroflexi and Deltaproteobacteria with unusual metabolic properties (see Table 21.1).
Another limitation is that pipelines based on reference
genomes restrict the genomes discovered to close relatives of
known organisms. New pipelines aim to discover new kinds
of taxa by reference-independent approaches; an example
is the MetaBAT pipeline developed by Zhong Wang and
colleagues at the Joint Genome Institute. MetaBAT bins
taxa based on the relative abundance of reads from multiple
samples of a target community. The assumption is that different samples contain slightly different proportions of each
species in the community; thus, a given genome will have
scaffolds present in the same abundance within one sample
but a different abundance in a different sample. For Paul
Evans and colleagues, the MetaBAT pipeline revealed a
new clade of methanogens growing in Australian gas wells
(see Table 21.1).
A modification of metagenomic analysis is that of singlecell genome sequencing. In this approach, single cells from
a microbial community are isolated by fluorescent cell sorting or by a microfluidic chamber. The DNA from a single
cell is then amplified by a special kind of PCR called multiple displacement amplification (MDA). The MDA-amplified genome is then sequenced by Illumina and assembled as
a single genome. Thus, in single-cell sequencing (described
in Chapter 7), multiple genomes from a community are isolated and assembled separately, without needing to sort out
a polymicrobial mixture of DNA.

Thought Question

21.3 Suppose you plan to sequence a marine metagenome

for the purpose of understanding carbon dioxide fixation and
release, to improve our model for global climate change. Do
you focus your resources on assembling as many complete
genomes as possible, or do you focus on identifying all the
community’s enzymes of carbon metabolism?

■

MICROBIAL ECOLOGY

■

823

Functional Annotation

Once we have our metagenomic DNA sequence reads
organized into scaffolds and partial genomes, how do we
“call” the genes? No single method works best to ensure
that we recognize all the actual genes encoding functional products—or that we don’t mistakenly define some
noncoding sequences as genes (false positives). Many bioinformatic tools are used to call genes. Some approaches
include:
■

Gene structure. The six reading frames are searched for
start and stop codons that bracket sequences of appropriate length to encode proteins (open reading frames, or
ORFs). To be transcribed and translated to a functional
product, each ORF must have an upstream promoter
sequence, as well as a ribosomal start site (discussed in
Chapters 8 and 10).

■

Homologs and motifs. The metagenomic reads may
match homologs of related genes from databases of
previously sequenced organisms. In addition, the databases include short, recurring peptide sequences called
“motifs” that are common to functional classes of
proteins.

■

Comparison with previously processed metagenomes. Metagenome comparison is particularly useful in the clinical setting, where diagnostic tests aim to
compare the microbiomes of diseased patients with a reference collection of “normal” human microbiomes.

Note that all of these gene-calling (annotation)
approaches are incomplete because they miss truly novel
genes for which no homologs or motifs exist in the databases. Nonetheless, functional genes offer a basis for
comparing two microbial communities. An example of a
comparative overview of functional genes is shown in Figure 21.8. This figure compares the abundance of functional gene categories between microbes from desert soils
and nondesert soils. Functional categories were determined
from Illumina-sequenced metagenomes using the MGR AST pipeline (Argonne National Laboratory), which
assigns functions to genes based on sequence comparison with a functional gene reference database. The most
striking difference between the two is that the desert soil
genomes contain far fewer genes for virulence and defense,
such as antibiotic production and resistance. This finding confirms that microbes in deserts are more isolated
than those in moist soil communities; thus, the survival of
desert microbes depends less on competition with fellow
microbes than on the ability to tolerate extreme conditions
of dryness. On the other hand, the desert genomes encode
a greater number of products for protein metabolism.
This finding suggests that growth under deprivation may

824

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

20
Desert soils
Nondesert soils

18
16

% of reads

14
12
10
8
6
4
2

C

of

ac

to

rs

,v

ita

C
el
ld

Am

in
o

ac

id
s

an

d

de

ivi Ca riva
sio rb
ti
C
m lus C n a ohy ves
e
in
s, ter ll w nd drat
pr ing a ce es
os -b ll a ll
th as nd cy
et ed c cle
ic
a
gr sub ps
Fa
ou s ule
D
tty
p ys
o
ac rm DN s, p tem
Iro ids anc A igm s
n , li y a me e
ac pi
n t n
qu ds d s abo ts
, a p li
M
i
s
et
iti nd or sm
ab
on i ul
a
s
ol
ism M and opr tion
en
e
m
of m
o
Ph
ar bra eta ids
ag
om n bo
es
at e tr lism
,p
ic an
ro
co sp
M
ph
o
til M mp ort
ag
i
i
t
s
es N
y
c ou
, t uc N an ell nd
a s
d
ra
ns leo itrog ch neo
po sid e em u
sa es n m o s
t
bl
e and eta axis
Ph ele nu bol
os me cle ism
ph nts o
or , p tid
us la es
s
Po P me mid
ta ho tab s
ss to ol
Re
i
gu P ium syn sm
la ro m the
tio te et s
n in ab is
an m ol
d eta ism
ce b
ll s olis
ig m
n
Se RN Re alin
co A spi g
nd m rat
ar eta ion
y
Vi
m bol
ru
S
e is
le
t
r
nc
es tab m
e, Su s oli
di lfu res sm
se r
p
as me on
e, ta se
an bo
d lis
de m
fe
ns
e

0

FIGURE 21.8

■ Functional gene categories: relative abundance compared between desert and nondesert soils. Highlighted
categories denote significant differences in abundance of genes in functional categories. Sixteen desert soil samples from hot deserts and
Antarctic cold deserts were compared with seven nondesert soils from forests and grasslands. (Error bars represent standard error of the
mean.) Source: Modified from Noah Fierer. 2012. PNAS 109:21390, fig. 3.

require a greater range of metabolic options for growth of
cell biomass.

Beyond the Metagenome

Metagenomics is our most powerful tool to identify the
microbes that inhabit an ecosystem. Yet serious limitations remain. In a study of soil in an apple orchard, Jo
Handelsman and colleagues compared the sampling rate
of a metagenomic screen versus plate culture. For isolation
of the soil community, they used a sophisticated culture
medium tailored to support growth of bacteria from the
rhizosphere (associated with plant roots) and to exclude
fast-growing fungi. From the same locations, the researchers sequenced the metagenome. To their surprise, the
metagenomes failed to detect more than 60% of the cultured bacteria.
How could these cultured organisms be missed in the
metagenome? The researchers hypothesize that the cultured organisms represent organisms of the “rare biosphere”—that is, species of such low abundance in the
soil that the metagenomic screen does not pick them up.
But upon culturing, these rare organisms are favored by

the sudden provision of concentrated nutrients—a condition that inhibits the more abundant soil organisms, many
of which are oligotrophs (discussed in Chapter 4). These
“copiotrophs” or “weed organisms” may normally be rare
but prevail when nutrients suddenly appear. Even our latest
advances, like long-read assembly and primer-independent
sequencing, surely miss unknown numbers of species.
Another question unanswered by metagenomes is the
spatial organization and interaction of microbes within a
habitat. However, the sequence data can be used to construct probes to answer such questions. A key technique
combines probes derived from sequencing with fluorescence microscopy, called fluorescence in situ hybridization, or FISH (Fig. 21.9A). The technique makes use
of a fluorophore-labeled oligonucleotide probe (usually a
short DNA sequence) that hybridizes to microbial DNA or
rRNA. Hybridizing to rRNA increases sensitivity because
rRNA is present in approximately 100-fold to 10,000-fold
excess over DNA. In a typical procedure, the cells of a sample are fixed to a slide (Fig. 21.9A, step 1) by a chemical
treatment that maintains cell integrity while permeabilizing the cell so that the fluorophore-labeled DNA probe
can enter (step 2). Next, the fixed cells are incubated in a

CHAPTER 21

■

MICROBIAL ECOLOGY

■

825

A.
Target (ribosomal RNA)
1. Cells are
fixed to a slide.

Probe

2. Fixed cells are
permeabilized.

Fluorophore

5. Cells containing hybridized
probes are identified and
enumerated by fluorescence
microscopy.

Fluorescently labeled
oligonucleotides
(probes)

Hybridized
cells

rRNA in
ribosome

4. Unbound probe
molecules are washed away.

3. Fluorophore-labeled DNA
probe hybridizes to rRNA.
B.

ADRIEN VIGNERON ET AL. 2013. ISME J. 7:1595.

Methane-oxidizing
archaea

Sulfate-reducing
bacteria

FIGURE 21.9

10 μm

hybridization buffer containing the probe, at a temperature
designed to maximize specificity of binding to the sequence
of the desired taxa (step 3). A probe with broad specificity
might hybridize to all bacterial rRNA, but not to archaeal
or eukaryotic rRNAs. For greater specificity, a probe may
have a sequence complementary to a sequence found only
in rRNA of a given bacterial taxon. Following hybridization and a wash (step 4), the cells containing hybridized
probes are observed by fluorescence microscopy (step 5).
Figure 21.9B shows an example of FISH used to reveal
the deep-sea methanotrophic consortium that oxidizes
90% of the methane emitted by methanogens—a major

■

Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH).

A. Fluorophore-labeled DNA oligonucleotide hybridizes to a
taxon-specific sequence of rRNA molecules within bacteria that
are fixed and permeabilized on a microscope slide. B. Syntrophy
between anaerobic methane-oxidizing archaea (green FISH) and
sulfate-reducing bacteria (red FISH). From deep-sea cold seep,
Guaymas Basin. Source: Part A modified from Rudolf Amann and Bernhard
M. Fuchs. 2008. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 6:339, fig. 1.

contribution to global climate (discussed in Chapter 22).
The target consists of a mixed biofilm of anaerobic methane-oxidizing archaea (ANME) and sulfate-reducing bacteria (SRB), obtained from a methane seep at the Guaymas
Basin in the Gulf of California, located 2 km below sea level.
The biofilm was labeled with oligonucleotide fluorescent
probes specific for ANME (red) and for bacteria (green).
The FISH image shows the two kinds of cells grouped
together in a remarkably regular pattern. The organization
of these cells facilitates their syntrophy, enabling ANME to
transfer electrons from methane to SRB, which reduce sulfate to sulfide.

826

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

Beyond metagenomes, how do we know which genes
are actually expressed by the target community? Emerging
technologies sample not just the DNA, but also the RNA
and protein pools of a community. Metatranscriptomics
is the study of the RNA transcripts (or RNAseq) obtained
from an environmental community. The “metatranscriptome” gives a snapshot of gene expression activity of a community at a given point in time. A metatranscriptome of a
marine water community will be presented in Section 21.2.
Metaproteomics is the study of proteins synthesized by
environmental samples and cultures.

Note:

Microbial ecology is an interdisciplinary enterprise
that uses methods presented throughout this book, such as fluorescence microscopy (Chapter 2), enriched medium (Chapter 4),
metagenome sequencing (Chapter 7), isotope labeling (Chapter 13), and molecular phylogeny (Chapter 17). Additional methods,
such as gel electrophoresis, are described in eAppendix 3.

To Summarize
■

■

■

■

■

■

■

A metagenome is the sum total of all DNA sequenced
from a microbial community. The community may be
any natural or human-made environment, or the microbiome (host-associated microbes) of a plant or animal.
Samples are obtained from a target community of a
defined environment. Sampling requires separating the
microbes from their physical environment, filtering the
organisms of interest, breaking open the cells, and purifying the DNA. Different sampling procedures may lead
to different views of a metagenome.
Species diversity of a community is assessed by SSU
rRNA amplification. Rarefaction curves estimate the
completeness of sampling the diversity.
Metagenomic DNA is sequenced. High-throughput
sequencing methods, such as Illumina sequencing by
synthesis, generate large amounts of data, which require
computational analysis.
The sequence reads are assembled into scaffolds and
binned into partial genomes. Assembly requires a computational pipeline that incorporates mathematical tools and
biological assumptions. Different pipelines make different
assumptions and may predict different taxonomic bins.
Functional annotation offers clues as to the ecological functions contributed by the microbes.
Emerging technologies go beyond metagenomics.
FISH reveals spatial organization of community partners. Gene expression and function are investigated by
metatranscriptomics and metaproteomics.

21.2

Functional Ecology

All organisms depend, directly or indirectly, on the presence of other organisms. How do microbes contribute
to these interactions? Microbes cycle essential nutrients
through a food web. They also serve more complex functions that we are just beginning to discover, such as defending host organisms from pathogens, and even modulating
animal development and behavior. Cooperation with partner organisms may be incidental, as in the case of hydrogen-oxidizing bacteria using H 2 from fermenters; or it
may involve mutualism, a highly developed partnership in
which two or more species coevolve to support each other
(discussed in Sections 21.3 and 21.4).

The Niche Concept

Within a community, each population of organisms fills a
specific niche. The niche is a set of conditions, including its
habitat, resources, and relations with other species of the
ecosystem, that enable an organism to grow and reproduce.
For example, the niche of Anabaena, a cyanobacterium, is
that of a filamentous or mat-forming marine organism that
fixes CO2 into biomass while fixing nitrogen via specialized cells called heterocysts (see Chapter 18). Anabaena’s
photosynthesis releases molecular oxygen that is used by
swarms of respiring bacteria. The habitat of Anabaena is
fresh or brackish water; its biomass provides food for invertebrates and fish. Despite autotrophy, Anabaena needs the
other organisms too. The cyanobacteria grow best in the
presence of heterotrophic Proteobacteria, whose respiration
removes oxygen gas from Anabaena’s heterocysts, which
need anaerobiosis to fix nitrogen. Thus, organisms do
more than fill a niche; they construct niches for other kinds
of organisms. Organisms perform niche construction by
shaping the biochemical dimensions of their habitat.

All Ecosystems Require Microbes

The role of microorganisms in all ecosystems was originally formulated by the Dutch microbiologist Cornelius B.
van Niel (1897–1985). Van Niel was the first to show that
bacteria in the soil and water can conduct photosynthesis
without producing oxygen, using electron donors such as
H 2S instead of H 2O. This surprising discovery revealed
one of many kinds of metabolism unique to microbes,
and unknown in plants or animals. Other unique forms
of microbial metabolism (discussed in Chapters 13–15)
include nitrogen fixation by bacteria and archaea, and the
degradation of lignin by bacteria and fungi. Moreover,
microbial metabolism provides ecosystems with their sole
source of key elements such as sulfur, phosphorus, and iron.

CHAPTER 21

MICROBIAL ECOLOGY

■

■

827

O
O
O

O

OH

Cl

Cl

2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid
HO

OH

4-Hydroxyphenylpyruvate

CH3
CH3

CH3 CH3
CH3

H3C

Xylene

CH3

H
N

CH3

O

O

Toluene

Alkane

Carbazole

OH

O

O
Cl

O

Cl

Cl

Cinnamate

OH

O

2,4,5-Trichlorophenoxyacetic
acid

3-Chlorobenzoate

OH

O

HO

Dibenzofuran
Dibenzo-p-dioxin

Cl

H 3C

O

O

NH2

4-Hydroxyphenylacetate

HO

2-Aminophenol

OH

OH

HO

Ibuprofen

Benzene

O

Cl

OH

2-Chlorobenzoate

Biphenyl

N
O

H

Gallate

Quinoline

HO

O

H3C
H3C

O

O

p-Cumate

TCA

N

4-Methylcatechol
COOH

OH
HO

Orcinol
O

O

Phenol

O

Polycyclic
aromatic
hydrocarbons

OH

O

O

O

O

OH
NO2

Terephthalate

Hydroxyquinol

OO
OH

O

4-Methyl-o-phthalate

Cl

O

Cl
OH

Vanillate

Cl

2,4-Dichlorophenol

O

O–

Phthalate

O

O–

Isophthalate
O

OH
O

CH3

OH

Cl

2,7-Dichlorodibenzo-p-dioxin

O

OH

HO

HO

–

O

O

CH3

OH

Resorcinol

3-Phenoxybenzoate

OH

NO2

O

O

Protocatechuate

O

OH

2,4-Dinitrotoluene

Phenanthrene
O

Tetralin

CH3

OH

OH

O

HO

3-O-Methylgallate

[Naphthalene]

Cholesterol
sterol

Abietane
diterpenoid

OMe

Aniline

O

Salicylate

OH

Gentisate

OH

OMe

HO

HO
HO

OH

H 3C

Indole H

H3C

Catechol

OH

H
N

OH

OH

OH
O

N
O–

3-Nitrobenzoate

OH

2,4’-Dihydroxyacetophenone

CH3

p-Cresol

FIGURE 21.10

■ Bacteria consume oil. Petroleum-polluted marine waters contain bacteria whose enzymes (orange balls) catabolize
components of crude oil, revealed by bacterial metagenomes and metatranscriptomes. Source: Modified from Rafiela Bargela et al. 2015. Sci. Rep. 5:11651.

These examples of microbial metabolism provide unique
roles for microbes in ecosystems. Van Niel expressed this
principle in two hypotheses of microbial ecology:
■

Every molecule existing in nature can be used as
a source of carbon or energy by a microorganism
somewhere. Any molecule found in the environment
can participate in some kind of energy-yielding reaction.
If an energy-yielding reaction exists, some microbe will
evolve to use it.

■

Microbes are found in every environment on Earth.
Every possible habitat for life supports microbes. In fact,

the largest part of the biosphere (below Earth’s surface) is
inhabited solely by microbes.
The van Niel hypotheses imply that a limitless variety of species carry out different energy-yielding reactions, depending on what their environment has to offer. For example,
oil-contaminated water from the Deepwater Horizon spill
region shows bacteria with enzymes that catabolize numerous components of crude petroleum (Fig. 21.10). In effect,
a pipeline spill acts as a kind of enrichment culture, in
which the addition of a particular class of nutrient favors
growth of microbes that can use that nutrient (discussed in

828

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

Chapter 4). The catabolic enzymes were revealed by functional annotation of metagenomes and metatranscriptomes.
Many of the substrate molecules, such as naphthalene,
were once considered nondegradable “xenobiotic” molecules. But all these substrates can ultimately be degraded to
CO2 via the TCA cycle (discussed in Chapter 13), although
the rate of breakdown may be slow. The energy gained by
microbial metabolism, as well as the elements that microbes
assimilate into biomass, eventually circulate throughout the
ecosystem. Even the microbe’s own genes encoding useful pathways may circulate by horizontal gene transfer (see
Section 9.6).

Carbon Assimilation and
Dissimilation: The Food Web

carbon and nitrogen in association with the plants and animals of an ecosystem. The cycles of other key elements,
and their effects on the global biosphere, are explored in
Chapter 22.

Thought Question

21.4 From Chapters 13–15, give examples of microbial metabolism that fit patterns of assimilation and dissimilation.

The major interactions among organisms in the biosphere are dominated by the production and transformation of biomass, the bodies of living organisms. To obtain
energy and materials for biomass, all organisms participate
in food webs (Fig. 21.11). A food web describes the ways
in which various organisms produce and consume biomass.
Levels of consumption are called trophic levels. Organisms at each trophic level consume biomass of organisms
from another level. At each trophic level, the fraction of
biomass retained by the consumer is small; most is released
as CO2, through respiration to provide energy.
Every food web depends on primary producers for two
things:

Decomposers

The interactions between microbes and their ecosystems
include two common roles of metabolic input and output,
often called assimilation and dissimilation, respectively.
Most of these metabolic processes were discussed in Chapters 13, 14, and 15, but ecology offers a different perspective.
Assimilation refers to processes by which organisms
acquire an element, such as carbon from CO2, to build
into cells. When the environment lacks organic compounds
containing an element such as nitrogen or phosphorus,
■ Absorbing energy from outside the ecosystem. A key
microbes may assimilate the element from mineral sources.
source of energy is sunlight, which drives production by
Common kinds of assimilation include carbon dioxide fixaphotoautotrophy.
tion and nitrogen fixation. Organisms that produce bio■ Assimilating minerals into biomass. The biomass of
mass from inorganic carbon (usually CO2 or bicarbonate
producers is then passed on to subsequent trophic levels.
ions) are called primary producers. Producers are a key
determinant of productivity for other members of the
ecosystem.
Dissimilation is the process of
A. General food web
B. Food webs with major roles for microbes
breaking down organic nutrients to
Production
of
Consumption
Biomass
inorganic minerals such as CO2 and
Primary producers
biomass
of producers
formed
–
NO2 , usually through oxidation.
Ocean
Consumers
Grazers
Microbial dissimilation releases minProtists and
erals for uptake by plants and other
Phytoplankton
60%
invertebrates
CO2 and
Bacteria,
10%
Grazers
microbes, and it provides the basis of
minerals
archaea, and
wastewater treatment (discussed in
algae
Viruses
Chapter 22). But microbial dissimi40%
lation can decrease habitat quality by
Forest
Predators 1%
removing organic nitrogen. When
Grazers
20%
soil bacteria break down amines
Plants
(RNH 2) to ammonium ion (NH4+),
Decomposers
Fire, fungi,
nitrifying bacteria such as NitroPredators 0.1%
80%
and bacteria
somonas oxidize the ammonium to
nitrite and nitrate. These highly sol■
uble anions are then washed out of FIGURE 21.11 Microbes within food webs. A. Biomass production and carbon recycling.
Percentages indicate the fraction of original CO2 converted to biomass at each trophic level.
soil into the groundwater.
B. In marine ecosystems, the primary producers are bacteria, archaea, and algae. Viruses break
This chapter covers microbial down both producer and consumer microbes. In a forest, the major producers are trees, while
assimilation and dissimilation of the main decomposers are fungi and bacteria.

CHAPTER 21

The majority of carbon in Earth’s biosphere is assimilated by oxygen-producing phototrophs such as cyanobacteria, algae, and plants. Certain important ecosystems are
founded on lithoautotrophs—for example, the hydrothermal vent communities, in which bacteria oxidize hydrogen
sulfide to fix CO2, capturing both gases as they well up
from Earth’s crust. The vent communities use oxygen generated by phototrophs living in the euphotic zone (see Section 21.5).
In addition to producers, all ecosystems include consumers, which acquire nutrients from producers and ultimately dissimilate biomass by respiration, returning carbon
back to the atmosphere (see Fig. 21.11A). Consumers
constitute several trophic levels based on their distance
from the primary producers. The first level of consumers,
generally called grazers, directly feed on producers. Grazers usually convert 90% of the producer carbon back to
CO2 through respiratory metabolism, yielding energy. The
next level of consumers, often called predators, feed on the
grazers, again converting 90% back to atmospheric CO2.
In microbial ecosystems, the trophic relationships are often
highly complex, because a given species may act as both
producer and consumer.
At each trophic level, some of the organisms die, and
their bodies are consumed by decomposers, returning carbon and minerals back to the environment for use by producers. All decomposers are microbes (fungi or bacteria).
Decomposers have particularly versatile digestive enzymes
capable of breaking down complex molecules such as lignin. Without decomposers, carbon and minerals needed
by phototrophs would be locked away by ever-increasing
mounds of dead biomass. Instead, all biomass is recycled
somewhere in the biosphere. As we learned in Chapter 13,
the energy gained by ecosystems can be cycled in part, but
all is eventually lost as heat.
In the function of ecosystems, phylogenetic distinctions
among the domains Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya are of
less significance than the biological and biochemical consequences of an organism’s presence in the community—that
is, what the organism produces or consumes. Thus, in this
chapter we place greater emphasis on trophic roles than on
phylogenetic distinctions.
The relative significance of microbial and multicellular
producers and consumers varies considerably among different habitats. A major difference appears between marine
and terrestrial ecosystems (Fig. 21.11B). In the oceans,
the smallest inhabitants, phototrophic bacteria, perform
most of the CO2 fixation and biomass production. The
main consumers are protists and viruses. Viruses are the
most numerous replicating forms in the ocean—and they
lyse most marine cells before any multicellular predators
get a chance to consume them. In terrestrial ecosystems,
by contrast, the major primary producers and fixers of CO2

■

MICROBIAL ECOLOGY

■

829

are multicellular plants. Plants generate detritus, discarded
biomass such as leaves and stems, that requires decomposition by fungi and bacteria. While viruses are important,
multicellular consumers such as worms and insects play a
greater role in decomposition.
The differences between the food webs of ocean and
dry land explain why most of the food we harvest from
the ocean consists of predators at the higher trophic levels (fish), whereas most food harvested on land consists of
producers and first-level consumers (plants and herbivores).
Fish depend on a large number of trophic levels that dissipate the carbon assimilated by a vast array of microbial producers. Thus, the numbers of fish remain limited, despite
the seemingly huge volume of ocean.

Oxygen and Other Electron Acceptors

The availability of oxygen and other electron acceptors is
the most important factor that determines how nutrients
containing carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur are assimilated and
dissimilated. Examples of aerobic and anaerobic metabolism are presented in Table 21.2. In aerobic environments,
microbes use molecular oxygen as an electron acceptor to
respire on organic compounds (abbreviated CHO) produced by other organisms (discussed in Chapters 13 and
14). Aerobic respiration on organic compounds is highly
dissimilatory in that it tends to break compounds down to
CO2. Microbes also use oxygen to respire on reduced minerals such as NH3, H 2S, and Fe2+ (lithotrophy). In most
cases, lithotrophy is coupled to CO2 fixation and is therefore assimilatory metabolism.
In anaerobic environments, such as deep soil, microbes
use minerals such as Fe3+ and NO2 – to oxidize organic compounds supplied by other organisms (anaerobic respiration)
or reduced minerals (anaerobic lithotrophy). Some metals
may be reduced to counteract their toxicity; for example,
Cupriavidus metallidurans reduces gold ion (Au3+) to form

TABLE 21.2+Aerobic and Anaerobic Metabolism
Reduced by CHO*
or H2 (anaerobic
respiration)

Element

Oxidized by O2
(lithotrophy)

Nitrogen

NH3 + O2 → NO3–
2+

+ O2 → Mn

4+

Manganese

Mn

Iron

Fe2+ + O2 → Fe3+
2–

Sulfur

H2S + O2 → SO4

Carbon

CH4 + O2 → CO2

*CHO = organic material.

NO3– + CHO → N2
Mn4+ + CHO → Mn2+
Fe3+ + CHO → Fe2+
SO42– + CHO → H2S
CO2 + H2 → CH4

830

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

A.

B.

NATURE 2013. 495:S12–S13/DOI:10.1038/495S12A

FRANK REITH HTTP://WWW.ADELAIDE.EDU.AU/DIRECTORY/FRANK.REITH

Gold made by
bacteria

Cupriavidus
metallidurans

FIGURE 21.12

■ Bacteria make gold. A. Frank Reith first showed that Cupriavidus metallidurans transfers electrons to gold and may
form natural gold deposits. B. C. metallidurans reduces Au3+ to gold metal (Au0) (SEM).

particles of gold metal (Fig. 21.12). Frank Reith, at the
University of Adelaide, proposes that most of Earth’s gold
ore was originally generated by bacterial reduction. Anaerobic environments require much slower rates of assimilation
and dissimilation than occur in the presence of oxygen.
The total biomass of anaerobic microbial communities,
however, far exceeds that of our oxygenated biosphere.

Temperature, Salinity, and pH

Other abiotic factors can profoundly affect the environment for microbes and other members of the food chain,
either directly or by impacting other factors. The effects
are most obvious for extremophiles, species that grow
in environments considered extreme by human standards
(Table 21.3), discussed in Chapter 5. Temperature limits
the rate of metabolism. Higher temperatures found in hot
springs (80°C–100°C) enable some of the fastest growth
rates measured (doubling times as short as 10 minutes for
some hyperthermophiles). On the other hand, temperature
limits the oxygen concentration in water, so hyperthermophiles often reduce sulfur instead. Extreme cold such as
that of polar regions may limit diversity and exclude all but
microorganisms and microscopic invertebrates. An example
of a cold-adapted ecosystem is the Antarctic lake cyanobacterial mats described in Special Topic 21.1.
High salt concentration limits the growth of microbes
adapted to freshwater conditions. By contrast, many microbial species have adapted to high salinity (they are called

TABLE 21.3+Extremophiles
Class of
extremophile

Typical environmental conditions
for growth

Acidophile

Acidic environments at or below pH 3

Alkaliphile

Alkaline environments at a range of
pH 9–14

Barophile

High pressure, usually at ocean floor,
from 200 to 1,000 atm

Endolith

Within rock crystals down to a depth
of 3 km

Halophile

High salt, typically above 2-M NaCl

Hyperthermophile

Extreme high temperature, above 80°C

Oligotroph

Low carbon concentration, below
1 ppm

Psychrophile or
cryophile

Low temperature, below 15°C

Thermophile

Moderately high temperature,
50°C–80°C

Xerophile

Desiccation, water activity below 0.8

halophiles). The haloarchaea, for instance, bloom in population as a body of water shrinks and becomes hypersaline.
Acidity is important geologically because a high concentration of hydrogen ions accelerates the release of reduced
minerals from exposed rock. Extreme acidity is often produced by lithotrophs (discussed in Section 14.5). The

CHAPTER 21

■

To Summarize

21.3

■

■

■

Microbial populations fill unique niches in ecosystems. Microbes are found in every environment. Every
chemical reaction that may yield free energy can be utilized by some kind of microbe.
Microbes fix or assimilate essential elements into
biomass, which recycles within ecosystems. Important
elements, such as nitrogen, are fixed solely by bacteria
and archaea.
Consumers and viruses break down the bodies of
producers, generating CO2 and releasing heat energy.
Dissimilation is the process of breaking down nutrients
to inorganic minerals such as CO2 and NO3 –, usually
through oxidation.

■

MICROBIAL ECOLOGY

■

831

Primary producers fix single-carbon units, usually
CO2. Microbial primary producers include algae, cyanobacteria, and lithotrophs.

increasing acidity releases minerals to be oxidized, while
excluding acid-sensitive competitors. Other kinds of habitats, such as soda lakes, show extreme alkalinity resulting
from high sodium carbonate.
As our understanding of ecosystems deepens, we discover other remarkable ways that organisms benefit each
other. For example, plant-associated bacteria and fungi
enhance the uptake of nutrients and protect the host from
pathogens. Animal-associated microbes protect the host
from pathogens, enhance digestion, and modulate the
immune system. These processes are detailed in the next
section, and in the sections on animal and plant microbial
communities (Sections 21.4 and 21.6).

■

■

Decomposers such as fungi and bacteria release
nutrients from dead organisms.
Microbial activity depends on levels of oxygen, carbon, nitrogen, and other essential elements, as well as
environmental factors such as temperature, salinity, and
pH. The largest volume of our biosphere contains anaerobic bacteria and archaea. Beneath Earth’s surface, most
metabolism is anaerobic.

Symbiosis

One of the most fascinating features of evolution is how
organisms adapt to the presence of others. Some relationships of microbes occur at a distance; for example, the oxygen gas released by marine cyanobacteria is breathed by
organisms around the globe. Other relationships require
intimate association between two or more partners. An intimate association between organisms of different species is
called symbiosis (plural, symbioses). Symbiotic associations
include a full range of both positive and negative relationships (Table 21.4). Whether positive or negative, both partners evolve in response to each other. Symbiosis may involve
two or more partner species, even thousands of partners, as
in animal digestive communities (see Section 21.4).

TABLE 21.4+Types of Symbiotic Associations Involving Microbial Species
Type of interaction

Effects of interaction

Example

Mutualism

Two organisms grow in an intimate species-specific
relationship in which both partner species benefit
and may fail to grow independently.

Lichens consist of fungi and algae (in some cases,
cyanobacteria) growing together in a complex layered
structure. Each species requires the presence of the
other.

Synergism

Both species benefit through growth, but the
partners are easily separated and either partner
can grow independently of the other.

Human colonic bacteria ferment, releasing H2 and
CO2, which methanogens convert to methane. The
methanogens gain energy, and the bacteria benefit
energetically from the removal of their fermentation
products.

Commensalism

One species benefits, while the partner species
neither benefits nor is harmed.

In wetlands, Beggiatoa bacteria oxidize H2S for
energy. Removal of H2S enables growth of other
microbes for whom H2S is toxic. The other microbes
are not known to benefit Beggiatoa.

Amensalism

One species benefits by harming another. The
relationship is nonspecific.

In the soil, Streptomyces bacteria secrete antibiotics
that lyse other species, releasing their cell contents
for Streptomyces to consume.

Parasitism

One species (the parasite) benefits at the expense
of the other (the host). The relationship is usually
obligatory for the parasite.

Legionella pneumophila, the cause of legionellosis,
parasitizes amebas in natural aquatic habitats.
Within the human lung, L. pneumophila parasitizes
macrophages.

832

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

SPECIAL TOPIC 21.1+ + Antarctic Cyano Mats: Have Ecosystem, Will Travel

–20˚C

© AMY CHIUCHIOLO

how does it escape? To reach Antarctica from New Zealand,
scientists must take an 8-hour flight in an air force transport
plane. The plane typically carries all kinds of workers and
equipment, prefabricated buildings, and all-terrain vehicles—
in effect, a sample of the human “ecosystem” needed to
sustain science at McMurdo Station and other research locations. It turns out that lake microbes have invented a similar
system. The cyanobacterial mats of many Antarctic lakes support entire ecosystems limited to microbes and meiofauna
(microscopic invertebrates). But within these lakes, the mats
have evolved a surprising cycle that flies them out to colonize
new locations—along with multiple components of their lake
ecosystem.
The lakes of the McMurdo Dry Valleys are isolated, without
outlet, and their main source of water is glacier melt in the
summer. Thus, each lake has little circulation or turnover, and
the water is covered by about 5 meters of ice. The ice surface is sculpted by katabatic winds, from cold air masses that
fall down the mountain slope reaching speeds of 200 km/h.
These winds carve stone and ice into fantastic forms (Fig. 1A).
But through the meters of ice, enough light penetrates to
power photosynthesis. The deepest water, where light barely
appears, supports mats of cyanobacteria such as Microcoleus.
The cyanobacteria absorb every photon, growing slowly over
the years, in some cases building flame-like forms a few centimeters tall (Fig. 2). To photograph these spectacular bacterial
gardens, divers like Tyler Mackey from UC Davis (Fig. 1B) must
drill through the ice and scuba dive (in water much colder
than off California). The cyano mat photosynthesis releases
a steady supply of oxygen that aerates the upper water, in a
way that suggests how oxygenation could have begun on early
Earth 2 billion years ago. As producers, the cyanobacteria support a community of consumers including bacteria, algae, and
flagellated protists (discussed in Chapter 20). These protists
are collected by Rachael Morgan-Kiss and her students at
Miami University of Ohio. The eukaryotes include meiofauna
such as rotifers, nematodes, and tardigrades (water bears)—
top predators of the lake, where no fish can live.
All Antarctic lake organisms must survive 6 months of frozen dark, when water is below zero and surface temperatures
reach –40°C. In the summer, with 24-hour sunlight, the phototrophs and consumers come back to life. The ice cover persists, except around the edge where a “moat” melts through.
Meanwhile, 10 meters below the ice, cyanobacteria are bubbling oxygen. The oxygen bubbles lift the mat, until a scrap
breaks off and floats toward the surface (Fig. 2). The scrap of
cyanobacterial filaments carries with it all kinds of associated
bacteria and protists, nematodes and water bears—in effect, a
sample of the whole lake ecosystem. The scrap halts beneath
the ice, where it freezes; and come winter, new ice freezes

A.

B.

O˚C

FIGURE 1

Exploring an Antarctic lake. A. Rachael MorganKiss on the wind-sculpted surface of Lake Hoare, McMurdo Dry
Valleys. B. Tyler Mackey prepares to dive below 5 meters of ice to
observe the benthic cyanobacterial mats.
■

beneath. But above, wind ablates the ice, wearing it down, as
annual winter freezes more below. Thus, over the years the
frozen scrap of life travels up the “ice elevator” to the surface. There, as the ice breaks open, the wind carries the scrap
away. The scrap may fall in the moat, ready to colonize anew.
Amazingly, even the nematodes and tardigrades come to life
again with all their phototrophs ready for photosynthesis. And

COURTESY OF TYLER MACKEY

What kind of life grows in an ice-covered Antarctic lake—and

CHAPTER 21

1. Cyano mat lifts
off, floats on oxygen.

MICROBIAL ECOLOGY

■

833

3. Wind carries
ecosystem to
new habitat.

Summer: Katabatic
winds ablate ice,
blow mat away.

Moat
meltwater

2. Trapped
in ice 5–10
years.

Winter: Water
freezes beneath.

■

Stalked
ciliate

Tardigrade

O2
Microcoleus
Diatoms

Flame
Flame mat
mat

FIGURE 2

■ Cyanobacterial mats carry an ecosystem. The cyanobacterial mats lift off upon bubbles of oxygen, carrying
protists, heterotrophic bacteria, and meiofauna. In winter, water freezes the mat into the ice. Over several years, the mat works its way
through the ice until katabatic winds scrape it out and carry the freeze-dried ecosystem to a new habitat.

some lucky scraps are borne away to a moat in some other
lake, ready to colonize a new home.
Morgan-Kiss and colleagues investigate these flyaway ecosystems to discover new life-forms. They sampled Lake Fryxell cyano mats emerging from the ice, and isolated community
DNA. Metagenomes were assembled by Don Kang and Zhong
Wang at the Joint Genome Institute using the MetaBAT computational pipeline. Analysis showed cyanobacteria (Microcoleus and Nostoc), oil-eating betaproteobacteria (such as
Rubrivivax), and actinobacteria (such as Pseudonocardia). Actinobacteria could produce new antibiotics—perhaps antibiotics
that never encountered human pathogens. Thus, this remote
ecosystem could provide unexpected benefits for medicine.

RESEARCH QUESTION
How do Antarctic lake microbes and meiofauna adapt to the
seasonal extremes of oxygen and light, followed by freezing
anaerobiosis and dark?
Sumner, Dawn Y., Ian Hawes, Tyler J. Mackey, Anne D.
Jungblut, and Peter T. Doran. 2015. Antarctic microbial
mats: A modern analog for Archean lacustrine oxygen oases.
Geology 43:887–890.
Slonczewski, Joan L., and Rachael Morgan-Kiss. 2015. Cyanobacterial communities of Antarctic Lake Fryxell liftoff mats
and glacier meltwater. Award #1936, Genome Portal of the
Department of Energy Joint Genome Institute.

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

Mutualism Involves Partner Species
That Require Each Other

In the most highly evolved forms of symbiosis, partner species require each other for survival—a phenomenon termed
mutualism. A striking case of microbial mutualism is the
interdependence of luminescent bacteria Aliivibrio fischeri and their host squid, Euprymna scolopes (described in
Section 10.5). Mutualism can involve two or more microbial partners. It can also involve one or more microbial
partners with a plant or animal host. In some cases, both
partners absolutely require each other; in other cases, one
or the other is incapable of growing alone. The mutually
beneficial relationship is maintained by numerous genetic
responses that regulate each partner, avoiding damage to
the other. Mutualisms such as nitrogen-fixing rhizobia
within legumes can have enormous practical applications
(discussed in Section 21.6).
Lichens. A highly evolved form of mutualism is the

lichen (Fig. 21.13). Lichens consist of an intimate symbiosis between a fungus and an alga or cyanobacterium—
sometimes both. The symbiosis requires compatible partner
species. The alga or bacterium provides photosynthetic
nutrition, while the fungus provides minerals and protection. Lichens grow very slowly, but they tolerate extreme
desiccation.
Lichens show a surprising variety of form. Different
species may form a flat crust, branched filaments, or leaflike lobes. A cross section of the leaflike lichen Lobaria

Microbiome of corals and sea anemones. Many inver-

tebrate animals acquire endosymbiotic algae, most commonly dinofl agellates. These endosymbionts are called
zooxanthellae (singular, zooxanthella). The algae receive
protection from predators, while the animal receives photosynthetic products. Examples include anemones, clams,
and corals (Fig. 21.15 and eTopic 21.2). Coral zooxanthellae are extremely important to the biosphere because
healthy coral is required for reef formation and much of
the biological productivity of coastal shelf ecosystems.
The slight rise in temperature that has occurred from
global warming has already caused severe problems with
coral bleaching, in which the algal symbionts die or are
expelled. The coral turns white and soon dies, unless its
symbionts return.

B.

JOAN SLONCZEWSKI

A.

pulmonaria reveals a layer of algae (green) covered by
fungal mycelium (white), which protects the algae from
ultraviolet light damage (Fig. 21.13C). In addition to
the algae, this lichen includes patches of cyanobacteria,
which fix nitrogen. Thus, the fungus, algae, and cyanobacteria form a three-way mutualism. For dispersal, the
lichen forms asexual clumps of algae wrapped in fungal
mycelium. The clumps flake off and are carried by wind
to new locations. In boreal (northern) forests, lichens
cover the majority of the ground and provide food for
grazing animals (Fig. 21.14). Lichens are a winter food
source for caribou, which dig beneath the snow to obtain
them.

C. Lichen cross section

FIGURE 21.13

JOAN SLONCZEWSKI

Fungi
Algae

Cyanobacteria

Algae wrapped
in fungal mycelia
for dispersal

STEPHEN AND SYLVIA SHARNOFF

834

■

Lichens.

A. A tombstone at Kenyon College Cemetery in Ohio, encrusted
with lichens (pale green) and
mosses (dark green), a nonvascular plant. B. Close-up of
the lichens in part (A). C. Section through a lichen (Lobaria
pulmonaria) shows fungal, algal,
and bacterial symbionts.

CHAPTER 21

■

MICROBIAL ECOLOGY

■

835

to survive, because one of their species may happen to be
resistant to a rise in temperature.

STEPHEN AND SYLVIA SHARNOFF

Symbiosis Involves Varying Degrees
of Cooperation and Parasitism

FIGURE 21.14

■

Lichens cover the ground in boreal forests.

Zooxanthellae

Calcium carbonate skeleton

FIGURE 21.15

■

(zooxanthellae).

Coral polyps carry mutualistic algae

The most common algal partners are members of the
dinoflagellate genus Symbiodinium. A given coral or anemone may harbor several different species of Symbiodinium,
which show different preferences for light or shade and different tolerances for temperature change. Studies of coral
bleaching due to temperature increase suggest that corals containing diverse species of symbionts are more likely

© OSF.CO.UK. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.

Polyp

Symbiosis between organisms involves a range of interdependence, from obligate mutualism (cooperation) to
obligate parasitism (see Table 21.4). In a gut community, some of the microbial members may enhance each
other’s growth, but they can also grow independently.
Their optional cooperation is called synergism, in which
both species benefit but can grow independently and
show less specific cellular communication. For example,
human colonic bacteria produce fermentation products
that colonic methanogens metabolize to methane. The
methanogens gain energy, and the fermenting bacteria
benefit energetically through the steady-state removal
of their end products. The bacteria found within marine
sponges may offer an example of synergism. These bacteria fix carbon or secrete defense chemicals that protect the
host sponge (see eTopic 21.3).
In other cases, one species derives benefit from another
without return; for example, some wetland bacteria derive
benefit from Beggiatoa because Beggiatoa bacteria oxidize
H 2S, which inhibits growth of other species. An interaction that benefits one partner only is called commensalism. Commensalism is difficult to define in practice, since
“commensal” microbes often provide a hidden benefit to
their host. For example, gut bacteria such as Bacteroides
species were considered commensals until it was discovered
that their metabolism aids human digestion.
An interaction that harms one partner nonspecifically,
without an intimate symbiosis, is called amensalism. An
example of amensalism is actinomycete production of antimicrobial peptides that kill surrounding bacteria. The
dead bacterial components are then catabolized by the
actinomycete.
Finally, parasitism is an intimate relationship in which
one member (the parasite) benefits while harming a specific host. Many microbes have evolved specialized relationships as parasites, including intracellular parasitic bacteria
such as the rickettsias, which cause diseases such as Rocky
Mountain spotted fever.
The distinction between mutualist and parasite is often
subtle. Lichens consist of a mutualistic association between
fungus and algae, but environmental change can convert the fungus to a parasite. On the other hand, parasitic
microbes may coevolve with a host to the point that each
depends on the other for optimal health. For example, the
high incidence of human allergies is proposed to correlate
with lack of exposure to parasites that stimulate development of the immune system.

836

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

A.

RITA COLWELL

1 µm

1 mm

RITA COLWELL

Copepod eggs

Vibrio
cholerae

B.

FIGURE 21.16 ■ Vibrio cholerae
colonizes copepods. A. Copepod

RITA COLWELL

(SEM) with case of eggs to be
“hatched” by V. cholerae bacteria
(TEM). B. Anwar Huq compares
water with and without filtration by
sari cloth, which prevents passage
of contaminated copepods and thus
prevents transmission of cholera.

A parasite of one host may be a mutualist of another. For
example, the human cholera pathogen Vibrio cholerae is a
mutualist of copepods (Fig. 21.16). This relationship was
discovered by Anwar Huq, from Bangladesh, who worked
with Rita Colwell, then director of the U.S. National
Science Foundation (interviewed in eTopic 1.1). Huq and
Colwell showed that in natural water systems, most V. cholerae cells do not swim freely but colonize the surfaces of
copepods. The copepods actually depend on these bacteria
to eat through the chitin of their egg cases, releasing their
young. Thus, bacterial mutualists of copepods are virulent
pathogens of humans, whose cholera diarrhea returns the
organism to the water full of copepods. To decrease the
incidence of cholera, Huq found that drinking water contaminated by V. cholerae could be partly decontaminated by
filtering out the copepods through sari cloth. The elucidation of this complex microbial partnership reaped benefits
for people threatened by cholera.
Multiple partner species can form a complex web of
positive and negative dependence. An example is the leafcutter-ant symbiosis with fungi, which includes a fungal
mutualist, a fungal parasite, and a bacterial mutualist that
counteracts the parasite (presented in eTopic 17.5).

To Summarize
■

■

■

■

■

■

Symbiosis is an intimate association between organisms
of different species.
Mutualism is a form of symbiosis in which each partner
species benefits from the other. The relationship is usually obligatory for growth of one or both partners.
Lichens are a mutualistic community of algae or cyanobacteria with fungi. Lichens are essential producers for
dry soil habitats.
Corals and sea anemones harbor zooxanthellae, algae
that provide products of photosynthesis in exchange for
a protected habitat.
Parasitism is a form of symbiosis in which one species
grows at the expense of another, usually much larger,
host organism.
Interactions of multiple species can include both
mutualism and parasitism.

CHAPTER 21

21.4

A.
OH

O

O

HO

Wood lignocellulose

HO

O

OH

MICROBIAL ECOLOGY

■

837

The digestive tracts of animals harbor particularly complex and ecologically interesting microbial communities.
Digestive chambers, such as those of the termite hindgut,
the bovine rumen, and the human colon, support thousands of species of bacteria, protists, and archaea.

Animal Digestive
Microbiomes

All animals have microbial communities on their surfaces
or within certain internal organs. Many microbes have beneficial effects, such as enhancing digestion or generating
protective substances in the skin. The beneficial properties
are so essential that an animal is now considered a holobiont, an entity composed of multiple types of organisms,
including microbes. By contrast, a relatively small proportion of animal-associated microbes cause disease. Human
microbial interactions with the immune system are discussed in Chapter 23. Pathogenesis and disease in humans
are discussed in Chapters 25 and 26.

■

Termite Wood-Digesting Microbiome

A particularly complex metabolic mutualism is that of termites, whose digestive tract contains bacteria that catabolize
wood polysaccharides such as cellulose. The termite feeds on
wood and is completely dependent on its symbiotic bacteria.
Wood particles ingested by the termite consist of cellulose and hemicellulose sugar chains entwined with complex
aromatic polymers called lignin. Within the termite digestive
organ (called the hindgut), its bacteria form
highly complex associations with protists
OH
such as Mixotricha paradoxa (Fig. 21.17),
HO
O
which can be as long as half a millimeter.
O

Hemicellulose (xylan)

OH

CH2OH
O
O
HO
OH

O

Cellulose

n

Termites, Reticulitermes
O
H3CO
HO

OH
O

O

O
OCH3

HO

O

B. Mixotricha

O
O

Lignin

OH

Eukaryotic
flagella

Mixotricha
paradoxa

Nucleus
Endoplasmic
reticulum

C. Surface symbionts of Mixotricha
Spirochete

Small spirochetes
Large spirochetes

Anchor
bacteria

Vestigial endosymbionts
Bacterial endosymbionts
(unidentified)
“Anchor bacteria”

FIGURE 21.17

KÖNIG H., BREUNIG A. (1997) ÖKOSYSTEM TERMITENDARM. SPEKTRUM DER
WISSENSCHAFT 68-76.

HO

■ Mixotricha paradoxa: a multiple symbiont. A. Wood lignocellulose is degraded by Mixotricha paradoxa. The flagellated protist possesses attached spirochetes (large and small species), “anchor bacteria,” and two kinds of bacterial endosymbionts. B. Soldier
termites, Reticulitermes flavipes, contain Mixotricha (SEM) and other gut endosymbionts that digest wood cellulose. C. TEM section through
Mixotricha’s pellicle, including anchor bacteria and attached spirochetes.

LYNN MARGULIS, SYMBIOSIS IN CELL EVOLUTION, 1981.

CH2OH
O

838

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

Mixotricha and other metamonad protists (see Chapter 20)
partly break down the lignin component of wood fibers. It is
not clear whether Mixotricha gains energy from lignin, but
the breakdown of fibers makes cellulose available for bacterial catabolism.
M. paradoxa is covered with cilia and flagella, and possesses several kinds of bacterial symbionts. The protist takes
up termite-ingested wood particles by phagocytosis, and
then the protist’s intracellular bacteria digest the wood polysaccharides. Mixotricha also has organelles that appear to be
vestigial remnants of another endosymbiont, diminished by
reductive evolution. On the protist’s surface, four kinds of
bacteria are attached. Two of the attached species are spirochetes, one significantly larger than the other. The spirochetes extend from the protist’s cell membrane; they are
flagellated, and their flagellar motility propels the protist cell.

Two other species of “anchor bacteria” are Gram-negative
rods attached to knobs of the protist surface. All members
of the partnership have evolved an obligate relationship,
although the basis for some relationships remains unclear.
The relationship among microbial symbionts within the
termite gut community generates a complex series of metabolic fluxes (Fig. 21.18). This kind of metabolic cooperation is called syntrophy, which means, “feeding together.”
For syntrophy, the fluxes within the community must
balance energetically with a negative value of ΔG, as they
would for a single free-living organism (discussed in Chapter 13). Most commonly, one species produces a product
that is consumed by the second species, which, if left to
build up in high concentration, would result in an unfavorable ΔG for its continued production.
In the simplified model shown in Figure 21.18, the
wood polysaccharides are hydrolyzed by bacteria and
A.
2. Regurgitation and
chewing of cud.

1. Digestion in the
rumen and reticulum.
Rumen
Flagellated protists break down
lignocellulose, releasing sugar chains.
Wood polysaccharides
Bacteria break down cellulose and ferment sugars.

Reticulum
O

O

C

C

Abomasum
OH

OH
Lactic acid

H
OH
Formic acid

Omasum

3. Reswallowed cud
moves to omasum.

4. Digestion is completed
in the abomasum.

H2 + CO2
Methanogens

B.

CH4
H
H

C

O
C
MIE UNIVERSITY, FACULTY OF BIORESOURCES

O H
H
Acetic acid

Termite

FIGURE 21.18

Endosymbiont metabolic fluxes within
termite hindgut. Bacteria and their protist symbionts ferment
■

wood polysaccharides to lactic acid, formic acid, acetic acid, H2, and
CO2 within the hindgut of a termite, Reticulitermes santonensis.
Some hydrogen is lost from the gut, some is converted to methane, and some is converted to acetic acid. Acetic acid is absorbed
through the outer lining and feeds the termite.

FIGURE 21.19

The bovine rumen. A. The rumen is the largest
of four chambers in the bovine stomach. B. Bacteria and fungi growing within the rumen.
■

CHAPTER 21

fermented to short-chain fatty acids, such as acetic acid,
which is absorbed by the termite. (The termite’s metabolism then oxidizes the acetate to CO2.) Other products of
the termite bacterial fermentation include CO2 and H 2,
which can be converted to methane by methanogenic
archaea. In some termites the H 2 builds up to levels as high
as 30%. The termite microbial mutualism is being studied
as a model system for production of hydrogen biofuel.

The Bovine Rumen Fermenter

■

MICROBIAL ECOLOGY

Streptococcus
Clostridium

Starch and sugars

Prevotella
Escherichia

Complex fibers
Chytridiomycete fungi

NADH

Pyruvate

Thought Question

NAD+
Lactate

NADH

21.5 How does ruminant fermentation pro-

The bovine gut system has four chambers
(Fig. 21.19A). The rumen initially digests the
feed and then passes it to the reticulum. The
reticulum breaks the feed into smaller pieces
and traps indigestible objects, such as stones
or nails. After initial digestion, feed is regurgitated for rechewing and then returned to
the rumen, by far the largest of the chambers.
In the rumen, feed is broken down to small

839

particles and fermented slowly by thousands of species of
microbes. The partially digested feed passes to the omasum,
which absorbs water and short-chain acids produced by fermentation. The abomasum then decreases pH and secretes
enzymes to digest proteins before sending its contents to the
colon for further nutrient absorption and waste excretion.
In the twentieth century, Robert Hungate (1906–2004)
at UC Davis pioneered techniques of anaerobic microbiology. One of Hungate’s methods still in use today is that of
obtaining anaerobic cultures from a fistulated, or cannulated, cow—that is, a cow in which an artificial connection is made between the rumen and the animal’s exterior
(see Fig. 21.2C). The cow is unharmed by the fistula and
rumen sampling.
Metagenomics coupled with bioenergetics studies shows
how different microbes fill different niches in ruminal
metabolism (Fig. 21.20). Cattle grown on relatively poor
forage (that is, forage high in complex plant content) show
a high proportion of ruminal fungi, the chytridiomycetes

All vertebrate animals possess digestive microbiomes. The
best-known microbiomes are those of ruminants, such as
cattle, sheep, and caribou. Throughout most of human civilization, ruminants have provided protein-rich food, textile
fibers, and mechanical work. A historical reference is the biblical injunction against consuming an animal that “is cleftfooted and chews the cud”—that is, “ruminates,” or redigests
its food in the fermentation chamber known as the rumen
(Fig. 21.19).
The microbial community of the rumen
enables herbivores to acquire nutrition from
Amino acids
Cellulose
complex plant fibers. From a genomic standRuminococcus
Megasphaera
Fibrobacter
point, such an arrangement makes evolutionPeptostreptococcus
ary sense. If the animal had to digest all the
NH3
diverse polysaccharide chains encountered in
Branched-chain
fatty acids
nature, its own genome would have to encode
CH4
a wide array of different enzyme systems.
CO2
Glucose
Instead, the ruminant relies on diverse microbial species to conduct various kinds of digesMethanogens
H2
NAD+
tion. As we saw for termites, microbes that
partly digest a substrate provide short-chain
fatty acids (SCFAs) that the host animal can
NADH
absorb and digest to completion by aerobic
respiration.
Ruminococcus

vide food molecules that the animal host can
use? How is the animal able to obtain nourishment from waste products that the microbes
could not use?

■

CO2

Megasphaera
Selenomonas

Acetate

NAD+
Succinate

NADH
Clostridium
Selenomonas
NAD

Acetate

+

+

Butyrate

Propionate

Propionate

Short-chain fatty acids
enter host circulation.

FIGURE 21.20

Ruminal metabolism. Various microbes participate in digesting food, ultimately producing short-chain fatty acids that are absorbed by the
bovine gut epithelium. Source: Based on J. B. Russell and J. L. Rychlik. 2001. Science 292:1119–1122.
■

840

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

Peyer’s patch
(immune system)

Food fiber (glycans)
Anaerobes (Bacteroides)

Gut epithelium
Phage tranfers
starch-use genes
among anaerobes.

Facultative (E. coli)

Inner mucus
Outer mucus

Intestinal lumen contains
diverse bacteria.

Pathogens stimulate
immune system.
Immune cells release
toxic oxidants.

Anaerobes hydrolyze
various types of
gylcans.
Sugars feed
pathogens.

Anaerobes secrete
hydrolases in vesicles;
share with community.
Hydrolases break down
glycans to sugars,
which feed facultatives.

Anaerobes
ferment sugars
to SCFAs.

Host mucins
feed bacteria.
Bacterial peptides
signal brain:
“Gut is full.”

Bacterial peptides
enter epithelium.

CO2–
CO2–
CO2–
CO2–
E. coli consumes O2
from epithelium; makes
lumen anaerobic.

SCFAs enter
blood; provide
nutrition.
Excreted bacteria
and undigested fiber

FIGURE 21.21

■ Human gut microbiome digests our food. In a “restaurant” mixed-species biofilm, Bacteroides bacteria break down
glycans into sugars that E. coli catabolizes, consuming oxygen from the host blood supply. The sugars may also feed pathogens, which stimulate an immune response.

(discussed in Chapter 20). Chytridiomycete mycelia appear
on ruminal food particles, and their motile zoospores—
formerly mistaken for protists—swim through rumen
fluid. By contrast, cattle fed a high-cellulose diet, such
as hay, grow faster and show cellulolytic bacteria such as
Ruminococcus albus and Fibrobacter flavefaciens. The cellulolytic bacterial metabolism also requires the presence of
Megasphaera and Peptostreptococcus species, which release
small amounts of branched-chain fatty acids. Thus, while
bacteria compete for food, they also share in a complex web
of syntrophy.
Ruminal fermentation includes production of H 2 and
CO2, which support methanogens. From a farmer’s point
of view, methanogenesis wastes valuable carbon from feed
and emits the greenhouse gas methane. So much methane forms that a cannula inserted into the rumen liberates
enough of the gas to light a flame. Other vertebrate digestive tracts produce less methane than cattle do. For example, kangaroos have a shorter gut retention time, so there
is less time for action of slow-growing microbes such as

methanogens. Switching from cattle to kangaroo meat has
been proposed in Australia as a way to decrease greenhouse
gas emissions.
Thought Question

21.6 How do you think cattle feed might be altered or supplemented to decrease methane production?

The Human Colon

In contrast to ruminants, humans (and other vertebrates)
conduct much of their microbial fermentation at a much later
stage of digestion, in the colon, which (unlike the rumen)
resides near the end of the digestive tract (Fig. 21.21).
The genomic coding capacity of human gut microbes
may exceed that of the human genome by a factor of 100.
Colonic fermentation favors bacteria capable of digesting
complex plant materials that pass undigested through the
small intestine. For example, Bacteroidetes genera such as

CHAPTER 21

Bacteroides and Prevotella ferment mucopolysaccharides,
pectin, and arabinogalactan, among many others. Because
the colonic oxygen pressure is low, most bacterial digestion
is fermentative, releasing acetate and other SCFAs that are
absorbed by the intestinal epithelium, thus providing up to
15% of our caloric intake. Amazingly, our bodies also use
amino acids synthesized by gut bacteria.
Our gut community varies among individuals, though
certain major taxa predominate. Besides Bacteroides, other
major colonic bacteria include Firmicutes such as Clostridium and Lactococcus, Actinobacteria such as Bifidobacterium, and Verrucomicrobia such as Akkermansia (bacterial
diversity is surveyed in Chapter 18). The ratio of Firmicutes
to Bacteroidetes evolves over the human lifetime, with Firmicutes predominating in adults while Bacteroidetes dominate in infants and the elderly. As in the bovine rumen,
diverse colonic bacteria both compete with each other and
collaborate through syntrophy. Bacteroides species release
outer membrane vesicles of hydrolases that break down
various types of glycans (polysaccharides) to release oligosaccharides (short sugar polymers). These oligosaccharides may be picked up by other species of Bacteroides and
Bifidobacterium that break them down further to SCFAs.
Some fermentation products support methanogens such as
Methanobrevibacter smithii.
A problem for the colon is the relatively short retention time of the human digestive tract. To remain in the
colon with continual resupply of nutrients, Bacteroides
and other anaerobes may form mixed biofilms with E. coli
that adhere to the epithelium in the outer mucus layer
(Fig. 21.21). The mucus layer turns over every 2 hours,
but E. coli growth can outpace the rate of shedding. The
mixed biofilm benefits both bacterial partners, as E. coli
gains access to sugars while reducing oxygen that leaks
in from the epithelium, sustaining the anaerobic environment for fermenters. These patches of mixed biofilm
are termed “restaurants” by Tyrrell Conway at Oklahoma
State University, who developed the restaurant hypothesis to explain colonic community structure. The mixed
biofilm has the added benefit of outcompeting pathogens. When competition fails, however, pathogens can
get through the mucus layer and invade the epithelium,
stimulating the immune system. The positive and negative
interactions of gut bacteria with the immune system are
discussed in Chapter 23.
An exciting research question is the interaction of gut
bacteria with the brain. For example, as food reaches E.
coli in the colon, the bacteria start to grow exponentially
and release certain peptides into the epithelium. These
peptides circulate through the blood and signal the brain
that the gut is full. Another intriguing finding is that
bacterial catabolism of amino acids produces neurotransmitters such as GABA and agmatine. These bacterial neurotransmitters have been proposed to stimulate the vagus

■

MICROBIAL ECOLOGY

■

841

nerve, which modulates anxiety and may influence psychiatric disorders.
Gut microbiomes even help establish circadian rhythms
in mammals, and may influence our experience of “jet lag.”
A study of mice showed that mouse microbial populations
vary over the daily cycle, and that restoring normal gut
populations can overcome a genetic defect in the molecular clock that governs animal activity. In humans, jet lag
induces abnormal fluctuations in the gut microbiome. Perhaps someday we will develop probiotic therapies for jet lag.
The mechanisms by which gut microbes influence our gut
epithelium and immune system are discussed in Chapter 23.
Thought Question

21.7 How could you design an experiment to test the hypothesis that an animal makes use of amino acids synthesized by
its gut bacteria?

To Summarize
■

■

■

■

■

■

■

Animals harbor digestive microbial communities.
The microbes possess numerous digestive enzymes
absent in the host genome.
Termite gut mutualists include protists that break
down lignin, as well as bacteria that catabolize cellulose.
A major by-product is hydrogen gas.
Syntrophy is a metabolic association between (at least)
two species, requiring both partners in order to complete the metabolism with a negative value of ΔG.
The rumen of ruminant animals is a complex microbial digestive chamber. Rumen microbes, including
bacteria, protists, and fungi, digest complex plant materials. The microbial digestion generates short-chain fatty
acids that are absorbed by the intestinal epithelium.
The human gut microbiome contributes to our
digestion. Anaerobes such as Bacteroides and facultative respirers such as E. coli form mixed biofilms. The
anaerobes break down large glycans to sugars utilized by
facultatives, and to short-chain fatty acids that enter the
intestinal epithelium.
Commensal members of the gut microbiome normally outcompete pathogens. Pathogenic bacteria
can invade the inner mucus layer and harm the gut
epithelium.
Human gut microbes communicate with their
host. Commensal bacteria send chemical signals to our
immune tissues and to our brain.

842

■

PART 4

21.5

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

which receives light for phototrophs. In the open ocean,
the euphotic zone extends down a couple hundred
meters, whereas at the coastal shelf (<200 meters to the
ocean floor), a higher concentration of silt and organisms decreases the photic zone to as little as 1 meter.

Marine and Freshwater
Microbes

What microbial communities inhabit the oceans? Oceans
cover more than two-thirds of Earth’s surface, reaching
depths of several kilometers and forming an immense habitat.
Both oceans and freshwater support huge quantities of bacteria and algae, which drive vast ecosystems. Marine microbes
contribute half the planet’s productivity (production of biomass). Marine and freshwater microbes form the base of the
food chain for seafood, with enormous impact on humans.

Marine Habitats

Marine water has a salt concentration averaging 3.5%. The
major ions are Na+ and Cl–, with significant levels of sulfate
and iodide. The salt concentration is high enough to prevent growth of many aquatic and terrestrial bacteria, such as
E. coli. Nevertheless, salt-tolerant organisms such as Vibrio
cholerae grow well over a broad range of salt concentration.
The ocean varies considerably with respect to temperature, pressure, light penetration, and concentration
of organic matter. In the open ocean, the water column
(known as the pelagic zone) is subdivided into distinct
regions (see Fig. 21.22):
■

Neuston (about 10 µm). The neuston is the air-water
interface. Although extremely thin, the neuston layer contains the highest concentration of microbes. Many algae
and protists have evolved so as to “hang” from the layer of
surface tension that forms at the air-water interface.

■

Euphotic zone (100–200 m). The euphotic zone, or
photic zone, is the upper part of the water column,

■

Aphotic zone. Below the reach of sunlight, in the aphotic zone, only heterotrophs and lithotrophs can grow.

■

Benthos. The benthos includes the region where the
water column meets the ocean floor, as well as sediment
below the surface. Organisms that live in the benthos,
such as those of thermal vent communities, are called
benthic organisms.

Another important determinant of marine habitat is the
thermocline, a depth at which temperature decreases steeply
and water density increases. A thermocline typically exists in
an unmixed region. At the thermocline, a population of heterotrophs will peak, feeding on organic matter that settles
from above. An experiment showing the thermocline, conducted by undergraduates, is described in eTopic 21.4.
Coastal regions show the highest concentration of nutrients and living organisms, and the least light penetration.
By contrast, the open ocean is largely oligotrophic (having an extremely low concentration of nutrients and organisms). The concentration of heterotrophic microorganisms
determines the biochemical oxygen demand (BOD; also
called biological oxygen demand), the amount of oxygen
removed from the water by aerobic respiration. Normally,
the open ocean has such a low concentration of organisms
that the BOD is extremely low; therefore, the dissolved
oxygen content is high. This explains why enough oxygen reaches the ocean floor to serve chemolithoautotrophs
such as sulfide-oxidizing bacteria. The BOD rises, however,

FIGURE 21.22

■ Regions of marine
habitat. The marine habitat subdivides

Coastal shelf
Neuston

Pelagic zone

Euphotic
zone
200 m
Benthos

Aphotic
zone
1,000 m
4,000 m

Benthos
10,000 m

into several categories. The coastal shelf
region is defined as the water extending from the shoreline out to a depth
of 200 meters. The pelagic zone (open
ocean) includes several depth regions:
the neuston, the microscopic interface
between water and air; the euphotic zone
of light penetration, where phototrophs
can grow, down to 100–200 meters;
the aphotic zone, which supports only
heterotrophs and lithotrophs; and the
benthos, at the ocean floor.

CHAPTER 21

MICROBIAL ECOLOGY

■

843

B. Submersible Alvin

BRYAN CHRISTIE DESIGN

PHOTO BY WILLIAM LAMBERT, WOODS HOLE OCEANOGRAPHIC INSTITUTION

A. Holger Jannasch

■

FIGURE 21.23 ■ Holger Jannasch discovered unculturable marine bacteria. A. Holger Jannasch pioneered the study of marine
microbes in the open sea and on the seafloor. B. A recent model of the submersible Alvin used by researchers from WHOI for sampling deep
marine organisms.

when excess sewage or petroleum is present, such as that
spilled by the Deepwater Horizon oil rig in 2010. Microbial consumption of these wastes at first deprives fish of
oxygen, but the process is the only way the ocean recovers
(see Figs. 21.4 and 21.10).

Culturing the Uncultured

To nineteenth-century microbiologists, the oceans appeared
virtually free of bacteria. Trained in the tradition of Robert
Koch (discussed in Chapter 1), microbiologists attempted to
isolate marine bacteria by plate culture, considered the definitive way to study a microbial species. But the colonies that

MUNIRUL ALAM, ET AL. 2007. PNAS 104: 17801–17806, FIG.3D.

B.

COURTESY OF RITA COLWELL

A.

grew on traditional plate media were extremely few. Then,
in 1959, the German microbial ecologist Holger Jannasch
(1927–1998) (Fig. 21.23A) showed that many more bacteria could be seen by light microscopy than could be grown
on plates. Later, with colleagues at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution (WHOI), Jannasch went on to study life
at the ocean floor, using the famous submersible vessel Alvin
(Fig. 21.23B).
Jannasch was one of the first to show that most marine
microorganisms cannot be cultured in the laboratory.
His observations sparked decades of controversy. How
can the organisms be alive if they cannot be cultured? In
1985, Rita Colwell (Fig. 21.24A), at the University of

FIGURE 21.24 ■ Uncultured bacteria. A. Rita Colwell, former
director of the National Science Foundation. B. Uncultured cells
of Vibrio cholerae in a biofilm (green fluorescence). Fluorescence
microscopy.

844

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

Maryland, introduced the concept of viable but nonculturable (VBNC), referring to environmental organisms
that metabolize but cannot be cultured. In some cases,
previously cultured bacteria, such as the cholera pathogen
Vibrio cholerae, were observed to have entered such a state
(Fig. 21.24B)—a phenomenon of great importance for
medicine. In other cases, environmental organisms were
found in an unculturable state, with no known means of
culture. Today we term such environmental organisms
uncultured—with the understanding that their culture
requirements may yet be discovered.
In fact, emerging culture methods now enable many
uncultured organisms to grow in the laboratory. Often,

A. Prochlorococcus
60º

30º

0º

–30º

microbial growth requires hidden synergy or mutualism with other organisms in the natural environment. For
example, the tiny cyanobacterium Prochlorococcus is the
ocean’s most abundant oxygenic phototroph, accounting
for half the ocean’s photosynthesis. The abundance map in
Figure 21.25, obtained from marine samples worldwide,
shows that in most regions, Prochlorococcus outnumbers its
relative Synechococcus by tenfold; the dominance of the tiny
phototroph is due in part to its unusual chlorophylls, which
absorb more of the blue light from the solar spectrum. Nevertheless, Prochlorococcus species are very difficult to grow in
pure culture. Erik Zinser and colleagues at the University of
Tennessee–Knoxville showed that culturing Prochlorococcus in the laboratory requires the presence of a
“helper bacterium” that catalyzes hydrogen
peroxide, a by-product of oxygenic photosynthesis. The helpers produce catalase,
which Prochlorococcus has lost through
degenerative evolution, enabling more
efficient growth when heterotrophs
are present. Thus, in the ocean—
as in gut microbiomes—microbes
require surprising synergisms and
symbioses, in the midst of competition. Synergism, rather than
single-species growth, may be
the more common condition
for microbes in nature.

–60º

B. Synechococcus

Marine
Metagenomes

Cultured or not, the marine
microbial communities are
now
emerging
through
metagenomes. In 2015, an
30º
international study led by Shinichi Sunagawa at the European
Molecular Biology Laboratory
0º
(EMBL) sequenced seven terabases (7 × 1012 bp), including sam–30º
ples of all the world’s oceans. The
study shows that, as abundant as
Prochlorococcus and Synechococcus are,
–60º
these phototrophs constitute only a
small fraction of the microbes present.
Abundant heterotrophs include Proteo3,000
10,000
50,000
100,000
bacteria, many of which have proteorhodopAbundance (cells/ml)
sins for photoheterotrophy. Also abundant are
the Thaumarchaeota, which oxidize ammonia released
FIGURE 21.25 ■ Global distribution of marine phototrophs
by fish and other organisms.
at the sea surface. A. Prochlorococcus abundance peaks in
As discussed in Section 21.1, even metagenomes miss
warmer water. B. Synechococcus is less abundant overall but
community members that fill important niches. To find rare
reaches colder regions. Source: Pedro Flombaum et al. 2013. PNAS 110:9824.
60º

CHAPTER 21

organisms with functional importance, researchers set out
to explore expressed genes—a “metatranscriptome.” Sallie
Chisholm and Edward DeLong, then at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, sequenced the mRNAs expressed
by marine bacteria obtained from a Hawaiian research station. The RNA molecules were polyadenylated (a string of
adenines was added) using an enzyme that favors mRNA
and excludes ribosomal RNAs because of their high degree
of secondary structure (intramolecular folding). The resulting RNA pool, enriched for expressed mRNA, was reversetranscribed to DNA (called cDNA for “complementary
DNA”). The cDNA was then amplified and sequenced.
The sequences of the cDNA (representing expressed
genes) were compared to those amplified from metagenomic DNA of the same microbial community. The relative abundance of expressed and metagenomic sequences
gives a measure of expression levels of all genes, which are
plotted in declining rank order (Fig. 21.26). The most
highly expressed genes included those encoding functional
elements of photosynthesis, such as light-harvesting proteins and Rubisco. Genes for DNA repair were also highly
expressed, presumably to correct UV damage in the open
ocean. But the most highly expressed genes were some of
the rarest in the metagenomes (colored red in Fig. 21.26).
And 40% of all the cDNA (expressed genes) had no counterpart in the genomic DNA (not shown in the figure).
Thus, expression analysis does indeed reveal organisms
undetected in the metagenome, presumably too rare for
detection by our current sequencing methods. It also suggests that vast ranges of organisms may remain unreached
by either genome or transcriptome sequencing.

■

MICROBIAL ECOLOGY

■

845

Beyond DNA, microbial ecology addresses organisms in their relationships with their habitat and with
each other. We will now introduce approaches to measuring microbial populations and their interactions within
marine communities. These approaches have enormous
practical applications, from the management of fisheries
to the assessment of greenhouse gas fluxes (a topic pursued in Chapter 22).

Measuring Planktonic Communities

Gene expression: log10 cDNA/metagenomic DNA

In marine science, the term plankton refers to organisms
that float passively in water. Microbiologists use the term
loosely, as microbial “plankton” include motile bacteria and
protists. Marine phytoplankton (microbial phototrophs)
produce a substantial part of the world’s oxygen and consume much of the atmospheric CO2.
Microbial plankton, or microplankton, include numerous members of the three domains discussed in Chapters 18,
19, and 20: bacteria (cyanobacteria and proteobacteria),
eukaryotes (diatoms and dinoflagellates), and archaea (crenarchaeotes and euryarchaeotes). Nanoplankton (about
2–20 µm) arbitrarily include smaller algae and flagellated
protists, as well as filamentous cyanobacteria. Picoplankton
(about 0.2–2 µm) consist of bacteria and the smaller eukaryotes, including the smallest living cells known. Besides these
size classes of cells, the term “femtoplankton” may refer to
marine viruses, the smallest detectable particles capable of
reproduction. Note, however, that the use of these prefixes
(“nano-,” “pico-,” “femto-”) is approximate and does not
refer to size units such as nanometers.
Despite the definition of “plankton,”
4
not all marine microbes float indepenMetagenomic
dently. Many form biofilms on colonial
DNA abundance
Hypothetical
algae such as kelps, or on suspended inor3
Low
ganic particles known as marine snow.
Medium
DNA repair (DNA methyltransferase)
As many as half of all marine bacteHigh
2
Light harvesting (PufB)
Extremely high
ria are associated with particulate subIon transport (proteorhodopsin)
strates from broken-down organisms. As
Protein biosynthesis (ribosomal protein)
1
observed by Farooq Azam at the Scripps
Carbon fixation (Rubisco)
Transport (ammonium transporter)
Institution of Oceanography, “Seawater
Photosynthetic electron transport
is an organic matter continuum, a gel of
0
(photosystem II proteins)
Electron transport
tangled polymers with embedded strings,
(photosystem I, II proteins)
sheets, and bundles of fibrils and parti–1
ABC transporter
cles, including living organisms, as ‘hot
(ATP-binding cassette) DNA repair
(photolyase)
spots.’” Thus, while the ocean as a whole
–2
has a low average nutrient concentraHighest
Rank-ordered gene expression ratios
Lowest
tion, marine waters include a suspension
■
of concentrated tangles of nutrient-rich
FIGURE 21.26 Genes expressed in a marine microbial community. Expression of each gene is measured as RNA (copied to cDNA) divided by the gene’s relative
substrates. Collectively, their global volabundance in the metagenome. The y-axis represents the ratio of cDNA to metagenomic
ume is so large that their sedimentation
DNA for all expressed genes, plotted in rank order (from highest to lowest). The relative
rate influences calculations of Earth’s
abundance of the DNA sequence within the metagenome is color-coded. The genes most
carbon cycle.
highly expressed tend to be rarest in the genome (colored red).

846

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

Population size can be estimated in different ways: the
number of individual reproductive units, the total organic
biomass available to consumers, or the rate of productivity or assimilation of key nutrients, such as carbon dioxide.
All ways of measuring these quantities present challenges;
there is no single right method, but different approaches
answer different questions.
Fluorescence microscopy. Marine microbes of all sizes,
even viruses, can be detected and counted under the microscope using a DNA-intercalating fluorescent dye. Recall
that fluorescence enables detection even of particles whose
size is below the resolution limit defi ned by the wavelength
of light (discussed in Chapter 2). Fluorescence microscopy
with a DNA-binding fluorophore such as DAPI is used to
detect planktonic microbes. Specific taxa can be detected
by FISH (see Fig. 21.9). FISH uses a fluorophore attached
to a DNA probe, a short sequence that can hybridize only
to DNA or RNA of a particular taxon.
Biomass. The amount of biomass can be determined by
standard chemical assays of protein and other forms of
organic matter. Net biomass of a population, however, does
not indicate productivity within an ecosystem, because it
misses the amount of carbon cycled through respiration.
Marine microbes have an extremely rapid rate of turnover,
but what appears to be a small population may nonetheless
conduct tremendous rates of carbon fi xation into biomass,
which is rapidly consumed by the next trophic level.
Incorporation of radiolabeled substrates. The measured

amount of biomass does not indicate the rate of biomass
production. The rate of production can be estimated by the
cells’ incorporation of a radiolabeled substrate. Uptake of
14
CO2 indicates the rate of carbon fixation—a highly significant property for the study of global warming. Uptake of
14
C-thymidine measures the rate of DNA synthesis, an indicator of the rate of cell division (example shown in eTopic 21.4).
These procedures can be conducted in seawater under native
conditions, without requiring laboratory cultivation.
A limitation of these methods is that addition of the
radiolabeled substrate may raise a nutrient concentration to
artificially high levels that distort the naturally occurring
rates of activity. In the case of labeled thymidine, another
limitation is that not all growing cells incorporate exogenous thymidine into their DNA.

Planktonic Food Webs

Marine plankton interact with each other as producers and
consumers in a food web. A simplified outline of the food web
in the open ocean is shown in Figure 21.27A. The diagram
of a food web is often called a “spaghetti diagram” because so
many trophic interactions cross each other in various directions.

The phototrophic producers are known as phytoplankton.
A phytoplankton of great importance is Prochlorococcus, but
this trophic category also includes myriad unrelated organisms, such as eukaryotic algae, diatoms, and dinoflagellates. In
the food web, bacteria and protists are consumed by larger protists, which feed small invertebrates, which feed larger invertebrates and, ultimately, vertebrates such as fish.
All levels of microbial plankton undergo intense predation by viruses. The degree of viral predation is difficult to
measure, but recent studies indicate that cell lysis by viruses
breaks down about half of microbial biomass (discussed in
Chapter 6). Virus particles represent a significant sink for
carbon and nitrogen. They accelerate the return of minerals to producers and necessitate a larger base of producers
to sustain the ecosystem. Some marine viruses are highly
host specific, infecting only certain species of dinoflagellates or cyanobacteria. Their presence selects for diverse
communities containing numerous scattered species. Other
viruses attack many hosts—and they transfer genes from
one host to another, such as the genes encoding photosystems. Thus, marine viruses are a dominant force determining community species distribution and genome content.

Thought Question

21.8 How do viruses select for increased diversity of microbial plankton?

Ocean ecosystems contain a large number of trophic levels, of which the top consumers include fish and humans.
Because each trophic level spends 90% of its food intake
for energy, ecosystems require a huge lower foundation
to sustain the highest-level consumers. This is one reason
why fisheries worldwide are now in danger of running out
of fish for human consumption: Fish are being harvested
faster than the ecosystem can replace them.
Note that actual food webs are far more complex than
the one shown in Figure 21.27A. One source of complexity is that many algal protists, such as chrysophytes (golden
algae) and dinoflagellates, are actually mixotrophs, organisms that both fix CO2 through photosynthesis and catabolize organic compounds from outside. Mixotrophy offers
the opportunity to grow at night, without light, and to
acquire scarce minerals, such as iron, from prey. Mixotrophs include secondary endosymbiont algae (discussed in
Chapters 17 and 20), such as kelp and sargassum weed, as
well as protists containing cyanobacterial or algal endosymbionts. A scheme for a food web that includes mixotrophs
is shown in Figure 21.27B. The scheme is further complicated by the existence of elaborate mutualistic associations
between different kinds of protists, algae, and bacteria.

CHAPTER 21

marine water column, the vast
majority of carbon transfer
occurs among microbes. Arrows
lead from organisms consumed
and point to their consumers. The primary producers are
phototrophic bacteria and algae,
with a smaller contribution from
lithotrophic bacteria and archaea.
Grazers include heterotrophic
bacteria and protists. Predators
include protist flagellates and
ciliates. About 50% of bacterial
and protist biomass is degraded
by viral lysis. Multicellular organisms cycle a relatively small
fraction of biomass. B. A more
complex view of the marine food
web includes mixotrophs (organisms that combine phototrophic
and heterotrophic nutrition) and
symbiotic associations between
protists and phototrophic
bacteria or algae.

A. Marine food web

MICROBIAL ECOLOGY

Light energy

CO2

Primary producers
Lithotrophs:
archaea
and bacteria

Minerals; NH3,
NO3–, SO42–, PO43–

Bacterial
phototrophs

Algae

Dissolved
and particulate
organic matter

Heterotrophic
bacteria

CO2

Viruses
Viruses

Protists: flagellates
and ciliates

Viruses

Microzooplankton

Viruses

Invertebrates

Viruses and
decomposers

Vertebrates
B. Food web with mixotrophy

>200 µm

Plankton size classes

FIGURE 21.27 ■ The pelagic
marine food web. A. In the

■

Phototrophy

Mixotrophy and phototrophic symbiosis

Heterotrophy

Green and
red algae
Diatoms

Symbiont-bearing
foraminiferans
and actinopods

Ciliates
Foraminiferans

Green algae
Diatoms
Dinoflagellates

Mixotrophic
dinoflagellates and
chrysophytes

Dinoflagellates,
ciliates,
chrysophytes

Green algae
Diatoms

Mixotrophic
chrysophytes

2–200 µm

0.2–2.0 µm

Heterotrophic
bacteria

Cyanobacteria

Uptake of
inorganic and
small organic
compounds

Inorganic C, N, P,
and small inorganic
compounds
Viral lysis

■

847

848

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

The Ocean Floor

The ocean floor (benthos) experiences extreme pressure
beneath several kilometers of water. Most organisms that
live there are pressure-dependent species, known as barophiles (discussed in Chapter 5). Barophiles require high
pressure for growth (200–1,000 atm), failing to grow when
cultured at sea level. Cold temperatures (about 2°C) select
for psychrophiles (cold-adapted species), whose rate of
growth is relatively slow. In the absence of light, heterotrophic bacteria depend on detritus from above as their carbon
source, but by the time any material reaches the benthos,

OAR/NATIONAL UNDERSEA RESEARCH PROGRAM (NURP).

A. Thermal vent

much of the organic carbon has been depleted by prior
consumers. A metagenome of the benthos (deep ocean)
reported in 2011 by Emiley Eloe, Douglass Bartlett, and
colleagues at UC San Diego revealed primarily Proteobacteria, Bacteroidetes, and Planctomycetes. Their genomes
encode a large number of heavy-metal transport and resistance proteins, which help cells survive toxic metals upwelling from the ocean floor. These metal resistance genes may
have practical applications for bioremediation.
Among the first to investigate life on the ocean floor,
in the 1960s, were Holger Jannasch (see Fig. 21.23) and
colleagues at WHOI. Using the submersible research
vessel Alvin, they discovered entirely new forms of benthic bacteria and archaea. Some of these microbes grow
in thick biofilms at black smoker thermal vents, or

Eyeless
shrimp

Water temperature (3°C)

f FeO(OH), MnO2

Sulfide-oxidizing bacteria
H2S + ½O2 f S0 + H2O

Methanotrophs
CH4 + 2O2 f CO2 + 2H2O
Basalt

Sulfate-reducing bacteria
SO42– + 4H2 f H2S + 2H2O + 2OH–

Pompeii
worm

Precipitation chimney (350°C)

Methanogens
CO2 + 4H2 f CH4 + 2H2O

Reaction zone
(400°C)
Hydrothermal fluid provides
CO2, H2S, H2
Magma (1,200°C)

FIGURE 21.28

■ The thermal vent ecosystem. A. At thermal vents, volcanic
activity causes upwelling of hydrogen sulfide and carbonates. The high concentrations
of sulfides have selected for evolution of invertebrates that feed through mutualistic associations with H2S-oxidizing bacteria. The H2S oxidizers fix carbon from the carbonates,
generating organic metabolites that feed their animal hosts. B. Vent bacteria within the
gills of tube worms provide energy from oxidation of hydrogen sulfide. Source: Part A from

Raina Maier et al. 2000. Environmental Microbiology. Academic Press. Reprinted by permission of Elsevier, Ltd.

B. Tube worms

OAR/NATIONAL UNDERSEA RESEARCH PROGRAM (NURP).

FeS, Mn2+ + O2

Minerals
precipitating

CHAPTER 21

hydrothermal vents, such as those of Guaymas Basin, in
the Gulf of California (Fig. 21.28) (discussed in Chapter 19). The clouds rising from the thermal vent are minerals precipitating as the superheated solution meets cold
seawater. The reduced minerals from the vents support
entire ecosystems of lithotrophic bacteria, including
mutualists of uniquely evolved giant clams and worms.
Many vent-dependent microbes are thermophiles,
adapted to high temperatures (discussed in Chapter 5).
Many are hyperthermophilic archaea such as Pyrodictium
occultum, growing at temperatures above 100°C, which
are reached only at high pressure (1,000 atm; discussed
in Chapter 19).
The ocean floor provides reduced inorganic minerals
such as iron sulfide (FeS) and manganese (Mn 2+) that can
combine with dissolved oxygen to drive chemolithoautotrophy (discussed in Chapter 14). Chemolithoautotrophy
by microbes in the sediment generates a permanent voltage
potential between the reduced sediment and the oxidizing water. As a result, the entire benthic interface between
floor and water acts as a charged battery that can actually
generate electricity.
The benthic redox gradient is enhanced dramatically
at hydrothermal vents, where volcanic activity causes
upwelling of hydrogen sulfide (H 2 S), H 2, and carbonates
(Fig. 21.28A). At a hydrothermal vent, these reduced
minerals are brought up by seawater that seeps through
the sediment until it reaches a magma pool, where it
becomes superheated and rises to the surface as steam.
Sulfate-reducing bacteria reduce sulfate from seawater
with H 2 upwelling from the vent fluids, to form H 2 S. As
the H 2 S rises, it is oxidized by sulfur-oxidizing bacteria
such as Thiomicrospira. Nearby anaerobic sediment supports methanogens, and the methane they produce seeps
up into the oxygenated water, where it is oxidized by
methanotrophs.
The high concentrations of sulfides near thermal vents
have selected for a remarkable evolution of invertebrate species that feed through mutualistic associations with H 2Soxidizing bacteria, such as the yeti crab (see the Current
Research Highlight). The H 2S oxidizers fix carbon from
the carbonates, generating organic metabolites that feed
their animal hosts—species of worms, anemones, and giant
clams, all closely related to surface-dwelling species that
would be poisoned by H 2S. The tube worm Riftia is colored bright red by a pigment carrying H 2S and O2 in its
circulatory fluid (Fig. 21.28B). The worm has evolved
such a complete dependence on its symbionts that it has lost
its own digestive tract.
Surprisingly, microbial communities related to those
at thermal vents are found in unheated benthic habitats
known as cold seeps, where hydrogen and methane seep
slowly through cracks in the rock. Cold-seep endosymbiosis within animals is presented in eTopic 21.2.

■

MICROBIAL ECOLOGY

■

849

Freshwater Microbial Communities

Many features of marine habitats also apply to freshwater
systems, such as lakes and rivers. Freshwater habitats, of
course, contain much lower salt, usually less than 0.1%. The
study of freshwater systems is called limnology. Like the
marine water column, the profile of a lake water column is
defined by depth, aeration, and temperature (Fig. 21.29).
Large, undisturbed lakes are usually oligotrophic,
with dilute concentrations of nutrients and microbes
(Fig. 21.29A). The warm upper water layer above the thermocline is called the epilimnion. The epilimnion water is
warm, well mixed, and oxygenated relative to the lower
layers of water, which are isolated from the atmosphere. It
supports oxygenic phototrophs such as algae and cyanobacteria. Below the epilimnion lies a thermocline, a steep transition zone to colder, denser water below.
The epilimnion reaches only about 10 meters in depth,
much shallower than the marine euphotic zone. In a lake,
the depth of light penetration varies greatly, depending
on the concentration of microbes and particulate matter. At
the edge of the lake, where the upper layer becomes shallow enough for rooted plants, is the littoral zone. In the
deeper water, below the epilimnion, lies the hypolimnion, a
region that becomes anoxic.
A lake that receives large concentrations of nutrients,
such as runoff from agricultural fertilizer or septic systems,
becomes eutrophic (Fig. 21.29B). In a eutrophic lake,
the nutrients support growth of algae to high densities,
causing an algal bloom (Fig. 21.29C). The algal bloom
is rapidly consumed by heterotrophic bacteria, whose respiration removes all the oxygen. This oxygen loss causes
the anoxic hypolimnion to reach nearly up to the surface
of the lake.
But all fish and invertebrates need access to the epilimnion for oxygen. In a eutrophic lake, fish die off owing to
lack of oxygen, which heterotrophic microbes have consumed. Such a lake is said to have a high level of biochemical oxygen demand (BOD). For example, in 2010, fertilizer
runoff caused eutrophication of Grand Lake St. Marys in
Ohio. The lake was covered with thick green algae that
released toxins, depleted oxygen, ruined boat hulls, and
prevented human use of the lake.
Common causes of eutrophication include:
■

Phosphates. Because phosphorus is commonly a limiting nutrient (nutrient in shortest supply) for algae, addition of phosphates from detergents and fertilizers can
lead to an algal bloom.

■

Nitrogen from sewage effluents and agricultural fertilizer runoff can lead to algal blooms by relieving nitrogen
limitation.

■

Organic pollutants from sewage effluents overfeed heterotrophic bacteria, depleting the epilimnion of oxygen.

850

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

A. Oligotrophic lake (dilute nutrients)

B. Eutrophic lake (rich nutrients)

Log10 CFUs/I
0

1

2

3

4

5

Log10 CFUs/I
6

7

Cyanobacteria

8

0

Neuston

O2

4

Thermocline

8

2

3

4

5

Cyanobacteria
Chloroflexi and sulfur bacteria

6

7
O2

H 2S

8

Neuston
Epilimnion
Thermocline
Hypolimnion

Benthos
Depth (m)

Depth (m)

Chloroflexi and sulfur
10 bacteria

Epilimnion

1

H2S

Sulfur bacteria and
sulfate-reducing organisms

Hypolimnion
20

Sulfur bacteria and
sulfate-reducing organisms

Benthos

C. Algal bloom

FIGURE 21.29

JOHN SEEWER/AP

Microbial metabolism in freshwater
lakes. A. Depth profile of an oligotrophic lake. The oxygenated

In a eutrophic lake, the lower layers have become
depleted of oxygen as a result of overgrowth of microbial
producers and consumers. Thermal stratification may break
up, and the lake may mix one to several times per year, thus
reoxygenating the entire lake. A permanently eutrophic
lake typically supports ten times the microbial concentrations of an oligotrophic lake (see Fig. 21.29A and B), but
shows greatly decreased animal life.
Anoxic water supports only anaerobic microbes.
These include anaerobic phototrophs that do not produce O2. Enough light may penetrate to support anaerobic

■

zone (epilimnion) reaches to the thermocline, below which only
anaerobes grow. CFU = colony-forming unit. B. Depth profile
of a eutrophic lake. The oxygenated epilimnion is much shallower, and microbial concentrations are tenfold higher than in
an oligotrophic lake. C. Algal bloom from fertilizer runoff fills a
channel into the reservoir at Grand Lake St. Marys State Park,
Ohio, in 2010.

H2S-oxidizing phototrophs such as Chlorobium and Rhodopseudomonas. Although H 2S photolysis provides less energy
than oxygenic H 2O photolysis, these bacteria have evolved
to use chlorophylls whose spectrum extends into the infrared (Fig. 21.30). Light in the infrared portions of the spectrum cannot be used by oxygenic phototrophs, because the
photon energy is insufficient to split water. The less efficient
H2S photolyzers, however, can harness the energy of red and
infrared radiation (discussed in Chapter 14). H 2S-oxidizing
phototrophs overlap metabolically with anaerobic heterotrophs and lithotrophs that reduce oxidized minerals. Some

CHAPTER 21

Chlorobium
(green sulfur bacteria)

Relative absorption

Anabaena
(cyanobacteria)

■

MICROBIAL ECOLOGY

■

851

Blastochloris
(nonsulfur purple bacteria)

Unabsorbed light

400

600
800
1,000
Wavelength (nm)

400

600
800
1,000
Wavelength (nm)

400

600
800
1,000
Wavelength (nm)

FIGURE 21.30

■ Absorbance spectra of chlorophyll from lake phototrophs. In the upper waters, algae and cyanobacteria absorb
primarily blue and red. Below, where red has been absorbed by microorganisms above, anaerobic phototrophs such as Blastochloris absorb
infrared (wavelengths beyond 750 nm).

bacteria, such as Rhodospirillum rubrum, can grow anaerobically with or without light; others grow only by anaerobic
metabolism, unassisted by light. These low-oxygen bacteria
form a flourishing community, but they cannot support oxygen-breathing consumers such as fish.
At the bottom of the water column, the water meets
the sediment (benthos). In the benthic sediment, gradients develop in which successive electron acceptors
become reduced by anaerobic respirers and lithotrophs
(Fig. 21.31). Electron acceptors that yield the most
energy are consumed first; as each in turn is depleted, the
electron acceptor with the most energy is consumed next.
First, molecular oxygen is used to oxidize organic material

and reduced minerals such as NH4+. Below, as molecular oxygen falls off, bacteria use nitrate (NO3 –) from oxidized ammonium ion as an electron acceptor to respire on
remaining organic material. As the nitrate is used up, still
other bacteria use manganese (Mn4+) as an electron acceptor, followed by iron (Fe3+) and sulfate (SO 4 2–). Reduction of sulfate leads to H 2 S, which eventually returns to
the upper layers supporting anaerobic photolysis. Reduction of CO2 by H 2 produces methane (CH4). Methane
collects below and sometimes ignites when it escapes to
the surface. Methane from freshwater lakes and streams is
emerging as a major contributor to global warming (discussed in Chapter 22).

Benthic microbial redox transformations
Carbon

Nitrogen

Sulfur

Surface

Surface

Surface

CO2

O2

O2

Depth in sediment

NO3–

NO2–
CH4
Concentration in sediment

FIGURE 21.31

SO42–

O2

S0

H2 S

NH4+
Concentration in sediment

Concentration in sediment

Redox gradients in the benthic sediment. At the top of the sediment interface with the water column, minerals
are first oxidized lithotrophically by O2; then, as O2 declines, the oxidized minerals are used as alternative electron acceptors for anaerobic
respiration.
■

852

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

Note:

Certain minerals and organic molecules occur in equilibrium between ionized and un-ionized states over the range of
pH typical of most common habitats (pH 4–9). Examples include
ammonia (NH3), which protonates to ammonium ion (NH4+), and
organic acids such as acetic acid (CH3COOH), which deprotonates
to acetate (CH3COO –). In this chapter we refer to the form most
prevalent at pH 7 unless stated otherwise.

Throughout the water column, protists consume algae
and bacteria, while fungi decompose detritus. Protists and
fungi also interact with invertebrates and fish as parasites.
Other important consumers are the viruses, which lyse
about half of microbial populations in lakes, as they do in
the ocean. Viruses limit the number of microbes and keep
the water clear enough for light to penetrate.

To Summarize
■

■

■

■

■

■

■

The euphotic zone of the ocean is the upper part of
the water column that receives light for phototrophs.
Below, in the aphotic zone, only heterotrophs and lithotrophs can grow. The benthos includes the region where
the water column meets the ocean floor, as well as sediment below the surface.
Most marine microbes either cannot be cultured or
require special culturing methods. Some can be cultured using conditions that mimic their natural habitat,
and allow intimate association with other species that
provide growth factors such as siderophores.
Plankton are small floating organisms, including
swimming microbes. Phytoplankton are phototrophs
such as cyanobacteria and algae. Microbial consumers
include protists and viruses. Many marine protists are
mixotrophs (producers and consumers in one).
Picoplankton include bacteria and small microbial
eukaryotes. They are measured by fluorescence microscopy. Their biochemical rate of production is estimated
by uptake of radiolabeled nutrients.
Benthic microbes are barophiles. The seafloor supports
psychrophiles, whereas hydrothermal vents support thermophiles. Vents and cold seeps support sulfur- and metaloxidizing bacteria, sulfur-reducing bacteria, methanogens,
and methanotrophs. Bacteria that oxidize H2S and methane feed symbiotic animals such as tube worms.
Freshwater lakes have stratified water levels. As depth
increases, minerals become increasingly reduced. Anaerobic forms of metabolism predominate, with the more
favorable alternative electron acceptors used in turn.
Lakes may be oligotrophic or eutrophic. Eutrophic
lakes may show such high biochemical oxygen demand
(BOD) that the oxygen concentration falls to levels too
low to support vertebrate life.

21.6

Soil and Plant Microbial
Communities

In contrast to the ocean, where the base of producers is
almost entirely microbial, the major producers of terrestrial ecosystems are macroscopic plants. Plants vary
greatly in size and form, from mosses and bryophytes to
prairie grasses and forest trees, but most terrestrial plants
are rooted in soil. Soil is a complex mixture of decaying
organic and mineral matter that feeds vast communities
of microbes. Soil is arguably the most complex microbial ecosystem on our planet. And soil-based agriculture
is the major source of food for our planet’s human inhabitants. The qualities of a given soil—oxygenated or water
saturated, acidic or alkaline, salty or fresh, nutrient-rich
or -poor—define what food can be grown and whether the
human community will eat or starve.

Soil Microbiology

The general structure of soil (Fig. 21.32) includes a series
of layers called “horizons” that arise as a result of soil-forming factors such as rainfall, temperature variation, wind,
and biological activity. Note that the soils of different habitats, such as prairie, forest, and desert, vary greatly as to the
depth and quality of each layer.
The surface layer of soil we see is the organic horizon
(O horizon). The organic horizon consists of dark, organic
detritus, such as shreds of leaves fallen from plants. The detritus
of the organic horizon is in the earliest stages of decomposition
by microbes, primarily fungi and bacteria such as actinomycetes. Early-stage decomposition is defined loosely as a state in
which the origin of the detritus may be still recognizable.
Beneath the organic horizon lies the lighter-colored
aerated horizon (A horizon), in which organic particles in
more advanced stages of decomposition combine with minerals from rock at lower levels. In the aerated horizon, the
source of the organic particles is no longer recognizable,
and decomposers have broken down some of the more difficult-to-digest plant structural components, such as lignin
(a complex aromatic polymer found in wood; discussed in
the next section). This partly decomposed material is often
sold by garden stores as peat or topsoil.
In well-drained soil, both the organic and aerated horizons are full of oxygen, as well as nutrients liberated by the
decomposers and used by plants. Soil consists of a complex
assemblage of organic and inorganic particles (Fig. 21.32).
Between the soil particles are air spaces that provide access
to oxygen, allowing aerobic respiration. Each particle of
soil supports miniature colonies, biofilms, and filaments of
bacteria and fungi that interact with each other and with
the roots of plants (Fig. 21.33).

CHAPTER 21

■

MICROBIAL ECOLOGY

■

853

Soil particle
Humic substances

Organic (O) horizon:
organic matter undergoing
decomposition
Aerated (A) horizon:
decomposed organic particles
and minerals

Bacterial
colonies

Polysaccharide secretion by
plants binds clay particles.

Oxygenated,
water drained

Eluviated (E) horizon:
insoluble particles leached
by rainwater; gray or
grayish brown
B horizon: clay and
minerals

Fungi

Water table
Anoxic,
water saturated

Water-saturated horizon:
organic matter, clay, and
minerals leached from above

100 µm

Physical entanglement
of fungal filaments

FIGURE 21.33

Microbes in soil and rock. Soil particles support growth of complex assemblages of microbes. A soil particle
contains bacterial colonies, biofilm associations, and microbes associated with fungi and plant roots.
Mineral particles broken
from bedrock below

■

FIGURE 21.32

crustal rock as deep as 3 km down contains endoliths, bacteria growing between crystals of solid rock. What energy
source feeds microbes trapped within rock? For some endoliths, a surprising answer may be the radioactive decay of
uranium. Uranium-238 decay generates hydrogen radicals that combine to form hydrogen gas. The hydrogen
gas combines with CO2 from carbonate rock, providing an
electron donor and a carbon source for methanogens and
other endolithic lithotrophs.

Below the aerated horizon, the eluviated horizon (E
horizon) experiences periods of water saturation from rain
(see Fig. 21.32). Rainwater leaches (dissolves and removes)
some of the organic and mineral nutrients from the upper
layers. Below the eluviated horizon lie increasing proportions of minerals and rock fragments broken off from bedrock below. These lower water-saturated layers form the
water table. This anoxic, water-saturated region contains
mainly lithotrophs and anaerobic heterotrophs.
The soil layers finally end at bedrock, a source of mineral
nutrients such as carbonates and iron. Interestingly, bedrock is permeated with microbes. Core samples show that

The top horizons of soil feature a food web of extraordinary complexity (Fig. 21.34). The major producers are
green plants, whose leaves generate detritus and whose
root systems feed predators, scavengers, and mutualists. Some carbon is also fixed by lithotrophs oxidizing
reduced nitrogen (NH3), hydrogen sulfide (H 2 S), and
iron (Fe2+). In well-aerated soil, however, the proportion
of carbon fixed by lithotrophs is small compared to that
fixed by plants.
Plant matter is decomposed by many species of fungi,
such as Mycena species, and by bacteria such as the actinomycetes. The actinomycetes include Streptomyces, a genus
famous for the production of antibiotics and for generating chemicals whose odors give soil its characteristic smell

Bedrock

■ The soil profile. Soil forms layers in which
decomposing organic material predominates at the top, and minerals toward the bottom, at bedrock. The top layers are aerated, providing heterotrophs with access to O2, whereas the bottom layers
are water saturated and anaerobic.

The Soil Food Web

854

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

Birds

CO2

Plants:
Shoots
and roots
Arthropods:
Shredders
Fungi:
Mycorrhizal fungi
Saprophytic fungi

Organic matter:
Waste, residue, and
metabolites from plants,
animals, and microbes

Plants:
- Leaves
- Roots
Lithotrophs

Nematodes:
Fungal and
bacterial feeders

Vertebrate
animals
Nematodes:
Predators

Bacteria

Producers

Arthropods:
Predators

Protozoa:
Amebas, ciliates,
and flagellates

Consumers

Aerated soil

Secondary consumers: Predators

Protists and fungi:
- Root feeders
- Decomposers
- Parasites
- Mutualists

Protists
Nematodes
Arthropods

Larger arthropods
Vertebrates

Decomposers:
Bacteria and fungi

FIGURE 21.34

The soil food web (aerated zone). Plants are the major producers, although some production also occurs from
lithotrophs such as ammonia oxidizers. Detritus from plants is decomposed by fungi and bacteria, which feed protists and small invertebrates
such as nematodes. Protists and small invertebrates are consumed by larger invertebrates and vertebrate animals.
■

(Fig. 21.35A). Besides fallen leaves, another source of
organic matter from plants is the rhizosphere, the region
of soil surrounding plant roots. The rhizosphere contains
proteins and sugars released by roots, as well as sloughedoff plant cells. These materials feed large numbers of bacteria, which then cycle minerals back to the plant. Bacteria
in the rhizosphere may also discourage growth of plant
pathogens.
In the aerated zone, bacteria feeding on leaf detritus and root exudates are then preyed on by protists and

nematodes. Many complex interactions occur. The nematode Heterorhabditis bacteriophora (Fig. 21.35B) carries symbiotic Photorhabdus luminescens bacteria, which it
alternately consumes and transmits as a mutualist when it
infects an insect. Vampirella protists drill holes in fungal
hyphae to suck out their nutrients. Parasitic fungi prey on
plants or invertebrates; some actually capture and strangle
nematodes. Mycorrhizal fungi extend the absorptive surface area of plant roots. Microbes ultimately feed invertebrates, which then feed larger invertebrates and vertebrate

CHAPTER 21

■

855

B. Nematode with symbiotic bacteria

10 +m
© 2007 TODD CICHE. WORMBOOK, DOI/10.1895/WORMBOOK.1.135.1, HTTP://WWW.WORMBOOK.ORG.

FIGURE 21.35

■ Soil microbes. A. Hyphae of actinomycete
bacteria, Streptomyces griseus. Streptomyces bacteria give the
soil its characteristic odor. B. The nematode Heterorhabditis
bacteriophora carries luminescent Photorhabdus luminescens
bacteria, which it alternately consumes and transmits to a host
insect.

10 +m

A. Lignin
OH
H3CO

predators. Some predators, such as earthworms and burrowing animals, enhance the soil quality by turning over
the matter, thus aerating the soil particles and helping to
mix the organic matter from above with the mineral particles from below.
A critical role of fungal decomposers (also known as saprophytes) is the breakdown of extremely complex structural components of vascular plants such as grass and trees
(Fig. 21.36). Trees, in particular, accumulate vast stores
of biomass in forms that are difficult to digest, such as lignin. Lignin is a highly complex and diverse covalent polymer composed of interlinked phenolic groups (benzene
rings with OH or related oxygen-bearing side groups)
(Fig. 21.36A). We saw earlier that termites host protozoa
that help degrade the lignin portion of wood particles. In
soil, fungi and bacterial decomposers possess enzyme systems to degrade lignin and other complex components of
plants. Examples of decomposers include white rot fungi
(Fig. 21.36B) and actinomycete soil bacteria. The prevalence of lignin is one reason that decomposition by fungi
plays a much larger role in terrestrial ecosystems than in
marine ecosystems.
The first phase of microbial degradation (about 50% of
the carbon) is complete within a year of deposition in the
soil. The remaining phenolics, however, may be degraded
at less than 5% per year, and some samples dated by 14C
isotope ratios have been shown to last 2,000 years. These
phenolic molecules are called humic material or humus.
Because of its slow degradation, humic material provides
a steady slow-release supply of nutrients for plant growth.
But forests whose rate of microbial decomposition is particularly low—for example, the New Jersey Pine Barrens—
depend on fire to clear the mounting layers of humus and
return its minerals to the ecosystem.

O
O

O

OCH3

H3CO

OH

O

HO

O

O

HO

O
O

O
HO
OCH3
O
B. White rot fungi

DUKE UNIVERSITY, DEPARTMENT OF BIOLOGY

FROM THE SOIL BIOLOGY PRIMER WITH PERMISSION, © 2000 SOIL AND
WATER CONSERVATION SOCIETY.

A. Streptomyces griseus

MICROBIAL ECOLOGY

■

FIGURE 21.36 ■ Microbial degradation of lignin. A. Lignin is
a complex organic polymer that is a component of wood and bark.
B. Xylobolus frustulatus, a white rot fungus, growing on a willow
log. The fungus degrades lignin.

856

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

Microbes Associated with Roots

The presence of plant roots provides yet another level of
complexity to soil communities (Fig. 21.37). Plant roots
influence the surrounding soil by taking up nutrients and
by secreting organic substances and molecules that modulate their surroundings. The environment surrounding a
plant root can be further subdivided into two categories:
the rhizoplane, the root surface; and the rhizosphere, the
region of soil outside the root surface but still influenced
by plant exudates (materials secreted by the plant). Particular bacterial species are adapted to these environments. For
example, in anaerobic wetland soil, the rhizoplane and rhizosphere of plant roots provide oxygen for methanotrophs
that oxidize methane produced by methanogens.
The rhizoplane and rhizosphere also provide the environment for symbiotic fungi that generate mycorrhizae. At
least 80% of plants in nature, including 90% of forest trees,
require mycorrhizae for optimal growth.

Root

Stele
(xylem ,
phloem )

Epidermis

Rhizoplane

Rhizosphere
5 mm

Root
hair

Cortex

Endodermis

Root cap

Mucigel
(plant and
bacterial
mucilage)

Sloughed
root cap
cell

FIGURE 21.37 ■ Plant roots offer special habitats for
microbes. The rhizoplane is the region of soil directly contacting the
plant root surface. The rhizosphere is the soil outside the rhizoplane
that receives substances from the root, such as mucilage, sloughed
cells, and exudates.

Mycorrhizae: The Fungal Internet

The function and significance of mycorrhizae for plant
growth is just beginning to be understood. Mycorrhizae (singular, mycorrhiza; from myco, “fungal,” and
rhiza, “root”) consist of fungal mycelia that associate
intimately with the roots of plants, extending access to
minerals while obtaining in return the energy-rich products of plant photosynthesis. Mycorrhizae were first discovered in the 1880s by German truffle hunters who
sought to cultivate the prized delicacy, the fruiting body
of an ascomycete (for review of fungi, see Chapter 20).
The propagation of truffles was investigated by mycologist Albert Frank at the Agricultural University of Berlin.
To his surprise, Frank found that the truffles extended
their mycelia far beyond the site of the fruiting body, and
that the mycelia formed an impenetrable tangle with plant
roots. Frank called the tangled mycelia “fungus-roots” or
mycorrhizae. A century later, we are beginning to appreciate that these mysterious fungus-root tangles offer a vast
interconnected network for exchange of nutrients among
fungi and many different plants, like an internet connecting countless sites.
Two different kinds of mycorrhizae are observed: ectomycorrhizae and endomycorrhizae. Ectomycorrhizae
colonize the rhizoplane, the surface of plant rootlets—the
most distal part of plant roots (Fig. 21.38). The fungal
mycelia never penetrate the root cells. They form a thick
mantle surrounding the root and growing between the
root cells, and then extend long mycelia away from the
root to absorb nutrients. Numerous kinds of fungi form
ectomycorrhizae, including ascomycetes (such as truffles)
and basidiomycetes, known by their mushrooms (such as
stinkhorns). Plants grown with ectomycorrhizae invest
less of their body mass in roots and more in the aboveground stems and leaves—an important consideration for
agriculture, in which the aboveground plant is usually the
part harvested.
Endomycorrhizae form a more intimate association, in
which the fungal hyphae penetrate plant cells deep within
the cortex (Fig. 21.39). The penetrating hyphae form
knobbed branches that resemble microscopic “trees,” or
arbuscules, within the root cells. Some of the hyphae form
specialized vesicles within the plant that store nutrients.
Another name for this kind of mycorrhizae is vesiculararbuscular mycorrhizae (VAM).
Endomycorrhizae are more specialized than ectomycorrhizae. They comprise a relatively small number of fungal species, such as members of the Glomeromycota genus
Glomus, and they show obligate dependence on their host
plants. Their presence in nature and their importance in
the ecosystem, however, are actually greater. Endomycorrhizal species exist entirely underground (they do not form
mushrooms), and they completely lack sexual cycles. They

CHAPTER 21

■

MICROBIAL ECOLOGY

■

857

Fungal mantle
Ectomycorrhizal hyphae
do not penetrate cells.

Rootlet

Hyphae

Ectomycorrhizal
hyphae

Root cortical
cells

Short
branched
rootlets

FIGURE 21.38

■ Ectomycorrhizae: fungi colonize
the surface of the rootlet. A. Plant root cross section.

Ectomycorrhizae extend hyphae from the root surface.
B. Ectomycorrhizal hyphae from a rootlet (LM).

50 µm

B.

A. Endomycorrhizae (plant root cross section)
Hyphae
Phosphorus

Vesicle

PHOTO COURTESY OF PAULA FLYNN, IOWA STATE UNIVERSITY EXTENSION.

A.

B. Arbuscules within root cells

Endodermal Phloem
cells
tubes
Xylem vessels

Zinc
Copper
Root hair

Arbuscules
Epidermal
cells

Potassium
Spores
10 +m

Plant cells
Fungal structures

FIGURE 21.39

■ Endomycorrhizae: fungi invade root cells, forming arbuscules. A. Plant root cross section. Endomycorrhizal
hyphae penetrate cells deep within the root cortex. B. The penetrating hypha forms an arbuscule within a root cell.

may acquire 25% of the photosynthetic product of their
hosts in exchange for tremendously expanding access to
soil resources.
Mycorrhizae greatly enhance the plant’s uptake of water,
as well as minerals such as nitrogen and phosphorus. In
addition, the hyphae sequester toxins, and they actually
distribute organic substances from one plant to another.

Mycorrhizae may join many different plants, even different
species, in a vast, nutrient-sharing network.
Thought Question

21.9 Design an experiment to test the hypothesis that the
presence of mycorrhizae enhances plant growth in nature.

© MARK BRUNDRETT

Nitrogen

858

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

Soil becomes anoxic when the rate of oxygen diffusion is
too low to support aerobic metabolism. Anaerobic metabolism allows much lower rates of production than metabolism
Non-wetland
Wetland
in the presence of oxygen because anaerobes use oxidants of
lower redox potential and limited quantity, such as sulfate
and nitrate. Many kinds of anaerobic
bacteria inhabit wetlands. For example, denitrifiers (bacteria using nitrate
to oxidize organic food) remove
Permanently waterlogged:
nitrate from water before it enters the
Mottled zone
gley soil, few mottles
Methanotrophs
Denitrifiers
water table—one of the ways that wetMethanogens
Sulfate reducers
lands protect our water supply.
Seasonally waterlogged:
Temporarily
The alternative oxidants (electron
gley soil, many mottles
waterlogged:
acceptors) are always in limited supply,
gray-brown soil,
few mottles
so further catabolism is carried out by
B.
fermentation. Fermentation allows only incomplete breakdown of food molecules, generating a rich and diverse supply of nutrients for a variety of consumers, including aerobic
organisms when the water recedes. Thus, despite its lower
overall productivity, anaerobic soil contributes to the nutritional diversity of wetland ecosystems. The relatively slow
rate of decomposition can lead to accumulation of high levels
of organic carbon, particularly rich for plant growth.
The anoxic conditions of wetlands also favor methanogenesis. Methanogenesis is performed solely by archaea
(discussed in Chapters 14 and 19). Methanogenesis occurs
when fermenting bacteria generate H 2, CO2, and other
1 cm
one- or two-carbon substrates that methanogens convert
FIGURE 21.40 ■ Wetland soil. A. A true wetland
to methane. Methane is a more potent greenhouse gas than
experiences periods of water saturation alternating with dry
CO2, and although the current methane concentration in
soil. Soil that is water saturated becomes anaerobic because
our
atmosphere is low, it is rising exponentially.
O2 diffuses slowly through water. B. Alternating periods of
In
water-filled anaerobic soils, particularly those of rice
water saturation and dryness give the soil a mottled color. The
fields, significant quantities of methane escape to the air
red-orange-colored portions around root holes result from oxidized iron (Fe3+), whereas the gray portions (“gley”) indicate
through air-conducting channels in the roots of the rice
that water has washed iron away after reduction (Fe2+).
plant. The roots of rice plants, like those of other wetland
vascular plants, contain channels to carry oxygen. These
same channels, however, allow methane to escape from
Wetland Soils
anaerobic soil. Fortunately, the rhizosphere of the roots supSo far, we have considered the interface between ground
ports methanotrophs that oxidize methane, so research is
and water (the benthic sediment beneath oceans and lakes)
being done to maximize methanotroph activity and miniand the interface between ground and air (aerated soil).
mize the release of methane. There is some evidence that
An interesting case that combines the two is wetlands
natural wetlands actually take in more carbon than they put
(Fig. 21.40A). A wetland is defined as a region of land
out, whereas disturbed wetlands (wetlands altered by human
that undergoes seasonal fluctuations in water level, so that
activity) generate net efflux of CO2 and CH4. The role of
sometimes the land is dry and oxygenated, and at other
wetlands in global cycling is discussed further in Chapter 22.
times water saturated and anaerobic. Wetlands provide
many crucial functions; for example, the Everglades filter
much of the water supply for Florida communities.
Wetland soil that undergoes such periods of anoxic
Plant Endophytic Communities
water saturation is known as hydric soil. Hydric soil is
The plant interior provides a special home for microbes
characterized by “mottles,” patterns of color and paleness
termed endophytes. The plant’s vascular system of phloem
(Fig. 21.40B). The reddish brown portions (for example,
tubes conducts photosynthesized sugars down from the
surrounding a plant root) result from oxidized iron (Fe3+).
leaves, while xylem tubes bring water and minerals up from
The gray portions indicate loss of iron in its water-soluble
the roots. Unlike the sterile blood vessels of animals, plant
reduced form (Fe2+) generated by anaerobic respiration.
transport vessels are normally colonized by endophytic fungi
COURTESY OF CHIEN-LU PING, UNIV. OF ALASKA, ANCHORAGE.

A.

CHAPTER 21

■

MICROBIAL ECOLOGY

■

859

and concentrate toxic metals such as arsenic, suggesting
a possible use for bioremediation of metal-contaminated
soil. They produce promising antibiotics and proteases for
cleansing agents. Other kinds of endophytes protect plants
from heat, salt, and drought—contributions of growing
importance as our global climate changes.

Plant cell nucleus

Bacterium

Rhizobia Fix Nitrogen for Legumes

FIGURE 21.41

■ Endophytic bacteria within plants. Communities of bacteria colonize a new root tip of the plant Arabidopsis
thaliana. The bacteria (green) and the root cell nuclei (blue) are
visualized by FISH with probes hybridized to rRNA, using confocal
laser scanning microscopy. Endophytes include species of Actinobacteria and Proteobacteria that may help the plant resist pathogens
and survive environmental stresses such as high salt or temperature.
Distinct clades of bacteria grow on the root surface or within the
plant tissues. Source: Derek Lundberg et al. 2012. Nature 488:86.

and bacteria. Thus, when we eat plants, we also consume all
their endophytes, or endophytic microbes (Fig. 21.41).
Some endophytes are obligate (can live only within the
plant), whereas others, such as pseudomonads, have alternative lifestyles in the soil. The microbial partners may grow as
mutualists, commensals, or parasites. Plants tolerate endophytes because they confer substantial benefits. For example,
prairie grasses called fescue, grazed by cattle in the southeastern United States, host fungal epiphytes. The fungi, Neotyphodium coenophialum, produce alkaloids that deter insect
predators, pathogens, and root-feeding nematodes. Unfortunately, some of the alkaloids poison cattle, but agricultural
scientists have engineered fungal strains that still protect the
plant from pathogens while allowing cattle to graze.
Human pathogens such as E. coli O157:H7 and Salmonella enterica can grow endophytically in crop plants such
as spinach and alfalfa. Endophytic pathogens pose a problem for the food industry because the bacteria cannot be
“washed off” from raw produce. On the other hand, endophytes such as Stenotrophomonas species have potentially
valuable uses. Stenotrophomonas bacteria produce enzymes
that deter many plant pathogens. The bacteria also absorb

A form of bacteria-plant mutualism critical for agriculture is
that of nitrogen fixation by rhizobia (singular, rhizobium),
a group of soil-dwelling Alphaproteobacteria (discussed in
Chapter 18). Major rhizobial genera include Rhizobium,
Bradyrhizobium, and Sinorhizobium. Rhizobia, associated
with legumes such as peas and beans, fix more nitrogen
than the plants absorb from soil, actually increasing the soil’s
nitrogen content. For this reason, farmers often alternate
crops such as corn with soybeans to restore nitrogen to the
soil. The rhizobial bacteria develop specialized forms within
plant cells, called bacteroids. Bacteroids lack cell walls
and are unable to reproduce; their function is specialized
for nitrogen fixation. The rhizobial infection of root hairs
induces the formation of nodules within which the nitrogenfixing bacteroids are sequestered (Fig. 21.42).
Thought Question

21.10 How do you think symbiotic rhizobia reproduce? Why
do bacteroids develop if they cannot proliferate?

LABORATORY OF MICROBIAL CHEMISTRY, UNIVERSITY OF NEW MEXICO

SARAH LEBEIS/UNIVERSITY OF NORTH CAROLINA

Root tip

FIGURE 21.42

■

Rhizobium nodules on pea plant roots.

Rhizobia induce legume roots to form nitrogen-fixing nodules.

860

PART 4

■

■

MICROBIAL
MICRO
ROB
B IAL DIVERSI
DIVERSITY
I TY A
AND
ND ECOLOGY

A.

B.
Epidermal cell

1. Flavonoids from plant
bind Nod protein of
Rhizobium, attracting
bacteria to plant.

Cortical cells

Root hair

2. Rhizobium cell binds
to root hair.

Plant cell
nucleus

3. Root hair is induced to curl
around Rhizobium.

Rhizobium

Infection
thread
4. Plant cell envelope opens
tube inward as infection thread.

20 µm

XAVIER PERRET, 2000. MICROBIOL & MOL BIOL REVS. 64:180.

Rhizobium cell

C.

6. Rhizobium bacteria
reach cortical cells.

7. Bacteria enter cortical
cells and differentiate to
bacteroids.

Symbiosome membrane

50 µm

C.DANIEL GAGE, 2004. MICROBIOL & MOL BIOL REVS. 68:280.

5. Rhizobium bacteria travel down
infection thread. Plant nucleus
travels ahead.

FIGURE 21.43 ■ The infection thread. A. Rhizobia are attracted to the legume by chemotaxis toward exuded flavonoids. A bacterium
induces an epidermal root hair to curl around it and take it up into the infection thread, a tube of plant cell wall material. The thread eventually
penetrates cortical cells, where the bacteria lose their cell walls and become nitrogen-fixing bacteroids. B. Root hair curling around Rhizobium, and the formation of an infection thread (LM). C. Infection threads invading the cortex (fluorescence microscopy). Bacteria express either
DsRed (pink) or green fluorescent protein (green).

The initiation, development, and maintenance of the
rhizobia-legume symbiosis poses intriguing questions of
genetic regulation. How does the association begin? How
do host plant and bacterium recognize each other as suitable partners? The legume exudes signaling molecules
called flavonoids into its rhizosphere. Flavonoids resemble
steroid hormones such as estrogen and have similar effects
on animals; they are also called phytoestrogens. The flavonoids are detected by rhizobial bacteria, which respond by
chemotaxis, swimming toward the root surface. Flavonoids
then induce bacterial expression of Nod factors, molecules

composed of chitin with lipid attachments. Nod factors
communicate with the host plant and help establish species
specificity between bacterium and host.
The entry of the bacteria into the host involves a fascinating interplay between bacterial and plant cells
(Fig. 21.43A). First, a bacterium is attracted by flavonoids
to the surface of a root hair extended by a root epidermal cell
(Fig. 21.43A, step 1). The bacterial Nod factor induces the
root hair to curl around it and ultimately surround the bacterium with plant cell envelope (steps 2 and 3). The bacterium
then induces growth of a tube poking into the plant cell

CHAPTER
CHAP
CH
APTE
TER
R 21
2

■

MICROBIAL
MICROBI
BIAL
AL ECOLOGY

■

861

Plant cell
Cell membrane of
host plant cell
Plant cell wall

Bacteroid depends on plant
to assimilate NH4+ into TCA
cycle intermediates to form
amino acids.

Malate
Bacteroid
TCA
cycle

Amino acid
cycle
NH4+

5 NADH + FADH2

8 NADH

4 NADH

O2

Leghemoglobin

Ferredoxin
16 ATP

4O2

O2

Respiratory
chain (ETS)
8H2O

Nitrogenase

N2

N2

Symbiosome
membrane

2NH3 + H2
NH4+
Bacteroid provides
NH4+ to plant.

FIGURE 21.44 ■ Energy and oxygen regulation during nitrogen fixation. The bacteroid receives photosynthetic products from the
plant, such as malate and oxygen, to generate ATP for nitrogen fixation. The amount of oxygen is regulated closely by leghemoglobin. The
bacteroid provides nitrogen (fixed as ammonium ion) to the plant cell.

(step 4). The tube growth is directed by the plant nucleus,
which migrates toward the plant cortex (step 5). As the
tube grows, bacteria proliferate, forming a column of cells
that projects down the tube (steps 6 and 7). This column of
cells is known as the infection thread. The infection thread
can be visualized by light microscopy (Fig. 21.43B).
As the infection thread develops, signals from the bacteria induce the cortical cells (below the epidermis) to prepare
to receive the bacteria. The bacteria induce further tube formation into the cortical cells and continue penetration as
they grow. The penetration of the infection thread into the
cortex is shown in fluorescence micrographs (Fig. 21.43C)
in which the bacteria are engineered to express a fluorescent protein.
The cortical cells invaded by bacteria are induced to
proliferate in an organized manner, forming nodules.

Within the nodules, most of the infecting bacteria differentiate into wall-less bacteroids that will fix nitrogen. A
few bacteria fail to differentiate; their fate is unclear. The
bacteroids remain sequestered within a sac of plant-derived
membrane known as the symbiosome. The symbiosome
membrane contains special transporters that mediate the
exchange of nutrients between the bacteroid and its host
cell, sustaining bacteroid metabolism while preventing
harm to the host.
From the plant cytoplasm, the bacteroid receives catabolites such as malate, which enter the TCA cycle and donate
electrons for respiration. The oxygen for respiration comes
from the plant’s photosynthesis, regulated by leghemoglobin to maintain levels low enough to allow nitrogen fixation (Fig. 21.44). Nitrogen fixation consumes about a
fifth of the plant’s photosynthetic products. As discussed

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

in Chapter 15, nitrogen is fixed by the nitrogenase enzyme
into ammonium ions:
+

+

–

N2 + 10H + 8e ⎯→ 2NH4 + H 2
The reaction requires expenditure of eight NADPH or
NADH, plus 16 ATP, which are generated by respiration.
But respiration requires oxygen, which poisons nitrogenase. Thus, oxygen needs to be delivered to the bacteroid
only as needed, and in an amount just enough to run respiration. The oxygen is sequestered and brought to the
bacteroid by leghemoglobin, an iron-bearing plant protein
related to blood hemoglobin.
Overall, the nitrogen fixation symbiosis is kept in balance by several regulatory mechanisms. The presence of
ammonium or nitrate ions inhibits symbiosis and nitrogen fixation. The bacteroids cannot synthesize their own
amino acids; instead, they must provide ammonium to the
plant cytoplasm for assimilation into amino acids, some of
which cycle back to the bacteroid. But what is known of
regulation is dwarfed by the unanswered questions: How
is the infection thread formed? How does the plant allow
infection while preventing uncontrolled growth of bacteria? What determines how much of the plant’s photosynthetic products are harvested by the bacteria? Why is
hydrogen gas released, and how can this loss of potential
energy be prevented? What limits the host specificity of
rhizobia to legumes, and can it be extended to other crop
plants, such as corn? Research on these questions is critical
for agriculture.
Thought Question

21.11 High levels of nitrate or ammonium ion corepress the

expression of Nod factors (see Fig. 21.43). What is the biological advantage of Nod regulation?

We have seen many ways in which bacteria and fungi
interact positively with plants, but other species act as
pathogens. In any environment, pathogens are always outnumbered by the vast community of neutral or helpful
microbes. Nevertheless, when a pathogen does colonize a
plant, its growth can have effects ranging from minimal to
devastating (Fig. 21.45). A relatively harmless plant virus
was associated with a famous historical phenomenon: the
sixteenth-century tulip craze in the Netherlands. The virus
caused streaking of tulip petals (Fig. 21.45A), a pattern
much admired by tulip fanciers. Other viruses, however,
can cause devastating blights and epidemics. (For more on
viruses, see Chapters 6 and 11.)
A pathogenic relative of rhizobia is Agrobacterium tumefaciens, a bacterium whose DNA transforms plant cells to
form crown gall tumors (Fig. 21.45B). A. tumefaciens has
an unusually broad host range, and its natural genetic transformation system has been applied widely for commercial
plant engineering (discussed in Chapter 16). The tumors
remain largely confined and have relatively little effect on
plant growth. Other bacterial pathogens, particularly species of Erwinia and Xanthomonas, severely damage plants.
The most common plant pathogens are fungi. Fungal
diseases such as anthracnose (Fig. 21.45C) cause substantial losses in agriculture, affecting cucumbers, tomatoes,
and other vegetables. Dutch elm disease, which has wiped
out nearly all the native elms of the United States, is caused
by the fungus Ophiostoma novo-ulmi. The fungus is carried by bark beetles, which bore into the xylem, damaging
the plant’s transport vessels and allowing access for fungal
spores.
Some fungal pathogens generate specialized structures
to acquire nutrients from plants. As a hypha grows across
the plant epidermis, its tip can penetrate the plant cell

C. Anthracnose fungus on white oak leaf

B. Crown gall tumor on rose stem

COURTESY KATHY NICHOLS

PAULA FLYNN, IOWA STATE EXTENSION SERVICE

A. Virus infection of tulips

Plant Pathogens

FIGURE 21.45 ■ Plant diseases
range from innocuous to devastating. A. Striped tulips result from a virus.
ALAMY

862

B. Crown gall tumor on rose stem, caused
by Agrobacterium tumefaciens. C. White
oak leaf spotted by anthracnose fungus.

CHAPTER 21
Haustorium mother cell

■

Septum
Neck
Sheath
Fungal wall

Nutrients

■

■

Haustorium
■

Host
cell wall
Plant cytoplasm

Nutrient
flow
■

■

FIGURE 21.46

■

A fungal pathogen inserts haustoria into

plant cells. The haustorium is surrounded by an invagination of the
plant’s cell membrane. Plant nutrients such as sucrose flow into the
haustorium and are transferred out to the fungal mycelia.
■

wall, followed by ingrowth of a bulbous extension called
a haustorium (plural, haustoria) (Fig. 21.46). The haustorium never penetrates the plant cell membrane, thus
avoiding leakage and loss of plant cytoplasm. Instead,
it causes the membrane to invaginate, while expanding
into the volume of the plant cell. The haustorium takes
up nutrients such as sucrose, generated by adjacent chloroplasts. Depending on the species of fungus, haustorial
parasitism can lead to mild growth retardation, or it can
rapidly kill the plant.

Thought Question

21.12 Compare and contrast the processes of plant infection
by rhizobia and by fungal haustoria.

To Summarize
■

The uppermost horizons of soil consist of detritus and
are largely aerated. Below the aerated layers, the eluviated horizon experiences water saturation. Lower layers
are anoxic.

■

MICROBIAL ECOLOGY

■

863

The soil food web includes a complex range of microbial producers, consumers, predators, decomposers, and
mutualists. Microbial mats and biofilms are complex
multispecies communities of bacteria, fungi, and other
microbes.
Fungi decompose lignin, a complex aromatic tree component that is challenging to digest. Lignin decomposition forms humus.
Certain fungi form symbiotic associations with plant
roots called mycorrhizae. Mycorrhizae transport soil
nutrients among many different kinds of plants.
Wetland soils alternate aerated (dry) with anoxic
(water-saturated) conditions. Anoxic wetland soil favors
methanogenesis. Wetland soils are among the most productive ecosystems.
Endophytes are bacteria or fungi that grow within plant
transport vessels, conferring benefits such as resistance
to pathogens.
Rhizobia induce legume roots to nodulate for nitrogen fixation. The bacteria enter the root as infection
threads. Some of the bacteria enter root cells and develop
into nitrogen-fixing bacteroids, which gain energy from
plant cell respiration but must remain anaerobic.
Plant pathogens include bacteria, fungi, and viruses.
Some pathogens only mildly affect the plant, whereas
others cause devastation. Some fungi invade plants using
haustoria, which grow into the plant cell by penetrating
the cell wall and invaginating the cell membrane to avoid
leakage of cytoplasm.

Concluding Thoughts
This chapter has introduced the challenge of characterizing microbial ecosystems, with the promise and pitfalls of
the metagenomes. We have seen how microbes colonize a
vast array of habitats, from the deserts and oceans to the
roots of plants and the digestive tracts of animals. Microbes
are found from the upper layers of our planet’s atmosphere
down to the deepest rock strata we can reach. Wherever
found, microbes both respond to and modify the environment that surrounds them. Thus, microbes both fill available niches and construct their own. While this chapter has
focused on food webs in local habitats, Chapter 22 takes a
global perspective of microbial ecology and its roles in the
cycling of Earth’s essential elements, such as nitrogen and
iron. We will see how microbes interact with global climate
change and examine the evidence for existence of microbial
life beyond Earth.

CHAPTER 22

■

MICROBES IN GLOBAL ELEMENTAL CYCLES

■

867

CHAPTER 22

Microbes in Global Elemental Cycles
22.1 Biogeochemical Cycles
22.2 The Carbon Cycle and Bioremediation
22.3 The Hydrologic Cycle and Wastewater

Treatment
22.4 The Nitrogen Cycle
22.5 Sulfur, Phosphorus, and Metals
22.6 Astrobiology

C U R R E N T R E S E A RC H

highlight

Nitrifying bacteria reshape the nitrogen cycle. Microcolonies
of Nitrospira (yellow) and other bacteria (green) within
nitrifying activated sludge. The microorganisms were
detected by fluorescence in situ hybridization with 16S
rRNA–targeted oligonucleotide probes specific for Nitrospira
or all bacteria, respectively. Nitrospira in activated sludge are
canonical nitrite oxidizers or complete nitrifiers.

A N I N T E RV I E W W I T H
HOLGER DAIMS, MICROBIAL ECOLOGIST, UNIVERSITY OF
VIENNA

What is surprising about finding the
complete nitrification pathway in
Nitrospira?
Since the first description of nitrifying
bacteria in 1892, a central hypothesis
of nitrification research has been that
different microorganisms catalyze
ammonia or nitrite oxidation. Microbiologists speculated about the existence of completely
nitrifying microbes, but no such organism was found for
more than a century. The discovery of Nitrospira species
that complete nitrification was a great surprise, especially
because Nitrospira are widely distributed in nature but were
thought to be merely nitrite oxidizers incapable of ammonia
oxidation.
© ALLEN TSAO

Source: Image by Holger Daims.

M

icrobes throughout the biosphere recycle
carbon, nitrogen, and other elements essential for all life. Through their biochemical
transformations, diverse microbial activities largely
determine the quality of soil, air, and water. Today, all
of these geochemical cycles are altered profoundly
by human activity. But microbes can help us manage
environmental change. From local wastewater treatment to the control of greenhouse gases, microbes
are our hidden partners on Earth. And Earth’s microbial cycles lead us to wonder whether biospheres
exist on other worlds.

Nitrospira colony

How will this discovery revise our view of the global
nitrogen cycle?
Nitrification is a key process of the nitrogen cycle in all oxic
ecosystems. The identification of complete nitrifiers, which
were overlooked for decades, means that current concepts
of nitrifier ecology and physiology need a thorough reevaluation. We should take this into account in future studies of
microbial ecology, agriculture, wastewater treatment, and
global climate change research.
867

868

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

The global cycle of nitrogen impacts every form of life on
Earth, and we invest vast resources in nitrogen fertilizers
for agriculture. Much of the nitrogen cycle depends on
microbes. We continue to discover unexpected microbial
contributors, such as the Nitrospira species that oxidize
ammonia all the way to nitrate (see the Current Research
Highlight). Nitrate is a key form of nitrogen that living
organisms may assimilate. Surprisingly, we find nitrate on
the planet Mars—suggesting a possible source of nitrogen
for life, if it should (or did) exist there.
The challenge of global cycles is quantification, adding
up all the inputs and outputs of key molecules. Ammonia oxidation is important to quantify because one of the
pathway’s intermediate forms is nitrous oxide (N2O), one
of three major greenhouse gases whose increase correlates
with the industrial age (Fig. 22.1). Greenhouse gases trap
solar radiation as heat—an effect known as the greenhouse
effect. Levels of these gases from thousands of years ago are
measured from air bubbles trapped in ice in Antarctica. The
gases are generated by bacteria, methanogens, and other
life-forms, but human technology accelerates their release.
Burning petroleum releases CO2 from a product that
bacteria and plants took millions of years to form. At the
same time, phototrophic bacteria and plants fix much of the
global carbon dioxide into biomass. But the added human
output of CO2 has outpaced the rate of plant and microbial
CO2 fixation. Global warming accelerates methane release
by methanogens. And bacteria oxidize sewage nitrogen to
N2O. Will the human-induced global climate change cause
mass extinctions of a majority of Earth’s species—as did

2,000 Years of Greenhouse Gas Concentrations

1,800

Carbon dioxide (CO2 )
Methane (CH4 )
Nitrous oxide (N2O)

350

1,600
1,400
1,200

300

1,000
800

250

0

500

1000
Year

1500

2000

600

FIGURE 22.1

■ Global greenhouse gases. Atmospheric levels
of CO2, methane, and nitrous oxide were measured in Antarctic ice
cores. The increase of these greenhouse gases since 1750 accompanies the rise in fossil fuel burning and fertilizer-intensive agriculture.

Source: Modified from U.S. Global Change Research Program. 2009. Global Climate
Change Impacts in the United States. Cambridge University Press.

22.1

Biogeochemical Cycles

Two billion years ago, ancient cyanobacteria began to photolyze water and produce molecular oxygen, as discussed in
Chapter 17. Oxygen is a powerful oxidant, lethal to most life
in that anoxic era, when all living organisms were anaerobic
microbes. To survive, anaerobes had to evolve mechanisms
of protection against oxygen, such as antioxidant molecules
and enzymes, or else retreat to anoxic habitats. Since then,
microbes have shaped our biosphere by releasing oxygen, by
fixing nitrogen and returning it to the atmosphere, and by
fixing and producing carbon dioxide. These and countless
other microbial processes have made Earth’s atmosphere what
it is, and they continue their roles in its homeostasis.

2,000

CH4 (ppb)

CO2 (ppm), N2O (ppb)

400

the rise of ancient cyanobacteria? Or can we use our knowledge of microbial ecology to channel microbial activities
into recovering the balance—for example, by increasing
microbial CO2 fixation?
Throughout most of this book, we present microbial biochemistry in the context of growth of individual organisms.
Here in Chapter 22, we show how the collective metabolic
activities of microbial populations contribute to global cycles
of elements throughout Earth’s biosphere. We consider the
ways that we humans enlist microbes for bioremediation,
the use of microbial metabolism to reverse pollution and
restore chemical cycles, such as the water cycle in the Florida Everglades (see Section 22.3). Finally, we explore how
our awareness of global microbiology has renewed our quest
for life beyond Earth. For example, the discovery of nitrate
on Mars shows the surprising possibility of nitrogen “fertilizer” available for life on that planet (see Section 22.6).

Microbes Cycle Essential Elements

Microbes have exceptional abilities to interconvert molecules (discussed in Chapter 21). But even microbes face the
limits of the actual elements themselves: No metabolism
can convert one element to another. Because organisms
cannot form their own elements, they need to get them
from their environment. While small amounts of matter
enter the biosphere from outer space, and gases continually
escape Earth, the rates of these changes are tiny compared
to the rates of living processes. So, organisms acquire their
elements either from nonliving components of their environment, such as by fixing atmospheric CO2, or from other
organisms, by grazing, predation, or decomposition. Furthermore, all organisms recycle their components back to
the biosphere. The partners in this recycling include abiotic
entities such as air, water, and minerals, as well as biotic
entities such as predators and decomposers. Collectively,

CHAPTER 22

TABLE 22.1*Typical Elemental Composition
of Gram-Negative Bacteria
Element

Dry weight (%)

Carbon

50

Oxygen

20

Nitrogen

14

Hydrogen

8

Phosphorus

3

Sulfur

1

Potassium

1

Sodium

1

Calcium

0.5

Magnesium

0.5

Chlorine

0.5

Iron

0.2

All others

0.3

■

MICROBES IN GLOBAL ELEMENTAL CYCLES

■

869

components such as the silicate shells of diatoms or the sulfur
granules of phototrophic bacteria. All of these elements flow
in biogeochemical cycles of nutrients throughout the biotic
and abiotic components of the biosphere. The environmental
levels of key elements can limit biological productivity. For
example, the concentration of iron can limit marine populations of phytoplankton, which depend on iron supplied by
wind blowing dust off a land mass. Other elements, such as
zinc and copper, are micronutrients, nutrients required in
still smaller amounts. Micronutrients, too, must be cycled,
although their flux is challenging to measure.

Sources and Sinks of
Essential Elements

the metabolic interactions of microbial communities with
the biotic and abiotic components of their ecosystems are
known as biogeochemistry or geomicrobiology.
Which elements need to be recycled and made available
for life? In most organisms, six elements predominate: carbon, oxygen, nitrogen, hydrogen, phosphorus, and sulfur (discussed in Chapter 4). Table 22.1 summarizes the
elemental composition typical of Gram-negative bacteria.
In other microbes, elemental proportions vary with species and growth conditions. Some species include inorganic

Biogeochemical cycles include both biological components
(such as phototrophs that consume CO2 and heterotrophs
that release CO2) and geological components (such as volcanoes that release CO2 and oceans that absorb CO2). The
major parts of the biosphere containing significant amounts
of an element needed for life are called reservoirs of that
element (Table 22.2). Each reservoir acts both as a source
of that element for living organisms and as a sink to which
the element returns. For example, the ocean is an important reservoir for carbon (CO2 in equilibrium with HCO3 –,
bicarbonate ion). The ocean’s carbon cycles rapidly; thus,
the ocean serves as both a source and a sink for carbon.
As elements cycle from sources to sinks, microbial
metabolism generates a series of redox changes (discussed
in Chapter 14). The major oxidation states of carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur are summarized in Table 22.3. Biospheric

TABLE 22.2*Global Reservoirs of Carbon, Nitrogen, and Sulfura
Reservoir

Carbon

Rate of
cycling

Nitrogen

Rate of
cycling

Sulfur

Rate of
cycling

Atmosphere

700 (CO2)

Fast

3,900,000 (N2)

Slow

0.0014 (SO2, H2S)

Fast

.Biomass

4

Fast

0.5

Fast

0.15

Fast

.Organic molecules

2,100

Fast

300

Fast

—

—

.Inorganic molecules

38,000
(HCO3–, CO32–)

Fast

20,000 (N2)
690 (NO3–, NO2–, NH4+)

Slow
Fast

1,200,000 (SO42–)

Slow

Ocean

Land
.Biomass

500

Fast

25

Fast

8.5

Fast

.Organic matter (soil)

1,200

Fast

110

Slow

16

Fast

.Crust (below land and ocean)

120,000,000

Slow

770,000

Slow

18,000,000

Slow

.Fossil fuel (oil, coal, natural gas)

13,000

Fast

Source: R. Maier et al. 2000. Environmental Microbiology. Academic Press, San Diego, CA.
a

Units are 109 metric tons, or 1012 kg.

870

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

TABLE 22.3*Oxidation States of Cycled Compounds
Oxidation state
–4

Carbon
CH4

CH3OH, (CH2)n

Methanol,
hydrocarbon

–1
0

(CH2O)n

Carbohydrate

CHOOH

Formic acid

+1
+2

NH3, NH4+

Ammonia,
ammonium ion

H2N-NH2

Hydrazine

NH2OH

Hydroxylamine

N2

Nitrogen

N2O

Nitrous oxide

NO

Nitric oxide
–

+3
+4

CO2, HCO3–

Sulfur

Methane

–3
–2

Nitrogen

Carbon dioxide,
bicarbonate ion

+5

HNO2, NO2

Nitrous acid,
nitrite ion

NO2

Nitrogen dioxide

HNO3, NO3–

Nitric acid,
nitrate ion

+6

carbon can be found as CH4 generated by methanogens (completely reduced, –4), as CO2 produced by respiration and fermentation (completely oxidized, +4), or as
one of various intermediate states of oxidation. Nitrogen
is excreted by many organisms in its most reduced form,
ammonia (NH3), which is protonated to ammonium ion
(NH4+). Ammonium is oxidized by lithotrophic bacteria through several stages to nitrite (NO2 –) and nitrate
(NO3 –), which serve as terminal electron acceptors for
anaerobic respiration. Sulfides (H 2S, HS –) serve as electron donors for respiration and sulfur phototrophy, whereas
oxidized forms, such as sulfite (SO32–) and sulfate (SO42–),
serve in anaerobic respiration.

Thought Question

Sulfides

S0

Elemental
sulfur

S2O32–

Thiosulfate

SO32–

Sulfite

H2SO4, SO42–

Sulfuric acid,
sulfate

To measure environmental carbon, nitrogen, and other
elements, various methods are used. These methods fall
under the following categories:
■

Chemical and spectroscopic analysis. Bulk quantities
of CO2, nitrates, and other chemicals can be determined
by sophisticated chemical instrumentation. Atmospheric
CO2 is measured by infrared absorption spectroscopy,
applied to samples from towers such as those of the
NASA FLUXNET study (Fig. 22.2). Gas chromatography is used to separate and quantify various gases,
including oxygen, nitrogen, sulfur dioxide, and carbon
monoxide. Mass spectrometry detects extremely small
quantities of different molecules, even distinguishing
between elemental isotopes.

■

Radioisotope incorporation. The influx and efflux of
CO2 can be measured by the uptake of 14C-labeled substrates in a small, controlled model ecosystem called a
mesocosm. Alternatively, CO2 flux can be measured with
radioisotope tracers in the field using a field chamber.

■

Stable isotope ratios. Some enzyme reactions show
a preference for one isotope over another, such as 14N
versus 15N. For example, denitrifiers (bacteria that
metabolize nitrate) strongly prefer the 14N isotope, leaving behind nitrate enriched in 15N. The 14N/15N ratio
is measured using mass spectrometry. Measuring nitrogen isotope ratios can indicate whether denitrifiers could
have conducted metabolism in the sample.

22.1 Why is oxidation state critical for the acquisition,
usability, and potential toxicity of cycled compounds? Cite
examples based on your study of microbial metabolism
(see Chapter 14).

How do we study microbial cycling on a global scale?
How do we figure out whether ecosystems are net sources
or sinks of CO2? Does microbial activity enhance or limit
availability of nitrogen? Rates of flux of elements in the
biosphere are very difficult to measure, yet the questions
have enormous political and economic implications.

H2S, HS–

CHAPTER 22

■

MICROBES IN GLOBAL ELEMENTAL CYCLES

■

871

A.

B.
0.4

Peak CO2 uptake

AMERIFLUX FLUX TOWER AT AUSTIN CARY MANAGEMENT FOREST, UNIVERSITY OF FLOIDA, GAINESVILLE, FL

0.2
0.0
–0.2
–0.4
–0.6

Latitude:
Yatir
El Saler
Le Bray
Renon

–0.8
–1.0
Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

Aug

Sep

Oct

Nov

31.3
39.3
44.7
46.6
Dec

Month

FIGURE 22.2

■ Measuring flux of elements in the biosphere. A. A U.S. FLUXNET tower at Austin Cary Memorial Forest in

Florida is used for atmospheric CO2 sampling as part of a global effort
to monitor carbon flux. B. Peak CO2 uptake by forests, recorded across
the seasons by FLUXNET towers at Yatir, Israel; El Saler, Spain; Le Bray,
France; and Renon, Italy. Source: Kadmiel Maseyk. 2013. FluxLetter 5:15.

Most flux measurements apply to gases, which are the
easiest forms to sample, but the data leave unanswered
many questions about the deep ocean and subsurface. Subsurface studies require drilling for samples, or more exotic
kinds of remote sensing such as airborne imaging of magnetic resistivity to reveal underground hydrology in Antarctica (described in Special Topic 22.1).

To Summarize
■

■

■

Microbes cycle essential elements in the biosphere.
Many key cycling reactions are performed only by bacteria and archaea.
Elements cycle between organisms and abiotic
sources and sinks. The most accessible source of carbon and nitrogen is the atmosphere. Earth’s crust stores
large amounts of key elements, but their availability to
organisms is limited.
Environmental flux of elements is measured
through chemistry. Methods include infrared spectroscopy and mass spectrometry, gas chromatography,

radioisotope incorporation, and the measurement of
isotope ratios.

22.2

The Carbon Cycle and
Bioremediation

The foundation of all food webs involves influx and efflux
of carbon. The major reservoirs of carbon are shown in
Table 22.2. In theory, carbonate rock forms the largest
reservoir of carbon. But Earth’s crust is the source least
accessible to the biosphere as a whole. Crustal rock provides
carbon only to organisms at the surface and to subsurface
microbes that grow extremely slowly. Thus, subsurface carbon turnover is very slow. The carbon reservoir that cycles
most rapidly is that of the atmosphere, a source of CO2
for photosynthesis and chemolithoautotrophy. The atmosphere also acts as a sink for CO2 produced by heterotrophy
and by geological outgassing from volcanoes.
The atmospheric reservoir is much smaller than other
sources, such as the oceans, crustal rock, and fossil fuels.
For this reason, the industrial burning of fossil fuels has

872

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

SPECIAL TOPIC 22.1& & An Underground River in Antarctica

RESEARCH QUESTION

COURTESY OF JILL MIKUCKI

-20˚C

FIGURE 1 ■ Jill Mikucki (left) and student at Blood
Falls. The red-colored flow from Taylor Glacier at Lake Bonney

is where iron-rich brine wells up from groundwater. Surface temperature is commonly 2°C in summer and –40°C in winter.
B.

on

of

pro

file

SW

el

oc

ati

~40 m

Lake
Bonney

Blood Falls

C.

What is the productivity of subsurface
microbes, and how much carbon do
they fix in our biosphere?
Mikucki, Jill A., E. Auken,
S. Tulaczyk, R. A. Virginia, C.
Schamper, et al. 2015. Deep groundwater and potential subsurface habitats
beneath an Antarctic dry valley. Nature
Communications 6: 6831. doi:10.1038/
ncomms7831.

Av
era
g

NE

0m
~50

Microbial communities shape our planet’s geology and geochemistry in surprising ways. From a glacier in the Antarctic
Taylor Valley spurts a bizarre red stream known as Blood Falls
(Fig. 1). For several years, Jill Mikucki and her students from
the University of Tennessee–Knoxville have investigated Blood
Falls and its mysterious microbial inhabitants. The microbes
turn out to be lithotrophs, reducing iron (Shewanella frigidimarina) or oxidizing sulfur (Thiomicrospira arctica). These iron
and sulfur metabolizers are also halophiles, growing in iron-rich
brine. The brine concentrated over 5 million years from ancient
marine water that once flowed there. The halophilic iron and
sulfur metabolizers fix CO2 into biomass by chemosynthesis, a
process that plays a role in our planet’s carbon budget.
But where does the Blood Falls brine come from? Mikucki
hypothesized that a subsurface river of brine flows deep
beneath the glaciers and permafrost of Taylor Valley, rising to
the surface only at the edge of Taylor Glacier. To gain evidence
for this model, Mikucki used an airborne sensor for electrical resistivity, a property that increases as water freezes but
decreases with salt concentration. A giant airborne electromagnetic sensor (Fig. 2A) was carried by helicopter above
the length and breadth of Taylor Valley (Fig. 2B). Traveling
A.
back and forth, the sensor mapped
electrical resistivity of the geological
strata below the lakes (Fig. 2C). The
mapping showed a dramatic drop in
electrical resistivity in sediments 500
meters below the glacier surface, indicating salt-saturated groundwater. But
this layer of brine rises dramatically at
the glacier’s forward edge, emerging
to the surface at Blood Falls. Thus, the
concentrated remains of a million-yearold river flow underground, bearing
with them a vast community of iron and
sulfur bacteria. The existence of such a
community suggests a possible mode
of existence for subsurface microbes
on the planet Mars.

Sect

ion p

rofile

Glacier ice

Blood Falls
Lake Bonney

50 m
~ 8 km

Brine-saturated
sediments

FIGURE 2 ■ Electrical resistivity reveals an underground river. A. A helicopter
carries a giant electromagnetic sensor to map subsurface electrical resistivity. B. Blood Falls
at Taylor Glacier shows iron-rich brine leaking up from an underground source. C. A map of
electrical resistivity reveals the underground flow of brine. Source: (A-C) Jill A. Mikucki, et al. 2015.
Nature Communications. DOI: 10.1038/ncomms 7831.

CHAPTER 22

perturbed the balance between atmospheric CO2 and
larger reservoirs, such as the ocean. The ocean actually
absorbs a good part of the extra CO2, in equilibrium with
carbonates; and microbial photosynthesis traps carbon in
biomass. But despite the ocean’s carbon capture, atmospheric CO2 continues to increase at an annual rate of
2 parts per million (ppm). This is twice the rate observed
in the past century, during the decade of the 1960s. Thus,
atmospheric CO2 is rising at an ever-faster rate. In 2013,
the Mauna Loa Observatory in Hawaii measured a level of
CO2 at 400 ppm—believed to be the highest level on Earth
for the past 3 million years.
On land, terrestrial plants, particularly forest trees,
sequester significant amounts of carbon—perhaps 10%–
20% of the CO2 released by burning fossil fuels. Forest carbon sequestration is shown in the international FLUXNET
data (Fig. 22.2B). This experiment compares the seasonal
patterns of net CO2 uptake (the negative values on the
y-axis) for forests at four different latitudes. It shows that
the higher the latitude of the forest, the later in summer its
CO2 uptake peaks. Such measurements provide the basis
for modeling global climate change, and for negotiating
agreements to “trade” pollution for forest growth.
Note, however, that being a greenhouse gas does not
make CO2 inherently “bad” for the environment. In fact, if
heterotrophic production of CO2 were to cease altogether,
phototrophs would run out of CO2 in roughly 300 years,

■

MICROBES IN GLOBAL ELEMENTAL CYCLES

■

873

despite the vast quantities of carbon present in the ocean
and crust. Thus, both CO2 fixers and heterotrophs need
each other for a continuous cycle.

Carbon Cycles Depend on Oxygen

The global cycle of carbon in the biosphere is closely linked
to the cycles of oxygen and hydrogen, elements to which
most carbon is bonded. Overall, carbon cycles between carbon dioxide (CO2) and various reduced forms of carbon,
including biomass (living material). Note that the results of
carbon cycling differ greatly, depending on the presence of
molecular oxygen.
Marine carbon cycling. The largest aerated ecosystem is the
photic zone of oceans (Fig. 22.3A). In the aerated (or oxic)
habitat of the marine photic zone, the ecosystem absorbs
enough light for the rate of photosynthesis to exceed the
rate of heterotrophy. Photosynthesis drives what is called the
biological carbon pump. Microbial and plant photosynthesis fi xes CO2 into biomass, designated by the shorthand
[CH 2O]. Phototrophs include bacteria and protists. Marine
phototrophs such as diatoms and coccolithophores trap a
substantial amount of carbon in biomass (Fig. 22.3B). A
portion of their biomass sinks to the ocean floor through
the weight of their silicate or carbonate exoskeletons. Photosynthetic CO2 fi xation is accompanied by release of O2.

A.

B.
Biological
carbon pump

Physical
carbon pump

Zooplankton
Surface
ocean
Bacteria

Deep ocean
Bacteria
Seafloor

Organic carbon

Microplankton

CO2
Deep consumers

100 m

Small phytoplankon

CO2

3,700 m

Large phytoplankon

5 μm

FIGURE 22.3 ■ The ocean’s biological carbon pump. A. CO2 enters equilibrium with carbonates, releasing H+ ions; as a result, the
ocean acidifies. In the biological carbon pump, CO2 is fixed by phytoplankton. Aerobic respiration by zooplankton and mixotrophs converts
some biomass back to CO2, while other biomass sinks to the deep ocean. B. Diatoms in lake sediment store carbon (colorized SEM).

EYE OF SCIENCE/SCIENCE SOURCE

CO2

Upwelling

CO2

Deep-water formation

CO2

874

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

B.

Aerobic

© KASPER ANDERSON

A.
Greenhouse gas
CO2 + H2O

Respiration:
[CH2O] is oxidized
to CO2.

Methanotrophy:
CH4 is oxidized
to CO2.

Lithotrophy:
CO2 is reduced
to organic biomass
[CH2O].

Anaerobic
A
Anae
c lilithotrophy:
ithotrophy:
CO2 is reduced
C
edu
uced to
organic
organ biomass
biom
mass
[CH
[C
CH2O].

Fermentation
and
Ferme
Fe
anaerobic
an
naero
obic respiration:
Organic
Orrgan
nic molecules
are
e catabolized
catabolized into
o
smaller
sm
malle
er products.
products.
COURTESY OF KARINA CLEMMENSEN

Greenhouse gas

Alcohols,
acids
A
Al
co
oh
ho
ols
ls, a
cid
ds
H2 + C
CO
O2

Fossil
F
Fos
sili
ffuels
fue
ls
ls

Anaerobic

O2

[CH2O]

CH4

Methanogenesis:
Methanogenesis:
CO
O2 is reduced
to CH4.

Photosynthesis:
CO2 is reduced
to [CH2O],
releasing O2.

Anaerobiosis p
pl
plus
us heat
at
and
d pressure pr
produce
roduce
fossil fuels.

FIGURE 22.4

■ The terrestrial carbon cycle: aerobic and anaerobic. A. Aerobic and anaerobic conversions of carbon. Blue =
reduction of carbon; red = oxidation of carbon; orange = fermentation; [CH2O] = organic biomass. In an aerobic environment (top),
photosynthesis generates molecular oxygen (O2), which enables the most efficient metabolism by heterotrophs, methanotrophs, and
lithotrophs. B. Cortinarius armillatus mushrooms are fruiting bodies of mycorrhizal fungi that share mutualism with birch trees. Inset: Karina
Clemmensen studies mycorrhizal sequestration of carbon.

The O2 is then used by heterotrophs (such as bacteria,
protists, and animals) to convert biomass [CH 2O] back to
CO2. In the presence of light, a net excess of O2 is released.
Biomass is also produced through lithotrophy or chemolithoautotrophy—the oxidation of hydrogen, hydrogen sulfide, ferrous iron (Fe2+) and other reduced minerals, and
even carbon monoxide.
Terrestrial carbon cycling: aerobic. Another large aerobic

habitat is the oxygenated layer of soil (discussed in Chapter 21) (Fig. 22.4A, top). While plants perform most of
the terrestrial photosynthesis, microbial phototrophs also
fi x CO2 into biomass. Microbial lithotrophy fi xes carbon in
soil and in weathered areas of crustal rock. Lithotrophy is
performed solely by bacteria and archaea, essential microbial partners in these ecosystems. Unlike photosynthesis,
lithotrophy usually consumes O2 instead of producing it.
Much carbon is stored as carbon polymers such as cellulose
and lignin. But microbial and animal consumers release a
lot of CO2 through respiration.
In 2013, another important microbial carbon sink was
discovered by Karina Clemmensen, Björn Lindahl, and

colleagues at Uppsala BioCenter, Sweden: the mycorrhizal fungi (presented in Chapter 21). Mycorrhizal fungi
(Fig. 22.4B) form mutualistic associations with forest
plant roots and are especially important for the roots of
trees. Clemmensen showed that in some forests, the roots
and fungi can sequester as much as 22 kilograms of carbon per square meter of forest soil, which may be 70% of
the total carbon sequestered. Thus, mycorrhizal fungi play
an important role in minimizing release of the greenhouse
gas CO2.
Anaerobic carbon cycling. Anoxic environments support
lower rates of biomass production than do oxygen-rich
environments because they depend on oxidants of lower
redox potential and limited quantity, such as Fe3+. Anaerobic conversion of CO2 to biomass is done mainly by bacteria and archaea. Vast, permanently anaerobic habitats
extend several kilometers below Earth’s surface, encompassing a greater volume than the rest of the biosphere put
together (Fig. 22.4A, bottom). In these habitats, endolithic bacteria inhabit the interstices of rock crystals (discussed in Chapter 21).

LUIS SINCO/LOS ANGELES TIMES VIA GETTY IMAGES

CHAPTER 22

FIGURE 22.5

■ Researchers ignite a bubble of methane on
Alaska’s Seward Peninsula.

In soil and water, anaerobic metabolism includes fermentation of organic carbon sources, as well as respiration and lithotrophy with alternative electron acceptors
such as nitrate, ferric iron (Fe3+), and sulfate. Anaerobic
decomposition by microbes is one stage in the formation
of fossil fuels such as oil and natural gas (primarily methane). In soil, anoxic conditions (extremely low in O2) favor
incomplete breakdown of organic material. This characteristic of anaerobic soil actually enriches ecosystems, particularly those of wetlands, which undergo periodic cycles
of aeration and hydration. The partly decomposed matter
becomes available for further decomposition. Anoxic environments favor production of methane from the H 2, CO2,
and other fermentation products of anaerobes.
A major source of concern for global greenhouse gases is
the methane hydrates accumulating in deep marine sediments,
generated by huge benthic communities of methanogens
(discussed in Chapters 19 and 21). Warming of methane
hydrate releases gaseous methane. Some methane is oxidized by methanotrophs, but an unknown amount rises to
the atmosphere (Fig. 22.5). Geological evidence suggests
that rapid methane release accompanied the retreat of the
glaciers during ice age transitions. A rapid methane release
today could accelerate global warming.
At the ocean floor, many of the methane hydrates are
oxidized by microbial mats of sulfate-reducing bacteria and
anaerobic methane-oxidizing archaea (ANME), discussed
in Section 19.4. The sulfate reducers plus the methane oxidizers conduct a syntrophic reaction, for which the overall
∆G value is negative:
CH4 + SO42– ⎯→ HCO3 – + HS – + H 2O
In this metabolism, methane is the initial electron donor
oxidized by the ANME partner, and sulfate is the terminal
electron acceptor reduced by the bacteria. The high sulfate concentration of marine water drives this reaction in

■

MICROBES IN GLOBAL ELEMENTAL CYCLES

■

875

anoxic sediment, where all of the O2 has been consumed by
microbes that oxidize upwelling reduced minerals (such as
sulfide oxidizers at thermal vents and cold seeps, discussed
in Chapter 21).
In 2012, researchers reported a different source of
marine methane, from aerated water: the aerobic ammoniaoxidizing archaea, such as Nitrosopumilus (discussed in
Chapter 19). William W. Metcalf and colleagues at the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign showed that
Nitrosopumilus species conduct reactions that degrade toxic
phosphonates, organic compounds containing a direct
carbon-phosphorus bond. The reactions release methylphosphonate, a compound that many kinds of bacteria
convert to methane in order to acquire the scarce phosphate for phospholipids and nucleic acids. In addition, the
sequence of the Nitrosopumilus enzyme for methylphosphonate production revealed homologs in the Global Ocean
Sampling Expedition (GOS) metagenome—for example, in
the bacterium Pelagibacter. Thus, both archaeal and bacterial methylphosphonate may be sources of methane from
aerated habitats.

The Global Carbon Balance

What determines atmospheric levels of CO2? The global balance of biological CO2 fixation and release largely determines the level of CO2. Since the beginning of the industrial
age, however, the release of CO2 has accelerated significantly.
The major part of this increase comes from the combustion
of fossil fuels, which adds about 6 × 1015 grams of carbon
annually to the atmosphere. Fossil fuels are the product of
microbial anaerobic digestion of plant and animal remains,
reduced to hydrocarbons by the pressure and heat of Earth’s
crust. When burned as fuel, carbon that had accumulated
over millions of years is rapidly returned to the atmosphere
as CO2. Increased CO2 fixation and ocean absorption compensate for some of the CO2 flux, but about a tenth of the
carbon remains in the atmosphere.
Another factor in the increase of atmospheric CO2 is
microbial decomposition in the soil (discussed in Chapter 21). Microbes release carbon through respiration
(aerobic and anaerobic), as well as fermentation in anoxic
strata, and methanogenesis. A major concern today is the
increased rate of microbial activity in Arctic permafrost as
temperatures increase. The Arctic permafrost is estimated
to store more than twice the amount of carbon that is in the
atmosphere. As permafrost melts, so do methane hydrates
from methane produced earlier by methanogens. In 2012,
Andrew McDougall and colleagues at the University of
Victoria (British Columbia) modeled both the response of
permafrost carbon release and its feedback effect on global
warming. They project that permafrost could release more
than a quarter of its carbon stores by the year 2100, and

876

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

that this amount could add another 1.5°C to the global
temperature by the year 2300. The microbial release of
methane and CO2 could increase the rate of global warming, which in turn thaws the permafrost faster.
The contribution of ocean ecosystems to carbon flux is
even more difficult to measure. Studies of carbon and oxygen flux based on isotope ratios suggest a much greater level
of biological production than earlier estimates suggested.
The oceans conduct more than half of the global biological uptake of carbon from the atmosphere. Metagenomic
surveys are revealing previously unrecognized communities
of marine phototrophs, such as submicroscopic cyanobacteria, the prochlorophytes (Prochlorococcus species). In the
deep ocean, similar studies reveal new methane-oxidizing
archaea (ANME) that play a critical role in removing benthic methane hydrates.
From a political standpoint, ecosystems such as forests
that act as carbon sinks by fixing carbon into stable biomass
are considered desirable because they lessen the rate of CO2
input into the atmosphere. Ecosystems that act as sources
of carbon dioxide may be viewed with disfavor because they
contribute to global warming. But what if CO2-generating ecosystems provide other environmental benefits? For
example, wetlands are among Earth’s most productive ecosystems, supporting vast amounts of plant and animal life,
although they also release significant amounts of CO2 and
methane. An example of research on wetland carbon cycles
is presented in eTopic 22.1.

To Summarize
■

■

■

■

■

The most accessible carbon reservoir is the atmosphere (CO2). Atmospheric carbon is severely perturbed
by the burning of fossil fuels.
Cyanobacteria and other phytoplankton cycle much
of biospheric CO2 and release O2. Oxygen released by
phototrophs is used by aerobic heterotrophs and lithotrophs. Marine plankton, as well as terrestrial trees and
mycorrhizal fungi, serve as major carbon sinks.
Anaerobic environments cycle carbon through bacteria and archaea. Bacteria conduct fermentation and
anaerobic respiration, while methanogens convert CO2
and H 2 to methane. Methane is oxidized to CO2 by
methane-oxidizing bacteria and archaea.
In oxygenated water, bacteria may release methane
via methylphosphonate.
Microbial decomposition returns CO2 to the atmosphere. Microbial decomposition is the main source of
accelerated CO2 flux from the soil, especially from melting permafrost.

22.3

The Hydrologic Cycle and
Wastewater Treatment

The fate and distribution of complex carbon compounds
are largely functions of the hydrologic cycle, or water
cycle, the cyclic exchange of water between atmospheric
water vapor and Earth’s ecosystems (Fig. 22.6A). A vast
reservoir of water is supplied by the ocean. In the hydrologic cycle, water precipitates as rain, which is drawn by
gravity into groundwater, rivers, lakes, and ultimately the
ocean. All along this route, of course, evaporation returns
water to the air. Human communities interact with the
hydrologic cycle by drawing water for drinking and other
purposes, and by returning wastewater. Before wastewater
can be safely returned to the hydrologic cycle, organic contaminants must be removed. Key parts of that treatment
are performed by microbes.

Biochemical Oxygen Demand

What determines the health of an aquatic ecosystem? As
discussed in Chapter 21, a major factor in the health of ecosystems is the balance between the level of oxygen and the
levels of reduced organic nutrients. Organic contamination
destabilizes marine, freshwater, and terrestrial ecosystems.
Water passing through the ground and aquatic ecosystems
carries organic carbon material from humus, sewage, and
fertilizer runoff. A sudden influx of rich carbon substrates
accelerates respiration by aquatic microbes. Microbial respiration then competes with respiration by fish, invertebrates,
and amphibians for the limited supply of oxygen dissolved
in water, raising the biochemical oxygen demand (BOD),
also called the biological oxygen demand (BOD). The
higher the concentration of organic substances, the higher
the BOD arising from microbial oxygen consumption.
High BOD can cause a massive die-off of fish and other
aquatic animals. Thus, a routine part of monitoring the
health of lakes and streams is the measurement of BOD. A
standard value of BOD is defined by measuring the rate of
oxygen uptake in a water sample by a defined set of heterotrophic bacteria (Fig. 22.6B). Oxygen uptake is observed
in a BOD analyzer (Fig. 22.6C), which detects dissolved
oxygen in water. The rate of decrease of dissolved oxygen
measured by the BOD analyzer is approximately proportional to the amount of dissolved organic matter available
for respiration. Note, however, that the BOD in a natural
environment will depend on the microbes actually present,
as well as the plants and animals competing for oxygen and
other resources.
Until recently, BOD was considered a local issue, affecting the health of lakes and rivers in a community. But today

CHAPTER 22

A. Hydrologic cycle

■

MICROBES IN GLOBAL ELEMENTAL CYCLES

■

877

B. BOD measurement

Rain

Transpiration

Well
Watershed

nic

c ar

bo

COURTESY OF JOEL GORDON

O rg a

Evaporation

Lake

n

fl u

x

River
C. BOD analyzer

Groundwater
Water carries nutrients
into river, increasing BOD.

Microprocessor

FIGURE 22.6 ■ The hydrologic cycle interacts with the
carbon cycle. A. The hydrologic cycle carries bacteria and

we recognize huge impacts of rising BOD in the oceans
(Fig. 22.7). Ocean oxygen levels are high near the surface,
where phototrophs release oxygen, but organic nutrients
are so scarce that respiration is limited. Oxygen is also high
in the deep benthos, because most organic nutrients have
been consumed, and because the sheer volume of water
can hold dissolved oxygen in large amounts. But near the
coastal shelf, currents may carry sediment up to a middle
region where organic nutrients meet the oxygen. This combination supports rapid bacterial respiration. The result is
an oxygen minimum zone (OMZ), a region of low or
near-zero oxygen sandwiched between the upper and lower
oxygenated layers. Above and below the anoxic water, there
is a steep oxycline (gradient of oxygen concentration). A
well-known OMZ is located off the coast of Oregon, where
crabs and other animals are found dying as they try to
escape asphyxiation.
Oxygen minimum zones are worsened by increasing
temperatures, which accelerate respiration, and by influx of
sewage and agricultural waste. The zone expands upward

Agitator
Reactor
(DO sensor,
temperature
sensor)

COURTESY ENDRESS+HAUSER, INC.

organic carbon into groundwater and aquatic systems. B. Bottled
water samples are measured for dissolved oxygen over time; the
rate of decrease of dissolved oxygen indicates biochemical oxygen
demand (BOD). The rate of decrease of dissolved oxygen in water
samples is approximately proportional to the concentration of
organic matter available for respiration. C. A microprocessorcontrolled BIOX-1010 BOD analyzer measures rate of respiration.
Water samples are mixed with a concentrated microbial biomass,
and a dissolved-oxygen (DO) sensor measures small rates of
oxygen decrease over time.

toward the surface and downward to the sediment, trapping crabs and fish. Today, large regions of ocean have
become dead zones, or zones of hypoxia, devoid of most
fish and invertebrates. A major dead zone is a region in the
Gulf of Mexico off the coast of Louisiana where the Mississippi River releases about 40% of the U.S. drainage to
the sea (Fig. 22.8A). Over its long, meandering course,
which includes inputs from the Ohio and Missouri rivers,
the Mississippi builds up high levels of organic pollutants,
as well as nitrates from agricultural fertilizer. When these
nitrogen-rich substances flow rapidly out to the Gulf in the
spring, they lift the nitrogen limitation on algal growth
and feed massive algal blooms. The algal population then
crashes, and their sedimenting cells are consumed by heterotrophic bacteria. The heterotrophs use up the available
oxygen, causing hypoxia. Hypoxia kills off the fish, shellfish, and crustaceans over a region equivalent in size to the
state of New Jersey.
In 2010 the Gulf of Mexico dead zone was expanded by
the unprecedented spill of oil from the Deepwater Horizon

878

■

PART
RT 4

■

MICROBIAL
M ICRO
ROB
B I AL
BIAL
LD
DIVERSITY
IVERSITY AND
ND
DE
ECOLOGY
COLO
CO
LOGY
O GY

≥200

0

180

500
5
00
0

120
100
80

1000
100
1
00

Upper oxycline

1500
15
500

Oxygen
minimum
zone

2000
200
00
2500

Winds from
tthe north
no
Phytoplankton bloom
h
nt ric
trie
nu

Deep oxycline

Lo

140
Depth (m)

O2 (μmol per kg water)

160

60
40
20
0

3000

w

O2

150m

Upwelling

Decaying plankton
consume oxygen

Seafloor

3500
4000

FIGURE 22.7

■ Oxygen minimum zone in the ocean. The oxygen minimum zone (OMZ) occurs in the region of the coastal shelf where
nutrients from below meet the oxygen produced by phototrophs above. In this region, microbial respiration consumes oxygen faster than the
organic nutrients. The OMZ can expand upward when phytoplankton blooms decay, consuming the surface oxygen.

oil well blowout (Fig. 22.8B). The offshore oil platform
exploded, releasing millions of barrels of oil into the Gulf
over 3 months. The leaked oil killed wildlife throughout the
Gulf, causing unprecedented environmental damage. Workers tried to contain the spill, but ultimately most of the oil
was consumed by marine bacteria. Only bacteria and archaea
possess the enzymes needed to degrade the complex organic
mixture of petroleum, which includes waxy aromatic compounds such as paraffins (discussed in Chapter 21). Many of
the pollutants were metabolized to CO2 by oil-eating bacteria that feed naturally on oil seeping slowly from the Gulf
sediment. But the sudden large input of oil raised microbial
respiration and BOD levels throughout the Gulf, thus lowering oxygen available to wildlife. Furthermore, certain oil
components linger in the environment for decades, including toxins such as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs).
Dead zones now occur along the coasts of industrial
and developing countries throughout the world, including
India and Australia. Dead zones deplete habitat for much
marine life—for example, forcing sharks to swim out of
hypoxic regions and nearer the shore. Dead zones contribute to the crash of fisheries worldwide, removing a critical
food resource for human populations. To avoid such dead
zones, release of industrial pollutants and fertilizers must
be prevented. In addition, all the communities throughout
the river drainage areas must treat their wastes to eliminate
nitrogenous wastes before disposal.

There are two common approaches to community wastewater treatment, both of which involve microbial partners:
wastewater treatment plants and wetland filtration. Both
approaches depend on microbes to remove organic carbon
and nitrogen from water before it returns to aquatic systems and ultimately the ocean.

Wastewater Treatment

In industrialized nations, all municipal communities use
some form of wastewater treatment (Fig. 22.9). The
purpose of wastewater treatment is to decrease the BOD
and the level of human pathogens before water is returned
to local rivers. The treatment process includes microbial
metabolism. A modern wastewater treatment plant can
convert sewage into water that exceeds all government
standards for humans to drink.
The wastewater treatment plant is the final destination for
all household and industrial liquid wastes passing through
the municipal sewage system. A typical plant includes the
following stages of treatment, illustrated in Fig. 22.9A:
■

Preliminary treatment consists of screens that remove
solid debris, such as sticks, dead animals, and feminine
hygiene items.

■

Primary treatment includes fine screens and sedimentation tanks that remove insoluble particles. The particles

CHAPTER 22

■

A. Mississippi River basin with Gulf of Mexico hypoxia

MICROBES IN GLOBAL ELEMENTAL CYCLES

■

879

B. Deepwater Horizon oil spill

Upper
Mississippi
Missouri

Lower
Mississippi

Latitude

Calcasieu Lake

© DANIEL BELTRA © GREENPEACE

Gulf of
Mexico

Hypoxia area
July 21–26, 2002
30

Ohio

Mississippi R.
Atchafalaya R.

Dissolved oxygen
less than 2.0 mg/l

29

50 km

–94

–93

–92
Longitude

–91

–90

–89

FIGURE 22.8 ■ The dead zone in the Gulf of Mexico. A. The Mississippi River drainage (shaded green) empties into the Gulf of Mexico.
Every summer, drainage high in organic carbon and nitrogen causes algal blooms, leading to hypoxia and death of fish. B. Aerial view of the oil
leaked from the Deepwater Horizon oil wellhead in the Gulf of Mexico, 2010. Source: A: National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration.

eventually are recombined with the solid products of
wastewater treatment to form what is known as sludge.
The sludge ultimately is used for fertilizer or landfill.
■

Secondary treatment consists primarily of microbial
ecosystems that decompose the soluble organic content
of wastewater, by aerobic and anaerobic respiration. The
nutrient removal process may include biological removal
of nitrogen and phosphorus. If included at this point,
nitrogen is removed by nitrifying bacteria that oxidize
ammonium, and phosphorus is removed by polyphosphate-accumulating bacteria. The microbes form particulate flocs of biofilm. The flocs are sedimented as
sludge, also known as activated sludge, owing to their
microbial activity.

■

Tertiary (advanced) treatment includes fi ltration of
particulates from the microbial flocs of secondary treatment, and may include chemical processes to decrease
nitrogen and phosphorus. The fi nal step involves disinfection to eliminate pathogens, usually by a chemical
process such as chlorination. The treated water is then
returned to local freshwater sources.

The microbial ecosystems of secondary treatment require
continual aeration to maximize breakdown of molecules to
carbon dioxide and nitrates. The floc size and composition
must be monitored for optimal performance. Floc microbes
typically include bacilli such as Zoogloea, Flavobacterium,
and Pseudomonas, as well as filamentous species such as
Nocardia (Fig. 22.10A). Optimal treatment depends on
the ratio of filamentous to single-celled bacteria: enough
filaments to hold together the flocs for sedimentation, but
not so many as to trap air and cause flocs to float and foam,
preventing sedimentation.
Besides bacteria, the ecosystem of activated sludge
includes filamentous methanogens (discussed in Chapter 19), which metabolize short-chain molecules such as
acetate within the anaerobic interior of flocs. Thus, wastewater treatment generates methane, often in quantities that
can be recovered as fuel.
In addition, the bacteria are preyed upon by protists
such as stalked ciliates (Fig. 22.10B), swimming ciliates, and amebas, as well as invertebrates such as rotifers
and nematodes. The predators serve the valuable function of limiting the numbers of planktonic single-celled

■

PART 4

A.

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

Preliminary
Primary
treatment
treatment

B.
Secondary
treatment

Liquid
Solid
Dewatering

Tertiary
treatment

Air

Sludge
Stream

Digestion
Land application
Sludge treatment

COURTESY CITY OF HUNTSVILLE, AL. WATER POLLUTION CONTROL.

880

FIGURE 22.9 ■ Wastewater treatment with bioremediation. A. In a municipal treatment plant, wastewater undergoes primary treatment (filtering and settling), secondary treatment (bioremediation by microbial decomposition), and tertiary treatment (chemical treatments
including chlorination). B. Aeration basin for secondary treatment with microbes.

bacteria, enabling the bulk of the biomass to be removed
by sedimentation.

Thought Question

22.2 What would happen if wastewater treatment lacked microbial predators? Why would the result be harmful?

Wastewater treatment plants are remarkably effective
at converting human wastes to ecologically safe water and
ultimately human drinking water. The plants are, however,

impractical for purifying the runoff from large agricultural
operations. For large-scale alternatives to treatment plants,
communities and agricultural operations are looking to
wetland restoration. Much of our current water supply is
already filtered and purified by natural wetlands, such as
the Florida Everglades (Fig. 22.11A). Wetlands remove
nitrogen through the action of denitrifying bacteria. In
wetlands, rainwater and river water trickle slowly through
vast stretches of soil, where microbial conversion acts as the
foundation of a macroscopic ecosystem including trees and
vertebrates. Thus, much of the carbon and nitrogen is fixed
into valuable biomass. In the wetlands of the Everglades,
the remaining water filters slowly through limestone into
B. Flocs

A. Nocardia sp.

10 µm

FIGURE 22.10

COURTESY VICTOR SANTA CRUZ

COURTESY VICTOR SANTA CRUZ

Stalked
ciliate

■ Microbes in wastewater bioremediation. A. Filamentous Nocardia sp. bacteria from flocs formed during secondary
treatment (LM). B. Flocs with a stalked ciliate, which preys on bacteria (LM).

100 µm

CHAPTER 22

MICROBES IN GLOBAL ELEMENTAL CYCLES

■

881

B. Artificial wetlands

A. Everglades

TIM MCCABE/USDA/NRCS

COURTESY OF EVERGLADES NATIONAL PARK

■

FIGURE 22.11

■ Water filtration by wetlands. A. The marshes of the Everglades act as natural filters that bioremediate water entering
the aquifers of southern Florida. B. The filtering system that Steve Kerns installed on his hog farm in Taylor County, Iowa, consists of a series
of hillside terraces that form wetlands containing bacteria that metabolize hog manure and wastewater.

underground aquifers, which ultimately provide water
through wells to human communities.
Some agricultural operations are building artificial
wetlands to replace treatment plants. Figure 22.11B
shows a hog farm where a series of terraced wetlands was
built to drain liquefied manure. The wetlands were found
to produce fewer odors and to remove organics more efficiently and at a lower cost than do traditional filtration
plants.
A much greater challenge is that of industrial runoff, in
which toxic wastes from factory chemistry enter an aquifer,
at levels endangering human health. These chemicals may
poison the treatment plants designed for human effluents.
Large regions of land surrounding such a plant may require
remediation that is expensive or impractical. And traces of
pollutants such as chlorinated aromatics reach every spot
on the globe; for example, dioxins are found in the tissues
of Antarctic penguins.
How can we remediate industrial pollutants before
they poison the local countryside and spread throughout the globe? One way is to harness naturally occurring
bacteria for bioremediation. The bacterial community’s reaction rate can be enhanced through selection
by enrichment culture (described in Chapter 4). In the
culture, organisms from the polluted site are cultivated
repeatedly in the presence of added pollutant, and then
tested for activity using radiolabeled substrates. An
example of successful bioremediation is the case of Aberdeen Proving Ground, where a microbial mat was used
to catabolize chlorinated hydrocarbons left by weapons
manufacture (eTopic 22.2).

To Summarize
■

■

■

■

■

■

■

The hydrologic cycle is the cyclic exchange of water
between the atmosphere and the biosphere. Water
precipitates as rain, which enters the ground and ultimately flows to the oceans. Along the way, some of the
water evaporates, returning to the atmosphere.
Water carries organic carbon that generates biochemical oxygen demand (BOD). High BOD accelerates heterotrophic respiration and depletes oxygen
needed by fish.
Oxygen minimum zones are hypoxic regions of ocean
sandwiched between upper and lower oxygenated
layers. Low oxygen levels are found at middle depth,
where the oxygen from phototrophs meets upwelling
organic nutrients.
Dead zones occur where sewage and agricultural
runoff expand the oxygen minimum zones. Dead
zones exclude all aerobic life.
Wastewater treatment cuts down BOD. Secondary
treatment involves formation of flocs, microbial communities that decompose the soluble organic content.
Wetlands filter water naturally. Wetland filtration
helps purify groundwater entering aquifers.
Industrial effluents are highly toxic and can reach all
parts of the globe. Bioremediation with microbes may
eliminate such toxins.

882

■

PART 4

22.4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

Sources of Nitrogen

The Nitrogen Cycle

Besides carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen, another major element that cycles largely by microbial conversion is nitrogen (Fig. 22.12). The nitrogen cycle is notable in three
respects:
■

Many oxidation states. A larger number of oxidation
states exist for biological nitrogen than for any other
major biological element (see Table 22.3). Conversion
between these oxidation states requires metabolic processes such as N2 fixation, lithotrophy, and anaerobic
respiration.

■

Dependence on prokaryotes. Many steps of the nitrogen cycle require bacteria and archaea. Without bacteria
and archaea, the nitrogen cycle would not exist.

■

Extreme perturbation by human technology. Half
the nitrogen in the biosphere now comes from anthropogenic (human-generated) sources.
Thought Question

22.3 How many kinds of biomolecules can you recall that
contain nitrogen? What are the usual oxidation states for
nitrogen in biological molecules?

Industrial N2
fixation forms
NH4+.

N2

N2

Assimilation
to form RNH2
NH4+

RNH2

Microbial decomposition
of amines (RNH2)
releases NH4+
(ammonification).

Soil

NH4+
Fertilizer

NO, N2O

Where is nitrogen found on Earth? As we saw for carbon,
a significant amount of nitrogen is found in Earth’s crust,
in the form of ammonium salts in rock (see Table 22.2).
Unlike crustal carbon, however, the nitrogen found in
rock is largely inaccessible to microbes. The major accessible source of nitrogen is the atmosphere, of which dinitrogen gas (N2) constitutes 79%. However, N2 is a highly
stable molecule that requires an enormous input of reducing energy before assimilation is possible (see Chapter 15).
Thus, for many natural ecosystems, and most forms of
agriculture, nitrogen is the limiting nutrient for primary
productivity.
Until recently in Earth’s history, nitrogen was fixed
entirely by nitrogen-fixing bacteria and archaea. In the
twentieth century, however, the Haber process was invented
for artificial nitrogen fixation to generate fertilizers for
agriculture. The process was devised by German chemist
Fritz Haber, who won the 1918 Nobel Prize in Chemistry. In the Haber process, N2 is hydrogenated by methane
under extreme heat and pressure. Today, the Haber process
for producing fertilizers accounts for approximately 30%–
50% of all nitrogen fixed on Earth. Other human activities, such as fuel burning and use of nitrogenous fertilizers,
contribute to oxidized nitrogen pollutants such as nitrous
oxide (N2O), a potent greenhouse gas.

Reduction and
assimilation
into biomass

N2

Greenhouse
gas
Biological
nitrogen
fixation
forms NH4+.

NH4+

N2
N2O

NH4+
Bacterial nitrification
forms NO2– + NO3–
from NH4+.

NO2–, NO3–

NO2–, NO3–
Bacterial and archaeal
denitrification reduces NO3–
to NO2–, NO, N2O, and N2.

Archaea oxidize
NH3 and N2O.

NO, N2O

Leaching
groundwater

Aquatic
environment
Greenhouse
gas

FIGURE 22.12

The global
nitrogen cycle. Bacteria and
■

archaea interconvert forms
of nitrogen throughout the
biosphere. Blue = reduction;
red = oxidation; orange =
redox-neutral.

CHAPTER 22

A. The nitrogen triangle

■

MICROBES IN GLOBAL ELEMENTAL CYCLES

■

883

B. Nitrobacter winogradskyi

N2

Greenhouse gas
N2O

NH
N
H

Anaerobic
An
NH4+
oxidation by NO2–
ox
(anammox)
(a
an

NO

Aerobic
nitrification

NO2–

NH
H3

Anaerobic
denitrification

NO3–
2 μm

NH2OH
Anaerobic nitrate
reduction to
NH4+ (DNRA)

FIGURE 22.13 ■ The nitrogen cycle: fixation, nitrification,
denitrification. A. The “nitrogen triangle” consists of nitro-

Bacteria and plants
assimilate NH4+
to form RNH2.

Nitrogenous organic
matter decomposes
to ammonia
(ammonification).

gen fixation and assimilation, reductive dissimilation of nitrate
(denitrification; blue), and oxidation (nitrification; red). Denitrification includes production of the potent greenhouse gas nitrous
oxide (N2O). Assimilation into biomass is often reductive; virtually
all nitrogen in biomolecules is highly reduced. Oxidation of ammonia generates nitrites and nitrates, whose runoff can pollute
water supplies. B. Nitrobacter winogradskyi oxidizes nitrite to
nitrate. Folded layers of membrane contain the electron transport
complexes.

RNH2
Reduction and
assimilation
Food chain

Because of extensive fertilizer use, the nitrogen cycle
today is the most perturbed of the major biogeochemical
cycles. The ultimate effects of perturbation are not yet clear.
Some models show that increased nitrogen fixation could
fertilize CO2 fixation by marine and terrestrial ecosystems,
partly decreasing net CO2 emissions. The amount, however,
will be too small to prevent global warming. Other models
show that accelerated nitrogen use could limit nitrogen availability in the global biosphere, with unknown consequences.

We will consider in turn the three sides of the nitrogen
triangle:
■

■

The “Nitrogen Triangle”

The numerous oxidation states available for microbial
metabolism of nitrogen generate a complex cycle of conversions. One way to organize the complexity is to envision a
“nitrogen triangle” whose corners include three key forms:
atmospheric N2; the reduced forms NH3 and NH4+; and
the oxidized forms NO2 – and NO3 – (Fig. 22.13A). At the
base of the triangle, both reduced and oxidized forms of
nitrogen are assimilated into biomass.

Thought Question

22.4 The nitrogen cycle has to be linked with the carbon
cycle, since both contribute to biomass. How might the carbon
cycle of an ecosystem be affected by increased input of
nitrogen?

■

N2 fixation to ammonium (NH4+), a form assimilated
into biomass by microbes and plants.
Ammonia oxidation, in which ammonia (NH3) is
oxidized aerobically to nitrite (NO2 –) and nitrate
(NO3 –), which are also assimilated by microbes and
plants. Aerobic oxidation to nitrite or nitrate is called
nitrification. In the absence of oxygen gas, anaerobic
ammonium oxidation by nitrite generates N2 —a reaction called anammox.
Denitrification of NO2 – and NO3 – back to N2 (or, in
carbon-rich habitats, reduction to NH3).

Nitrogen fixation. The main avenue for entry of nitrogen into the biosphere is bacterial and archaeal nitrogen
fi xation—specifically, fi xation of dinitrogen, or nitrogen gas (N2), into NH3, protonated to NH4 +. Ammonium ion is rapidly assimilated by bacteria and plants,
typically by combination with TCA cycle intermediates
to form key amino acids, such as glutamate (discussed in
Chapter 15). The ability to assimilate NH4 + into nitrogenous organic molecules is found in virtually all primary producers.
Fixation of nitrogen requires enormous energy because
the triple bond of N2 is exceptionally stable. Breaking the

SCIENTECHMATRIX.COM

Nitrogen
fixation

884

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

triple bond to generate ammonia requires a series of reduction steps involving high input of energy:

A. Soybeans grow with symbiotic rhizobia

Dinitrogen
N≡N ⎯→ HN=NH ⎯→ H 2N−NH 2 ⎯→ 2NH3
2H+ + 2e –
2H+ + 2e –
2H+ + 2e –

THOMAS HOVLAND/ALAMY

All the intermediate reactions of nitrogen fixation are
tightly coupled, so the intermediate compounds rarely
become available for other uses. The final product, ammonia, exists in ionic equilibrium with ammonium ion:
NH3 + H 2O ↔ NH4+ + OH–
Half the ammonia is protonated at about pH 9.3, so at nearneutral pH, most exists in the protonated form, NH4+.
Nitrogen fixation is catalyzed by the enzyme nitrogenase (discussed in Chapter 15). The highly reductive reactions of nitrogenase require exclusion of oxygen, yet they
also require a tremendous input of energy, usually provided
by aerobic metabolism. Therefore, nitrogen-fixing bacteria
generally isolate anaerobic nitrogen fixation from aerobic
metabolism by one of several mechanisms, such as the heterocysts of cyanobacteria (also discussed in Chapter 15).
Given the energy expense and the need to exclude oxygen, many species of bacteria, as well as all eukaryotes, lack
the nitrogen fixation pathway. But all ecosystems, both
marine and terrestrial, include some species of bacteria and
archaea that fix N2 into ammonia. Nitrogen-fixing bacteria in the soil include obligate anaerobes, such as Clostridium species, and facultative Gram-negative enteric species
of Klebsiella and Salmonella, as well as obligate respirers
such as Pseudomonas. The rhizobia form nitrogen-fixing
endosymbionts of legume plants. In oceans and in freshwater systems, cyanobacteria are the major nitrogen fixers.
After fixation, all these organisms assimilate the reduced
nitrogen into essential components of their cells. Within
an ecosystem, nitrogen fixers ultimately make the reduced
nitrogen available for assimilation by nonfixing microbes
and plants, either directly through symbiotic association
(such as that of rhizobia and legumes, discussed in Chapter 21) or indirectly through predation (marine cyanobacteria) and decomposition (soil bacteria).
If nitrogen fixation is ubiquitous in soil and water, then
why is nitrogen limiting? Nitrogen fixation is extremely
energy intensive; thus, the rate of fixation usually fails to
meet the potential demand of other members of the ecosystem. The one exception is legume symbiosis with rhizobia,
which provide ample nitrogen for their hosts.
In agriculture, symbiotic nitrogen fixation by rhizobial bacteria increases the yield of crops such as soybeans
(Fig. 22.14A). To enhance colonization by nitrogen fixers,
farmers apply molecules called isoflavonoids, which mimic
the natural plant-derived attractants for rhizobia.

B. Nitrate contamination of groundwater

Risk of groundwater nitrate
contamination (1970–1995)
Low risk
Moderate risk
High risk

FIGURE 22.14

■ Agricultural benefits and consequences
of microbial nitrogen metabolism. A. Soybean field in Maine.

Rhizobial nitrogen fixation enhances growth of soybeans and other
major crops. B. Nitrate in drinking water is especially prevalent in agricultural regions of the United States. Ammonification of fertilizer,
followed by nitrification, generates nitrate and nitrite. Nitrate and
nitrite runoff from oxidized nitrogenous fertilizers pollutes streams
and groundwater.

Nitrification. Free ammonia in soil or water is quickly oxidized for energy by nitrifiers, bacterial species that possess
enzymes for oxidation of ammonia to nitrite (NO2 –), or
of nitrite to nitrate (NO3 –). This process is called nitrification. Nitrification of ammonia is a form of lithotrophy,
an energy generation pathway involving oxidation of minerals. The nitrification pathway generates the red base of
the triangle in Figure 22.13A. The pathway of nitrification includes:
Ammonia
NH3 ⎯→
+ ½O2

Nitrite
Nitrate
–
NH 2OH ⎯→ NO2
⎯→ NO3 –
+ O2
+
+ ½O2
H 2O + H+

CHAPTER 22

The pathway includes two separate energy generation
mechanisms: (1) ammonia through NH 2OH to nitrite,
and (2) nitrite to nitrate. Typically, soil contains both kinds
of microbes, collaborating to complete the conversion to
nitrate, while some species of Nitrospira perform the entire
pathway oxidizing ammonia to nitrate. Nitrifying genera
include Nitrosomonas, which oxidizes ammonia to nitrite,
as well as Nitrobacter (Fig. 22.13B) and Nitrospira, which
oxidize nitrite to nitrate. Nitrite can also serve as an electron donor for photosynthesis by Thiocapsa species. Note
that the production of both nitrite and nitrate generates
acid, which can acidify the soil.

Thought Question

22.5 In the laboratory, which bacterial genus would likely
grow on artificial medium including NH2OH as the energy
source: Nitrosomonas or Nitrobacter?

Nitrate produced in the soil is assimilated by plants and
bacteria nearly as quickly as ammonium ion, although extra
energy is needed to reduce nitrate to NH4+ for incorporation into biomass. Nitrate assimilation to biomass is called
assimilatory nitrate reduction. Assimilatory nitrate reduction differs from the nitrate reduction involved in anaerobic
respiration, which releases the reduced nitrogen and yields
energy. In agriculture, intensive fertilization generates a
large excess of ammonia resulting from ammonification,
the breakdown of organic nitrogen, releasing ammonia.
Ammonia is oxidized rapidly by lithotrophic bacteria (nitrifiers). The excess ammonia leads to a buildup of nitrites and
nitrates, which are highly soluble in water, and they readily diffuse into aquatic systems. Aquatic nitrate reacts with
organic compounds to form toxic nitrosamines. Nitrate
influx also relieves the nitrogen limit on algae, causing
algal blooms and raising BOD. Chronic nitrate influx leads
to eutrophication and die-off of fish.
Consumption of nitrate in drinking water can lead to
methemoglobinemia, a blood disorder in which hemoglobin is inactivated. Methemoglobinemia is a problem for
infants because their stomachs are not yet acidic enough
to inhibit growth of bacteria that convert nitrate to nitrite.
Nitrite oxidizes the iron in hemoglobin, eliminating its
capacity to carry oxygen. The failure to carry oxygen leads
to a bluish appearance—one cause of “blue baby syndrome.” Nitrite-induced blue baby syndrome is a problem
in intensively cultivated agricultural regions, such as Kansas
and Nebraska (Fig. 22.14B).
Agricultural runoff also contributes to oxygen minimum zones and dead zones, such as those off the Oregon
coast and in the Gulf of Mexico. The amines in sewage are

■

MICROBES IN GLOBAL ELEMENTAL CYCLES

■

885

removed as ammonia (ammonification), and the ammonia
is oxidized by lithotrophs. The major marine ammonia oxidizers include the Thaumarchaeota, such as Nitrosopumilus
(discussed in Chapter 19).
Denitrification. N2 is regenerated by anaerobic respiration

(see Fig. 22.13A), in which an oxidized form of nitrogen,
such as nitrate or nitrite, receives electrons from organic
electron donors. Bacteria and archaea reduce nitrate
through a series of decreased oxidation states back to atmospheric nitrogen:
Nitric
Nitrate
Nitrite
oxide
2NO3 – ⎯→
2NO2 –
⎯→
2NO
⎯→
4H+ + 2e – + 2H+ + 2e –
4H+ + 4e – +
2H 2O
2H 2O
Nitrous
oxide
Dinitrogen
⎯→
N2
N2O
+
–
+ 2H + 2e
+
H 2O
H 2O
In terms of elemental flux through ecosystems, nitrate
and nitrite reduction are known as denitrification or dissimilatory nitrate reduction. (In contrast, assimilatory
nitrate reduction incorporates nitrogen into biomass.)
Anaerobic respirers in soil or water use an oxidized form of
nitrogen as an alternative electron acceptor in the absence
of O2 (discussed in Chapter 14). All types of nitrogenbased anaerobic respiration are repressed in the presence of
oxygen, a more favorable electron acceptor; therefore, denitrification is limited to anoxic habitats.
In undisturbed environments, the products of nitrate
respiration rarely build up to levels that harm the ecosystem. Heavy fertilization, however, causes buildup of excess
nitrate and so increases the environmental rate of denitrification. During this process, some of the nitrogen escapes
as nitrous oxide gas (N2O). A highly potent greenhouse
gas, N2O generates 200 times the warming effect of CO2;
thus, relatively small amounts of N2O can make a disproportionate contribution to global warming. Furthermore,
N2O in the upper atmosphere reacts catalytically with
ozone, depleting the ozone layer. Thus, the atmospheric
effects of bacterial denitrification are a serious concern in
agricultural and waste treatment processes.
Nitrous oxide also builds up in marine dead zones, where
the nitrates from ammonium oxidation are subsequently
used as electron acceptors. Syed Wajih Naqvi and colleagues
at the National Institute of Oceanography in Goa, India,
investigated denitrification in the zone of hypoxia off the
coast of India (Fig. 22.15A). The study revealed unexpectedly high levels of N2O production at a series of stations
within the zone. In one experiment, introduction of nitrate

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

into water samples from the dead
zone led quickly to production of
nitrite and N2O (Fig. 22.15B), a
process conducted by denitrifying bacteria. Studies in 2012 suggested additional N2O production
by ammonia-oxidizing archaea
such as Nitrosopumilus. Thus, bacterial denitrification and archaeal
ammonia oxidation in polluted
ocean waters may contribute significantly to global warming.
Dissimilatory nitrate reduction
to ammonia. Most environmen-

A.

B.
20

NO2–

India
20
Bombay
103

200 m
depth

(10–6 M)

■

Latitude (°N)

886

10

NO3–

Goa

15

N2O
Zone of
hypoxia

0

0

48

96
144 192
Incubation time (h)

240

tal nitrate and nitrite are reduced
FIGURE 22.15 ■ N2O production from
via N2O as described previously.
a
coastal dead zone. A. Zone of hypoxia
10
Cochin
Certain conditions, however, favor
off the coast of India. Circles represent
the alternate route of dissimilasample-collection stations. B. Levels of
200 km
NO3–, NO2–, and N2O following addition of
tory nitrate reduction to ammo70
75
–
NO
3 to a water sample from the zone of
nia (DNR A) (see Fig. 22.13A).
Longitude (°E)
hypoxia. The sequential rise of NO2– and
Nitrate reduction to ammonia is
N2O indicates metabolism of denitrifying
a form of anaerobic lithotrophy
bacteria.
or hydrogenotrophy in which nitrate serves as an electron
acceptor and hydrogen gas (H 2) is the electron donor:
Anammox by bacteria has now been observed in all
NO3 – + 4H 2 + H+ ⎯→ NH3 + 3H 2O
kinds of anaerobic habitats, including terrestrial soil and
aquatic sediment. The reaction accounts for a majority of
Bacteria reduce nitrate to ammonia mainly in anaerobic
all N2 returned to the atmosphere. Among bacteria, the
environments rich in organic carbon and H 2 generated by
main anammox contributors are planctomycete genera
fermentation, but low in reduced nitrogen, such as sewage
such as Kuenenia and Scalindua (Fig. 22.16). Anammox
sludge and stagnant water. Another carbon-rich habitat
planctomycetes (discussed in Chapter 18) are an unusual
favoring this pathway is the rumen, the digestive tract of
kind of cell wall–less bacteria with a special interior memcattle, goats, and other ruminant animals (see Chapter 21).
brane that segregates the toxic intermediates of the anamRuminants consume grasses whose cellulose requires digesmox reaction. Promising anammox microbes have been
tion by mutualistic microbes. Ruminants also depend on
identified from wastewater sludge, in the hope of using
their digestive microbes to assimilate nitrate into ammonia
them for more effective removal of excess nitrogen from
and synthesize amino acids.
wastewater.
Anaerobic ammonium oxidation (anammox). For many
years, denitrification was considered the main way that
nitrogen compounds return N2 to the atmosphere. In
To Summarize
2003, two research groups from Europe and Costa Rica,
led by Tage Dalsgaard and Marcel Kuypers, showed that
■ Nitrogen in ecosystems is found in a wide range of
in anoxic deep-sea water the major source of N2 is bacteria
oxidation states. Interconversion of most of these states
conducting anaerobic ammonium oxidation by nitrite (the
requires bacteria or archaea.
anammox reaction, discussed in Chapter 14):
■ The main source and sink of nitrogen is the atmoNH4+ + NO2 – ⎯→ N2 + 2H 2O
sphere. N2 is fixed into NH4+ by some bacteria and
archaea. Denitrifying bacteria reduce NO3 – successively
In anammox, ammonium ion serves as electron donor, and
back to N2 and return it to the atmosphere.
nitrite serves as anaerobic electron acceptor—an unusual
■ Nitrogen fixation is conducted by symbiotic bacteria
combination of two different oxidation states of the same
key element, nitrogen. The reaction is a kind of anaerobic
in association with specific plants. Legume-associated
lithotrophy.
nitrogen fixation is critical for agriculture.

CHAPTER 22

■

MICROBES IN GLOBAL ELEMENTAL CYCLES

■

887

these macronutrients, many toxic metals in the environment, such as mercury and arsenic, are either bioactivated
or detoxified by microbes.

LAURA VAN NIFTRIK AND MIKE S. M. JETTEN. 2012. MICROBIOL. MOL. BIOL. REV 76:585

The Sulfur Cycle

200 nm

FIGURE 22.16 ■ Anammox bacterium: Scalindua. The
planctomycete Scalindua has an interior compartment to undergo
anammox lithotrophy (discussed in Chapter 14). Pili surround the
envelope.

■

■

■

Nitrification (NH4+ ⎯→ NO2 – ⎯→ NO3 –) is aerobic
oxidation of ammonia to nitrite and nitrate. Nitrification yields energy for lithotrophic bacteria in soil and
water, and consumes oxygen, thus expanding marine
oxygen minimum zones.
Bacteria conduct anaerobic respiration, reducing
nitrate to N2 and nitrous oxide (N2O), a greenhouse
gas. In the deep ocean, NO3 – may be reduced by hydrogen gas to NH3.
Under anaerobic conditions, bacteria oxidize NH4+
with NO2 –, generating nitrogen gas (the anammox
reaction).

22.5

Sulfur, Phosphorus,
and Metals

Besides carbon and nitrogen, many other elements participate in biochemical cycles that have important consequences
for the biosphere, as well as for human environments. Sulfur undergoes a “triangle” of redox conversions analogous
to that of nitrogen. Phosphorus, unlike other biological
elements, is generally assimilated in the oxidized state, and
phosphate is often a limiting nutrient for plants. Iron cycles
in complex interactions with sulfur and phosphate. Beyond

Sulfur is a major component of biomass, including proteins and cofactors. Like carbon and nitrogen, sulfur can be
assimilated in either mineral or organic form. At the same
time, assimilation competes with dissimilation. Reduced
and oxidized forms of sulfur (comparable to those of nitrogen; see Table 22.3) offer electron donors and acceptors
for dissimilatory reactions that generate energy. Reduced
forms of sulfur, such as H 2S, can also participate in photolysis through reactions analogous to those of H 2O. Oxidized forms, such as sulfate, serve as anaerobic electron
acceptors. As with nitrogen, most of these redox reactions
are performed solely by bacteria and archaea. The biochemistry of sulfur cycling has important environmental consequences, such as the corrosion of concrete and iron.
In the ocean, sulfate is the second most common anion
after chloride. Marine sulfate turns over slowly and constitutes an essentially limitless supply. Thus, sulfur is
rarely a limiting nutrient. Marine algae release various
reduced forms of sulfur, such as dimethylsulfoniopropionate (DMSP). Bacteria metabolize DMSP to dimethyl sulfide [(CH3)2S], which causes part of the “salty sea smell.”
Dimethyl sulfide enters the atmosphere, where it becomes
oxidized to aerosols that may help water condense and form
clouds. In the atmosphere, the overall amount of sulfur
(mainly sulfur dioxide) is small. Nevertheless, some sulfur compounds generate toxic effects, as well as acidic pollution. Thus, both biochemical and industrial sources of
atmospheric sulfur are of concern.
Competing assimilatory and dissimilatory sulfur reactions in the biosphere form a “sulfur triangle” including H 2S, S0, and SO42– (Fig. 22.17A). The oxidation and
reduction pathways are analogous to those of nitrogen (compare Fig. 22.13A). Bacterial sulfur metabolism includes
additional options of anaerobic phototrophy, such as H2S
phototrophy. In an aquatic system, H2S arises from spring
waters welling up from the sediment and from decomposition of detritus. In decomposition, anaerobic respirers
such as Desulfovibrio species convert sulfate to sulfur, then
to H 2S. As H 2S rises to the oxygenated surface water, it is
readily oxidized by sulfur-oxidizing bacteria such as Acidithiobacillus and Beggiatoa. Beggiatoa species are known as
“white sulfur bacteria” because they form white mats (Fig.
22.17B). Their appearance is due to the sulfur granules
generated by sulfide oxidation. Microbial sulfide oxidation
is helpful for environments because it removes H2S, which is
highly toxic to most nonsulfur bacteria and plants. Because
of the toxicity of H 2S, autotrophs more readily assimilate

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

B. White sulfur bacteria

A. The sulfur triangle
S0

H2S (+ O2)
oxidation

Sulfur (+ O2)
oxidation

H2S photolysis
(anaerobic)
Sulfur
respiration

H2S

Sulfate
respiration

Assimilatory
sulfate reduction

SO42–

SO2
Atmospheric
photooxidation

H2S oxidation

5 cm

DR. JUERGEN SCHIEBER, INDIANA UNIVERSITY DEPARTMENT OF GEOLOGICAL SCIENCE

888

Decomposition
Assimilatory
reduction
to RSH

H2 + S
thermal vent
RSH
Bacteria and
plants assimilate
to RSH.

Algae,
bacteria

Dimethyl sulfide
[(CH3)2S]

Food chain

SO42– into biomass, despite the extra energy needed to
reduce SO42– to the thiol form found in proteins.
If light is available, anaerobic phototrophs such as Rhodopseudomonas species will use light energy to oxidize H 2S.
Some phototrophic bacteria further oxidize the S0 generated to sulfate. In some sulfur-rich lakes, such as the Russian Lake Sernoye, underground springs pump in so much
H 2S that most of the sulfur is photolytically converted to
S0, which forms up to 5% of the sediment. This elemental
sulfur can be mined commercially.
In thermal vent ecosystems, several sulfur-based reactions drive metabolism. For example, thermal vent archaea
such as Pyrodictium species use sulfur to oxidize hydrogen
gas to H 2S:
H 2 + S0 ⎯→ H 2S
This type of sulfur-based hydrogenotrophy is enhanced by
the vent conditions of extreme pressure and temperature
(100°C)—conditions under which elemental sulfur exists
in a molten state more accessible to microbes than solid
sulfur.
Decomposition of biomass generates various organic
sulfur compounds, many of which are volatile. Odors of
certain microbial sulfur products contribute to the smell of
rotting eggs, but others enhance the taste of cheeses (discussed in Chapter 16).

FIGURE 22.17 ■ The sulfur cycle. A. The “sulfur triangle.”
With oxygen, bacteria and archaea oxidize H2S to sulfur dioxide, and then to sulfate. Anaerobically, H2S may be photolyzed
to sulfur. Sulfate serves as an electron acceptor for anaerobic
respiration, or it may be assimilated into biomass, with reduced
sulfur groups (RSH). Algae form DMSP, which bacteria convert to
dimethyl sulfide. B. Microbial mat of white, sulfur-oxidizing bacteria (probably Beggiatoa) growing at a sulfide spring.

Sulfur is reduced by sulfur-reducing bacteria in many
subsurface environments, such as beneath deposits of oil
and coal (Fig. 22.18A). Oil and coal contain sulfur in
the form of SO42– and provide a carbon source for sulfate
respirers (sulfate-reducing bacteria that respire using sulfate as a terminal electron acceptor). The products of sulfate
respiration include S0 and organic sulfur. When the fuel is
burned, these forms of sulfur cause severe pollution. Before
burning, however, the S0 and organic sulfur can be oxidized by sulfur-oxidizing bacteria. Fuel processors are now
turning to sulfur-oxidizing microbes for experimental use
in “desulfuration,” the removal of sulfur from coal.
One habitat that exhibits the entire range of sulfur
oxidation states is a sewer pipe. In a concrete sewer pipe,
the alternation between anaerobic and oxygenated sulfur biochemistry causes severe corrosion (Fig. 22.18B).
The microbial decomposition of sewage yields large quantities of toxic H 2S, which then volatilizes to high levels
that endanger sewer workers. The H 2S is then oxidized
to sulfuric acid by Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans, a bacterium that colonizes the surface of the concrete. The sulfuric acid (H 2SO 4) decreases the pH at the concrete surface
to pH 2. In the concrete surface, sulfuric acid converts
calcium hydroxide to soluble calcium sulfate. Over several
years, this corrosion can eat away half the thickness of a
sewer pipe.

CHAPTER 22

■

MICROBES IN GLOBAL ELEMENTAL CYCLES

A. Sulfate-reducing bacteria underground

CaSO4 + 2H2O
Aerobic sulfide
oxidation by
lithotrophs gives
SO42–.

Concrete pipe

Surface

Corrosion

O2
SO4
SO

H2S
S0
Oil
Oi
Organic S

Oxygenated
zone

Microbial action

H2S

889

B. Sewer pipe corrosion by sulfur bacteria
Ca(OH)2 + H2SO4

Sulfate-reducing
bacteria

■

Acidithiobacillus

Anoxic
zone

Microbial
decomposition
of sewage
produces H2S.
Sewage liquid
H2 produced
by fermenting
bacteria

H2S

H2 + SO42–

H2 + SO42–
Anaerobic sulfate
reduction by
sulfate respirers
Pipe
corrosion

FIGURE 22.18 ■ Consequences of the sulfur cycle. A. Oil- or coal-bearing geological strata provide rich electron donors for sulfatereducing bacteria (sulfate respirers). Eventually, various forms of sulfur contaminate the oil or coal, which, when burned as fuel, generates
first SO2 and ultimately sulfuric acid (acid rain). B. In a sewer pipe, sulfate-reducing bacteria (sulfate respirers) generate H2S. Sulfur-oxidizing
bacteria then oxidize H2S to sulfate in the form of sulfuric acid. The sulfuric acid reacts with calcium hydroxide in the concrete, thus corroding
the interior surface of the pipe.

Sulfur metabolism shows important connections with
metabolism of metals. For example, sulfur-oxidizing bacteria such as A. ferrooxidans oxidize iron as well (discussed
shortly).

Thought Question

22.6 Compare and contrast the cycling of nitrogen and
sulfur. How are the cycles similar? How are they different?

The Phosphate Cycle

Phosphorus is a fundamental element of nucleic acids,
phospholipids, and phosphorylated proteins. Unlike sulfur
and nitrogen, which are found in several different oxidation states, phosphorus is cycled mainly in the fully oxidized state of phosphate (Fig. 22.19). The absence of fully
reduced phosphorus in ecosystems may be due to the fact
that reduced phosphorus (phosphine, PH3) undergoes
spontaneous combustion in the presence of oxygen. Nevertheless, some anaerobic decomposers use phosphate as
a terminal electron acceptor, reducing it to phosphine. In
marshes and graveyards, where extensive decomposition
occurs, phosphine emanates from the ground, where it
ignites with a green glow. Microbial respiration of phosphate might be the cause of such “ghostly” apparitions.

Where is phosphate available? Although phosphate is
abundant in Earth’s crust, its availability in ecosystems is
limited by its tendency to precipitate with calcium, magnesium, and iron ions. Thus, dissolved phosphate in water and
soil is often a limiting nutrient for productivity. In natural
ecosystems, the available phosphate is taken up rapidly by
bacteria and phytoplankton, and then consumed by grazers
and predators and dispersed by decomposers.
Marine water is extremely limited for phosphate,
because of the distance from sediment minerals. Thus, the
genomes of marine phototrophs encode many systems for
acquiring phosphate from organic sources. Some actually
acquire phosphorus in a partly reduced form, such as phosphite (PO33–) or phosphonate (HPO32–), both of which are
available in marine water. In addition, marine phototrophs
show an unusual ability to substitute nonphosphorus lipids for phospholipids, thus cutting their phosphorus needs
by half. For example, the cyanobacteria Prochlorococcus,
Synechococcus, and Trichodesmium can replace membrane
phospholipids with sulfonated lipids. Similarly, algae such
as Thalassiosira species can replace phosphatidylcholine
with betaine, which contains no phosphate but includes a
carboxylate group.
Another microbial response to phosphate scarcity is to
replace membrane phosphates with organic phosphonates,
in which the phosphorus atom bonds directly to carbon
(R–PO32–), instead of the easily hydrolyzed phosphoester

890

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

Soluble phosphate is
taken up by bacteria
and plants, and then
passes on to consumers.

Soluble inorganic
phosphate

oxygen carrier molecules such as hemoglobin. Other common micronutrients
required for enzymes and cofactors are
zinc, copper, and selenium.
Precipitation

Iron in soil and sediment. Iron is a

major component of Earth’s crust,
and substantial quantities are present
Insoluble inorganic
in most soil and aquatic sediment. Yet
Decay
Decay
Plants
phosphate in sediments
Bacteria,
the availability of iron to organisms
Bacteria,
Bacteria
fungi
fungi
is limited by its extremely low soluIndustrial
processing
bility in the oxidized form. In microPhosphite (PO33–) and
phosphonate (HPO32– )
bial biochemistry, the oxidized form,
DNA
polyphosphates
ferric iron (Fe3+), interconverts with
Animals
the reduced form, ferrous iron (Fe2+).
PO43–
In the presence of oxygen, iron metal
Insoluble organic
(Fe0) “rusts” and is therefore available
Soluble organic
phosphate
phosphate
to organisms mainly as Fe3+. Ferric iron
is especially insoluble at high pH, precipitating with hydroxide ions as ferric
■
FIGURE 22.19 The phosphate cycle. Phosphorus in the biosphere occurs entirely in
hydroxide [Fe(OH)3] or with phosthe form of inorganic or organic phosphate. Most phosphate precipitates as insoluble salts in
sediment. The small amount of soluble phosphate is taken up by plants and bacteria, which
phate ions as ferric phosphate (FePO4)
may then be taken up by consumers. Decomposers return phosphate to the environment.
(Fig. 22.20A). At neutral pH, iron is
oxidized by bacteria such as Gallionella, Leptothrix, and Mariprofundus.
bond. These organic phosphonates, however, are cleaved
In
iron
mines,
where
pyrite (FeS2) is exposed to air,
by marine archaea, the ammonia oxidizers such as Nitrospontaneous oxidation releases sulfuric acid:
sopumilus. The archaea release methylphosphonate, which
PO43–

many bacteria can cleave to obtain phosphate. Phosphate
scavenging from methylphosphonate releases methane,
thus interacting with the carbon cycle.
In agriculture, phosphate is often added as a fertilizer.
Phosphate fertilizer is obtained by treating calcium phosphate rock with sulfuric acid, producing calcium sulfate
(gypsum) and phosphoric acid. Excess phosphate from fertilizer or industry may drain into streams and lakes where
phosphorus is the limiting element. The sudden influx of
phosphate causes an algal bloom. The overgrowth of algae
leads to overgrowth of heterotrophs, depletion of oxygen,
and destruction of the food chain.

Thought Question

22.7 Compare and contrast the cycling of nitrogen and
phosphorus. How are the cycles similar? How are they
different?

The Iron Cycle

Why do organisms need iron? As a micronutrient, iron
forms a negligible part of biomass but is essential for
growth (discussed in Chapter 4). Organisms require iron
as a cofactor for enzymes and an essential component of

2FeS2 + 7O2 + 2H 2O + 4H+ ⎯→ 2Fe2++ 4H 2SO4
Lithotrophs such as Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans can
catalyze iron oxidation to yield energy, thus increasing
the rate of production of sulfuric acid. Rapid sulfuric
acid production leads to acid mine drainage. Where acid
mine drainage enters an aquatic system, the reduced iron
is oxidized by lithotrophs to ferric hydroxide, forming an
orange precipitate, seen in home plumbing (Fig. 22.20B).
Iron mine drainage causes severe pollution of streams
(Fig. 22.21).
In anoxic habitats, such as benthic sediment, Fe3+ is
largely reduced to Fe2+ by anaerobic respiration. Reduction
leads to loss of the reddish color, generating gray-colored
sediment, as in wetland soil (discussed in Chapter 21). The
reduction of Fe3+ to Fe2+ is one of the enriching contributions of anaerobic sediment to freshwater wetlands and
coastal estuaries, because reduced iron is more available to
plants and bacteria. Oxidized iron, in aerobic soils, can be
taken up only by bacteria. Bacteria synthesize special iron
uptake systems, including molecules called siderophores
that bind ferric ion outside and then are taken up by the
cell (see Section 4.2). Bacterial iron then becomes available
to consumers in the ecosystem.
Iron cycling often connects with the sulfur cycle in
ways that can prove unfortunate for human engineering.

CHAPTER 22

■

A. The iron cycle

MICROBES IN GLOBAL ELEMENTAL CYCLES

■

891

B. Iron precipitation due to lithotrophy
Phytoplankton
consumers

Depth in sediment

Fe3+
FePO4

Fe3+
FeOOH
Fe(OH)3
Fe2O3

Bacteria with
transport systems
Bacterial oxidation
of Fe2+ (lithotrophy)

Iron-oxidizing
oxid
xid
xidi
dizi
izing
ing
g bact
b
bacteria
acter
teria
teri
ia

2+
Fe2+
Fe

Ox
O
x
Oxygenated
zone
BRYAN ALLEN

Precipitation of
Fe3+ by OH–
or PO43–

Anoxic zone
FeOOH
FePO4

Reduction
of Fe3+ by
anaerobic
respiration

CO
O2

Bacteria
Bacteria
B
i
and plants
plant
pl
antss
ant

Fe2+

[CH2O]

FIGURE 22.20

■ The iron cycle. A. Ferric iron
(oxidized iron, Fe3+) precipitates with hydroxide or
phosphate. Only bacteria can assimilate Fe3+. In anoxic
sediment, bacterial respiration reduces Fe3+ to Fe2+, a
more soluble form available to plants. B. Home plumbing shows signs of lithotrophic oxidation of Fe2+ to Fe3+
(orange precipitate).

H2CO3
Salts of reduced
iron (Fe2+)

FeCO3

FeS

Fe3(PO4)2

Fe3O4
F

The most serious problem is anaerobic corrosion of iron.
Iron corrodes spontaneously in the presence of oxygen. In
anoxic environments, however, little spontaneous corrosion
takes place. Instead, iron is corroded by sulfate-reducing
bacteria (Fig. 22.22). Bacteria such as Desulfovibrio and
Desulfobacter can grow on the iron surface, forming an
anaerobic biofilm. Within the biofilm, iron is oxidized to
Fe2+, and sulfate dissolved in the water is reduced to ferrous sulfide:

carbon for biomass, they consume bacteria as a source of
iron. Another source of marine iron, discovered in 2013, is
hydrothermal vents.
Iron is thus a limiting nutrient for marine phytoplankton. As discussed in Chapter 21, when higher quantities

4Fe0 + SO42– + 4H 2O ⎯→ FeS + 3Fe2+ + 8OH–
The FeS flakes away, exposing more iron to react with
water, resulting in cyclic corrosion.

extremely scarce. This is because the benthic sediment
containing iron is so distant that its iron is largely inaccessible. The main source of marine iron is eolian (windborne) dust from dry land, such as from windstorms in
the Sahara desert. Most of the wind-borne iron is particulate, oxidized, and unavailable to eukaryotic phytoplankton (algae). Thus, bacteria that acquire and reduce ferric
iron provide the main entry of iron into the ecosystem.
This may explain why so many marine algae are mixotrophs: Although their photosynthesis can fi x plenty of

THOMAS R. FLETCHER/ALAMY

Marine iron. In the upper layers of most oceans, iron is

FIGURE 22.21

Mine drainage enters a stream. Lithotrophic
oxidation of reduced iron yields the orange material polluting this
stream in Preston County, West Virginia.
■

892

■

PART 4

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

■

Anoxic biofilm of
Desulfovibrio desulfuricans
SO42–
Fe

SO42–

2+

Metal surface
0

4Fe + SO4

2–

+ 4H2O

2+

FeS + 3Fe

+ 8OH–

FIGURE 22.22 ■ Anaerobic corrosion. Iron-sulfur bacteria
convert Fe0 to FeS. FeS flakes off, exposing iron to further oxidation
and rapid corrosion. Source: Modified from Hang T. Dinh et al. 2004. Nature
427:829–832.

of a limiting nutrient enter an ecosystem, the limited populations rapidly increase. The rise of algal populations
following iron addition was demonstrated in an “iron fertilization” experiment conducted in 2007 by Phillip Boyd
and colleagues at the University of Otago, New Zealand.
Several thousand kilograms of ferrous sulfate (FeSO 4) was
released in the Southern Ocean, near Antarctica. Within
a week after the iron release, there was a bloom of phytoplankton. The dominant phytoplankton in the bloom
were diatoms of the species Fragilariopsis kerguelensis.
The diatom bloom was so large that it was detected by a
NASA satellite as a region of increased color reflected by
chlorophyll.
The dramatic effects of iron fertilization led some
researchers to propose that increasing iron throughout
the oceans could cause blooms of diatoms, removing CO2
from the atmosphere. If a sufficiently large proportion of
the diatoms were to escape predation and fall to the ocean
floor, they would effectively remove their carbon from circulation. An alternative outcome, however, would likely be
eutrophication, causing an ecological collapse comparable
to a dead zone.
While iron fertilization is unlikely to meet our need
for CO2 removal, microbiology offers other approaches to
offset the perturbation of Earth’s carbon cycle by human
technology. For example, bacteria and algae may be engineered to provide biofuels, such as hydrogen gas, whose use
yields energy without releasing CO2.
Our view of Earth’s biosphere increasingly is moving
toward environmental management—the concept that wilderness as such no longer exists, but only a biosphere to be
managed for better or worse. Microbes will have many roles
as partners in environmental management.

Besides iron, numerous trace metals interact with bacterial
species as either electron donors or acceptors (Table 22.4).
Bacterial conversion of metals can either produce toxic species or remove toxic metals from ecosystems. For example, chromium-6 [Cr(VI)] is an extremely toxic pollutant
that can be reduced by soil bacteria to the much less toxic
Cr(III). Microbial metal cycling is discussed further in
eTopic 22.3.
How can bioremediation remove toxic minerals from
groundwater? An example is the bioremediation of arsenic,
a critical water contaminant in densely populated countries
such as India, Bangladesh, and Cambodia. Arsenic causes
cancers and crippling skin disorders. Arsenic and other metals can be removed from groundwater via bioremediation.
Bhaskar Sengupta and colleagues at Queen’s University,
Belfast, developed a bioreactor technology for subterranean
arsenic removal, or SAR (Fig. 22.23). This process takes
advantage of the fact that different oxidation states of arsenic differ in their solubility. For the bioreactor, groundwater is cycled through an oxygen pump and returned to the
source. Naturally occurring lithotrophic bacteria oxidize
arsenite (AsO33–, water-soluble) to arsenate (AsO43–, insoluble). Bacteria also oxidize iron and manganese to their less
soluble forms, as discussed in Chapter 14. The negatively
and positively charged ions precipitate together, effectively
removed from the water.

Multiple Limiting Factors Modulate
Complex Ecosystems

A common assumption of terrestrial and aquatic ecology is
that a single nutrient, such as phosphorus or iron, is limiting for a given ecosystem. The requirement for more than
one limiting factor is known as resource colimitation.
In highly oligotrophic marine water, populations often
depend on multiple limiting factors. For example, in the
Baltic Sea, both nitrogen and phosphorus are present in
such low concentrations that they must be added together
in order to stimulate a phytoplankton bloom. In another
example, the North Atlantic is limited for both phosphorus
and iron. Addition of both P and Fe stimulates growth of
nitrogen-fixing cyanobacteria.

To Summarize
■
■

Other Metals in the Environment

Another concern for environmental management is that of
toxic metals and metalloids such as mercury and arsenic.

Sulfate is abundant in marine water.
Oxidized and reduced forms of sulfur are cycled in
ecosystems. Sulfate and sulfite serve as electron acceptors for respiration. Hydrogen sulfide serves as an electron donor. Sulfur oxidation to sulfuric acid causes acid
mine drainage and pipe erosion.

CHAPTER 22

■

MICROBES IN GLOBAL ELEMENTAL CYCLES

■

893

TABLE 22.4*Microbial Metabolism of Metals
Microbial genera
(examples)

Effects within environment

Alcaligenes,
Pseudomonas

Removal of poisonous AsO33– via use as terminal
e– acceptor, converting to insoluble AsO43–.

AsO43– ⎯→ AsO2–

Bacillus, Chrysiogenes,
Pyrobaculum

AsO43– (arsenate) used as terminal e– acceptor.

AsO43– ⎯→ (CH3)3As

Candida (a fungus),
Scopulariopsis (a fungus)

Methylarsines. Poisonous; inhalation of moldy
wallpaper with arsenic pigment.

Chromium (Cr)

CrO42– ⎯→ Cr3+

Aeromonas, Arthrobacter,
Desulfovibrio

CrO42– [Cr(VI)] is mutagenic and carcinogenic; as
e– acceptor, reduced to Cr3+ [Cr(III)], less toxic.

Manganese
(Mn)

Mn2+ ⎯→ Mn4+

Hyphomicrobium,
Arthrobacter

Mn is a trace element required for enzymes.

Mn4+ ⎯→ Mn2+

Geobacter, Pseudomonas

Anaerobic respiration in sediment.

Hg2+ ⎯→ Hg0

Acidithiobacillus

Hg0 volatilizes; little harm.

Hg2+ ⎯→ (CH3)Hg+

Desulfovibrio

(CH3)Hg+ is a severe neurotoxin; accumulates at
higher trophic levels, such as fish.

Selenium (Se)

Se0 ⎯→ SeO32–

Bacillus, Micrococcus

Se is a trace element; small amounts in food help
remove mercury. Larger amounts are toxic.

Uranium (U)

UO22+ ⎯→ UO2

Veillonella, Shewanella,
Geobacter

UO22+ [U(VI)], soluble, is respired to uranium
dioxide, UO2 [U(IV)], insoluble; used for cleanup
of radioactive uranium.

Vanadium (V)

VO3– ⎯→ VO(OH)

Veillonella, Desulfovibrio,
Clostridium

V is a trace element for some nitrogenases and
invertebrate blood pigments.
VO3– (vanadate) is oxidized as an e– donor.

Metal

Major conversions

Arsenic (As)

AsO33–

Mercury (Hg)

3–

⎯→ AsO4

Oxygenation

Power supply

Recharge tank

Delivery tank

Tap

Top ground surface

Ground
Ground
Gro
undwat
ndwat
n
water
wa
er tab
er
ttable
ab
b
Groundwater

FIGURE 22.23
Oxygenation
ati
tio
on zo
on
zon
zone
on
ne
AsO

AsO
AsO
O433–
3+
3+

Pump

M 3+
Mn

A
Ars
Arsen
rsen
en oxidized
Arsenite
to ar
to
ars
rse
arsenate,
which
c
co
om
mp
complexes
with
Fe
e3+ aand Mn3+

■ Subterranean arsenic
removal. Bioremediation of arsenic-contaminated

groundwater by lithotrophic bacteria. Water cycles
through oxygenation tanks back to the source, where
bacteria oxidize arsenite, iron, and manganese.
The oxidized form of arsenic, which is arsenate,
precipitates with iron and manganese for convenient
removal.

894

■

■

■

■

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

Phosphorus cycles primarily in the fully oxidized
form (phosphate). Phosphate limits growth of phototrophic bacteria and algae in some aquatic and marine
systems.
Iron cycles in oxidized and reduced forms. Oxidized iron (Fe3+) serves as a terminal electron acceptor
in anaerobic soil and water. Reduced iron (Fe2+) from
rock is oxidized through weathering or mining. Bacterial lithotrophy accelerates iron oxidation, leading to
acidification.
Metal toxins can be metabolized by bacteria. Bacterial metabolism may either increase or decrease toxicity. Metabolic conversion to an insoluble form, such
as arsenite to arsenate, offers an effective means of
bioremediation.
Marine habitats show resource colimitation. Multiple
resources may be limiting for the phytoplankton community or for different populations.

22.6

with strong covalent bonds. The same fundamental molecules that appear in early-Earth simulation experiments,
such as adenine and glycine, also appear in meteorites.
Thus, we suspect that the fundamental building blocks for
biochemistry are universal. On the other hand, if life could
indeed be founded on some other basis, how would we
recognize it?
If life is found on other planets, it will almost certainly
include microbes. In fact, a case can be made that the
majority of biospheres in our galaxy would consist entirely
of microbial life, since microbes inhabit a wider range
of conditions than do multicellular plants and animals.
Even on Earth itself, the largest bulk of our biosphere—
including deep sediments and rock strata—consists of
microbial ecosystems.

Did Mars Once Support a Biosphere?

For several reasons, the most studied candidate for extraterrestrial life has been the planet Mars:
■

Geology. Of all the solar planets, Mars seems the most
similar to Earth in its topography; indeed, some areas
of Mars remarkably resemble desertscapes on Earth.
Martian rock contains the fundamental elements needed
for life on Earth.

■

Day and year length. Mars has a day length similar to
that of Earth, and a year only twice as long as ours.

■

Temperature. The average temperature on Mars is
220 K (–53°C), too cold for most biochemistry on
Earth, but its temperature rises above freezing at the
equator. By contrast, the torrid heat of Venus (460°C)
would exclude stable macromolecules.

■

Atmosphere. Overall, Mars has an atmospheric pressure
of 6 millibars (mbar), barely a hundredth that of Earth
(1,013 mbar), and it lacks molecular oxygen. Thus, aerobes could not grow. But the Martian atmosphere does
include carbon dioxide, actually at 20 times the CO2
content on Earth, so there would be plenty for photoautotrophic production of biomass.

■

Water. Surface water freezes out of the Martian atmosphere, without existing as a liquid. But mineral formations suggest that liquid water flowed in the past.
Liquid water may yet exist deep underground, supporting life-forms similar to the endoliths of Earth’s crustal
rock.

Astrobiology

As we come to appreciate the ubiquitous contributions of
microbes to shaping our planet, in all its diverse habitats,
increasingly we wonder whether microbes exist on worlds
beyond Earth. Is Earth unique in supporting life, or have
living cells evolved as well on Mars or Venus or on Jupiter’s
planet-sized moons? Astrobiology is the study of life in the
universe, including its origin and possible existence beyond
Earth. The discovery of life beyond Earth would arguably
be the most significant advance in science since a human
set foot on the moon.
If the same physical and chemical laws govern the universe everywhere, then it is hard to suppose that only
one of the billions of stars would have a planet supporting life. On the other hand, we have no idea how many
planets have been capable of developing and sustaining a
biosphere. As Isaac Asimov said, “There are two possibilities. Maybe we’re alone. Maybe we’re not. Both are equally
frightening.”
If life exists elsewhere, is it built on the same fundamental elements as ours? Many lines of evidence suggest that
the biochemistry of life elsewhere would resemble that
of Earth. Terrestrial life is founded on macroelements in
the first two rows of the periodic table, including carbon,
nitrogen, oxygen, phosphorus, and sulfur (see Table 22.1;
for the periodic table, see Appendix 1). The valence numbers (that is, the number of electrons in the outer electron
shell) of these elements from the middle of the periodic
table enable them to form complex molecular structures

The existence of liquid water is a key question because
on Earth, wherever liquid water exists—even brine (concentrated salt) at –20°C—there we find microbial life. In 2015,
NASA’s Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO) found evidence
of flowing water on Mars (see Chapter 1). Water condenses

CHAPTER 22

BETHANY EHLMANN, NASA/JPL/JHUAPL/MSSS/BROWN UNIVERSITY

■

FIGURE 22.24

■ Evidence of past water on Mars. Sedimentary deposits in the Mars Jezero crater, mapped by the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter in 2007. The flow patterns resemble a river delta,
best explained by a model involving the flow of liquid water. Green
indicates claylike mineral deposits.

and freezes out of the Martian atmosphere, generating ice
clouds and snow. The Martian soil composition showed high
levels of perchlorate, a chemical that attracts water to form
liquid solution and can support the metabolism of some
Earth microbes.
Other evidence for liquid water in the past on Mars
comes from geological formations surveyed by the Mars
Reconnaissance Orbiter in 2007. The orbiter mapped sedimentary deposits in Mars’s Jezero crater (Fig. 22.24).
The crater formations reveal flow patterns typical of a river
delta flowing into a lake. Claylike mineral deposits (falsecolored green in Fig. 22.24) may have trapped organic
compounds needed for life. The layered patterns are best
explained by a model involving fluid flow, such as the flow
of water.
If life once existed on Mars, what became of it? Two
main possibilities are considered:
■

Life developed and existed until the planet froze.
Under this scenario, life originated much as it did on
Earth, during a time of heavy bombardment from
space and outgassing of nitrogen and carbon dioxide.
Unfortunately, however, life failed to generate sufficient
atmosphere for a greenhouse effect to sustain temperate
conditions. No oxygenic organisms produced molecular
oxygen and an ozone layer.

■

MICROBES IN GLOBAL ELEMENTAL CYCLES

■

895

Life developed and still exists underground. In the
absence of an ozone layer, the Martian surface is sterilized by cosmic radiation. Nevertheless, microbes may
yet exist deep underground, similar to the endolithic
prokaryotes on Earth, or the subsurface brine communities of Antarctica (see Special Topic 22.1). Subsurface
microbes are protected from cosmic radiation.

Do Biosignatures Indicate Life?

If microbes do exist on Mars, they should be detectable.
But the detection of unknown life, even on Earth, remains
a challenge. The advent of PCR sequence detection of
species based on ribosomal genes has revealed thousands
of unknown species, most of which cannot be grown or
recognized by other methods. Other species may well be
missed if their rRNA sequences fail to amplify with our
probes. On Mars, assuming life evolved independently of
Earth life-forms, we would have no way to define sequence
probes for detection.
Instead, researchers try to define biosignatures, chemical
and physical signs that could only have been formed by life.
Most of the proposed biosignatures are based on types of
evidence for life on Earth, either as fossils of ancient life (discussed in Chapter 17) or as signs of current life in extreme
habitats. Proposed biosignatures include the following:
■

Microfossils. The mineralization of microbial cells leads
to the formation of structures that can be visualized
under a microscope. The cell fossils must be sufficiently
distinct to establish that no abiotic process could have
formed them.

■

Isotope ratios. Certain biochemical reactions preferentially use one isotope of an atom over another; for example, Rubisco, the key enzyme of carbon dioxide fixation,
uses 12C in preference to 13C. Thus, both photosynthetic
and chemolithoautotrophic use of 12C can decrease the
12
C/13C ratio in subsequent carbonate deposits. Isotope
ratios of nitrogen, oxygen, and sulfur are also used as
biosignatures.

■

Mineral deposits. Certain mineral formations are
observed to be caused only by microbial activity. For
example, insoluble manganese oxides such as Mn 2O3
are almost always the result of microbial oxidation of
reduced manganese. Reduced manganese ions are very
stable, and their abiotic oxidation rate is extremely slow.

■

Metabolic activity. Samples of soil can be incubated
with radioactive tracer substances such as 14CO2 and
tested for metabolic conversion or incorporation into
biomass. It must be established that the conversion
could not have occurred abiotically and that no organisms from Earth were present.

896

■

PART 4

■

MICROBIAL DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY

Various kinds of evidence for life on Mars have been
reported, such as possible microfossils within a Martian
meteorite that landed in Antarctica. Metabolic activity was
tested in samples obtained by the NASA Viking lander in
1975. As of this writing, however, no evidence has proved
conclusive for active or past living microorganisms on Mars.

If no life exists—or if it exists only in the form of microbes
deep underground—should we consider human intervention, or terraforming, to make Mars habitable for life from
Earth? Scenarios for terraforming, long explored in science
fiction, are now receiving serious thought among space
scientists. Terraforming Mars would require increasing
the temperature and air pressure. The temperature of the
atmosphere might be increased by release of greenhouse
gases. In addition, sufficient carbon dioxide and nitrogen
gases must be made available from the Mars surface rock.
In principle, microbes from Earth could be seeded to grow
and generate an atmosphere containing nitrogen, oxygen,
and CO2.
The dilemmas and consequences of terraforming are
depicted in the novel Red Mars (1993), by Kim Stanley
Robinson. In favor of terraforming, it is argued that Mars
offers enormous natural resources of potential benefit for
humanity, especially as terrestrial resources are used up.
Human settlements on Mars would be a major step forward for space exploration. On the other hand, it is argued
that the planet Mars is a natural monument, a place with its
own right to exist as such. It should be allowed to remain
in its natural state for future generations to appreciate. As
a practical matter, terraforming remains unfeasible for the
near future. For example, the amount of chlorofluorocarbons required to raise Martian temperature is calculated to
be 100 times greater than our global capacity to produce
such substances.

Does Europa Have an Ocean?

Farther out in the solar system, surprising candidates for
microbial life are the moons of Jupiter. In 2000, the Galileo space probe passed several of Jupiter’s moons, including
Ganymede, Callisto, and Europa (Fig. 22.25). While their
distance from the Sun results in extreme cold, these bodies receive extra heat from friction generated by tidal forces
from the giant planet Jupiter. In the case of Europa, the
tidal forces have been calculated to provide enough heat to
liquefy water without boiling it off. Furthermore, measurement of Europa’s magnetic field suggests that its composition includes a dense iron core surrounded by 15% water.

NASA/DRL

Could Mars Be Terraformed
to Support Earth Life?

FIGURE 22.25

■

Jupiter’s moon Europa. Does life exist be-

neath Europa’s ice, in a salty sea?

Most of the water must be locked in ice, but tidal heating
could melt enough water for an underlying ocean of brine.
On Earth, similar brine lakes beneath the ice of Antarctica
harbor halophilic archaea that grow at –20°C.
If such oceans do exist, how could they support life without photosynthesis? Photosynthesis is impossible at Jupiter’s
distance from the Sun. However, an alternative source of
chemical energy might be the influx of charged particles
accelerated in Jupiter’s magnetic field. Charged particles
entering Europa’s ice can react with water to form hydrogen
peroxide (H 2O2). The H 2O2 then breaks down, releasing
molecular oxygen. Oxygen reaching the brine layer below
could combine with electron donors from crustal vents and
power metabolism. Alternatively, molecular hydrogen (H 2)
could be generated from water ionized by decay of radioisotopes. A similar source of H 2 for life has been proposed to
occur on Earth in rock strata several kilometers below the
surface, where it may support lithotrophs. On Europa, the
hydrogen could then combine with oxygen gas or other oxidants to power life. These schemes are highly speculative—
but tantalizing enough to encourage future NASA missions
to take a closer look at Europa and its sister moons.

Does Life Exist on Planets
of Distant Stars?

The past decade of astronomy has seen an extraordinary
growth in our knowledge of solar systems beyond our own.
Now that we know that so many other stars possess planets,

we can only wonder whether they also possess
biospheres of life-forms we would recognize.
In recent years, astronomers have found several hundred “extrasolar” planets orbiting distant stars, including some the size of Earth.
Could we ever hope to detect signs of life on
an extrasolar planet? A possible means of detection is suggested by William Sparks and colleagues at the Space Telescope Science Institute
in Baltimore, and collaborating institutions.
They show that light scattered by marine phytoplankton exhibits a property called “circular
polarization.” Circular polarization arises from
substances that are homochiral—that is, present in only one of two mirror forms, such as the
L and D forms of an amino acid. Homochirality is a strong biosignature, typical of proteins
and metabolites. If someday we have telescopes
capable of detecting light from distant planets,
circular polarization might provide evidence
of life.
Figure 22.26 shows an infrared photograph
through the Spitzer Space Telescope of nebula
RCW-49, a gaseous cloud full of newborn stars.
Recall from Chapter 17 that as stars form, they
take up dust of supernovas that includes all the
elements needed to form biomolecules. Spectroscopic observation of RCW-49 reveals stars
surrounded by disks coalescing into planets.
The planetary disks contain icy particles full of
organic molecules such as methanol, glycine, and
ethylene glycol, a reduced form of sugar. Could
there be biospheres in the making?

■

MICROBES IN GLOBAL ELEMENTAL CYCLES

■

897

NASA

CHAPTER 22

FIGURE 22.26

■ A stellar nursery. Nebula RCW-49 contains more than
300 newborn stars, from which NASA’s Spitzer Space Telescope detected
spectroscopic signals of common organic constituents of life (infrared
photograph).

■

Jupiter’s moon Europa is proposed as another possible site for life. Europa is bathed in a sea of brine similar
to terrestrial habitats for halophiles.

Concluding Thoughts
To Summarize
■

■

■

Astrobiology is the study of life in the universe,
including possible habitats outside Earth.
The search for extraterrestrial life is based on methods similar to those used to seek early life on Earth.
Evidence includes chemical and physical biosignatures,
isotope ratios, microfossils, and metabolic activity.
Mars is the planet whose geology most closely resembles that of Earth. Geological features strongly support
the past existence of flowing water, a prerequisite for
microbial life.

Our observations of distant molecules, as well as our analysis of meteorites (discussed in Chapter 17), suggest that the
biomolecules of Earth fit into a universal pattern of interstellar chemistry. Whether life exists elsewhere or we are
alone, we must remember that our Earth is the only place
we know of at this time that can support humans and the
forms of life we require for our own survival. The survival
of our entire biosphere depends on our microbial partners cycling key elements and acquiring energy to drive
the food web. For the first time in history, human technology now rivals the ability of microbes to alter fundamental cycles of biogeochemistry. But to manage and
moderate our alterations—for our own survival and that of
the biosphere—our fate still depends on the microbes.

CHAPTER 23

■

HUMAN MICROBIOTA AND INNATE IMMUNITY

■

901

CHAPTER 23

Human Microbiota and Innate Immunity

23.2 Benefits and Risks of Microbiota
23.3 Overview of the Immune System
23.4 Physical and Chemical Defenses against

Infection
23.5 Innate Immunity: Surveillance, Cytokines, and

Inflammation
23.6 Complement and Fever

C U R R E N T R E S E A RC H

highlight

Inflammasomes. An inflammasome is a multimeric disk that
forms in the eukaryotic cytoplasm to initiate inflammation.
Hao Wu studies inflammasome assembly using cryo-EM. She
found that a single NOD-like receptor (NLR) protein (NAIP2)
can initiate disk assembly after binding to a Salmonella secretion protein. Activated NAIP2 then nucleates the circular assembly of 10–11 monomeric blades of another NLR (NLRC4)
to form the disk. At the base of the disk, the caspase-1 protease oligomerizes. Caspase-1 proteolytically activates precursors of cytokines IL-1β and IL-18. Cytokine secretion begins
the process of inflammation.
Source: Zhang et al. 2015. Science 350:404–409.
NLRC4
monomer

T

he human body teems with microbes (the
microbiome) vital to our existence and is under
constant attack from pathogens. How do we
survive? Obstacles such as skin and stomach acid,
which are nonspecific defenses, will repel most microorganisms. But for microbes able to breach these
physical barriers, there await innate and adaptive
immune defenses. Chapter 23 explores the microbiome and describes the series of barriers and elaborate
innate immune defenses that keep microbes at bay.

A N I N T E RV I E W W I T H
HAO WU, STRUCTURAL BIOLOGIST, HARVARD MEDICAL SCHOOL

HARVARD MEDICAL SCHOOL

23.1 Human Microbiome

How has your work changed the
way we think about inflammasome
assembly?

The field presumed that inflammasome assembly resembles that of the
multisubunit apoptosome, a molecular machine that initiates programmed
cell death in damaged cells. Every subunit of an apoptosome must bind to a
ligand before assembly. Here we, as well as Jijie Chai’s group,
showed that only one subunit of the inflammasome (NAIP2)
needs to bind ligand. The conformationally activated sensor
NAIP then triggers stepwise assembly of NLRC4 subunits
through ATPase-mediated polymerization. NLRC4 does not
need to bind microbial ligands.
Would interfering with the inflammasome have an effect
on infection or cancer?

31.1 nm

An acute infection would likely worsen if we inhibited inflammasome assembly, because reduced inflammation means the
microbe could grow more. Fortunately, other inflammasomeindependent mechanisms can still initiate inflammation. In the
context of long-term, chronic inflammation, inhibiting inflammasome assembly may have hugely beneficial effects, such
as in inflammatory diseases and autoimmunity. In contrast,
activating inflammasomes could, in some cases, enhance
antitumor immunity, as suggested by the protective role of
caspase-1 protease in a model of colorectal cancer.
901

902

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

Two vacationing tourists, unknown to each other, were swimming in the Gulf of Mexico along the Alabama coast. One, a
12-year-old girl, had a cut on her leg caused by the sharp edge
of a scooter. The other, a man 66 years of age, had recently cut
his arm on a nail protruding from a wooden handrail. Within
moments of entering the water, several small Gram-negative
microbes invaded both of their bodies through those cuts.
Four days later, the young girl was heading back to Birmingham, sitting in the back of the family car, oblivious to the battle recently waged in her bloodstream. At the same time, the
man lay dead of an aggressive blood infection.
Both swimmers were attacked by the same pathogen,
Vibrio vulnificus. Why did one live and the other die? As is
the case for most healthy people, a variety of nonspecific,
innate immune factors present in the girl’s body killed the
invading pathogen before it could multiply. The man, on
the other hand, was an alcoholic with liver disease. He was
deficient in several of those defense mechanisms—mechanisms that made the difference between life and death.
What are these powerful innate factors? How can they be
nonspecific, able to attack many different microbes without ever previously encountering any of them? And why do
they kill the invaders and not our own cells? The inflammasome described in the Current Research Highlight is
one of those important innate factors.
Before exploring questions of immunity and self-defense,
we must understand that each of us is a self-contained ecosystem, home to numerous microbes inhabiting all sorts of
body niches. The day-to-day presence of these microbial
guests both shapes and sharpens our immune system, but it
is a benefit that comes with considerable risk.

23.1

Human Microbiome

From the moment of our birth to the time of our death, we
are constantly populated by microbes. These include bacteria, archaea, fungi, viruses, and even some protozoa. The
consortium of colonizing microbes has been dubbed the
human microbiota or microbiome.

Note:

Usage of the terms “microbiota” and “microbiome” has
blurred. “Microbiota” originally referred to actual microbes inhabiting a body site, whereas “microbiome” referred to the gene pool
within those microbes.

To illustrate the significance of the microbiome, consider
that our bodies carry about 10 times as many bacterial cells as
nucleated human cells and about 100 times more nonredundant bacterial genes than human genes. (A recent estimate
that includes non-nucleated red blood cells places the bacterial/human cell ratio closer to between 1:1 and 2:1.) Microbes
colonize wherever our body meets the external environment

(for example, skin, mouth, gastrointestinal tract, and parts
of the genitourinary tract). Most internal organs, blood, and
cerebrospinal fluid are sterile. The presence of any microbes
at these sites is considered an infection. The majority of species that make up our microbiota are unknown and have
never been grown in the laboratory. Consequently, metagenomic strategies (described in Chapters 7 and 21) are being
employed to identify our resident microbes. In 2016, the U.S.
government announced the National Microbiome Initiative
to advance understanding of how microbiomes contribute to
our health and the environment.
By and large, the body’s barriers of defense work well
to prevent incursions by microbiota or, in the event of an
incursion, to kill the invader. Unfortunately, these defenses
break down when an immune system is compromised by
medical treatments (such as anticancer drugs) or by diseases
(for instance, a deficiency in complement factors, discussed
in Section 23.6). Such a person is described as a compromised host and can be repeatedly infected by certain normal biota. Organisms causing disease in this situation are
called opportunistic pathogens.
We now understand that bacteria colonizing our bodies may be as important collectively as a kidney or liver. For
instance, Gary Siuzdak and his colleagues at the Scripps
Research Institute showed that our body cells are continually bathed in metabolites produced by gut microbes. It
is now thought that these metabolites, which circulate in
our blood, can have positive as well as negative effects on
human health and development.

Microbiome Acquisition and
the Hygiene Hypothesis

When and how does a person develop a microbiome?

Recent evidence suggests that the microbiome begins to
develop before birth. The fi rst stool (meconium) passed
by a newborn, before its fi rst meal, contains some bacteria.
The source of those microbes may be the placenta, which
has its own microbiome.
Once the baby breaks out of the embryonic membrane,
however, it is exposed to a dizzying array of microbes residing in the birth canal and the outside world. Contributions
to the baby’s skin, oral, gut, and genitourinary microbiomes come from the food they eat, the air they breathe,
and the people, places, and things they touch. Young babies
actually have microbiomes that are more diverse than those
of adults. But by 3 years old, the diversity decreases in complexity to assume adult composition.
Figure 23.1 presents the major human body sites (skin,
respiratory, digestive, and genitourinary tracts) that are
colonized by microbes, and illustrates the relative makeup
of bacteria, fungi, and viruses that comprise each microbiome. As you view the figure, notice the dramatic difference

CHAPTER 23

Bacteria

Fungi

■

HUMAN MICROBIOTA AND INNATE IMMUNITY

■

903

Viruses

Actinobacteria

Aspergillus

Bacteriophages

Bacteroidetes

Candida

Eukaryotic viruses

Cyanobacteria

Cladrosporium

Firmicutes

Malassezia

Fusobacteria

Saccharomyces

Proteobacteria

Other

Mouth
Bacteria

Nose

Viruses

Fungi

Lung
Bacteria

Bacteria
Stomach

Bacteria

Viruses

Fungi

Vagina

Intestines
Bacteria

Bacteria

Fungi

Skin
Bacteria
Viruses

Fungi

Viruses

FIGURE 23.1

■

Fungi

Relative amounts of microbial phyla and families present at various colonizing sites. Each pie chart presents the

relative compositions of bacterial phyla, genera of fungi, or viruses present in each microbiome as determined by the sequencing of genes
encoding 16S ribosomal RNA (see Sections 7.6 and 15.5). Classes of microbes are identified by color in the legend. Source: Data from Marsland and
Gollwitzer. 2014. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 14: 827.

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

in levels of Bacteroidetes when comparing nasal and intestinal microbiomes, or of Candida in the microbiomes of
the mouth and vagina. Composition within an individual’s
microbiome remains relatively constant over time but can
significantly fluctuate with diet, age, geography, or drugs.
The hygiene hypothesis. For millennia, human microbiota

were shaped by an intimate contact with natural environments composed of animals, caves, dirt, poop, and bugs.
This natural outdoor world harbored a vast array of microbial taxa that could compete to populate our skin and
mucosal surfaces. Today we are an indoor species spending
almost all of our time inside closed buildings, segregated
from nature—an arguably less diverse microbial environment. Add to that our use of soaps, antibiotics, and disinfectants and you can appreciate how severely we have
restricted our access to microbes. As a result, our microbiota appear less diverse than those of our long-ago ancestors.
Studies that have compared the modern-day human
microbiome with those of closely related wild African apes
and of uncontacted Amerindians (see Chapter 27) bear this
out. Although improved hygiene limits exposure to pathogens, recent studies suggest that narrowing the diversity of
our microbiome can contribute to inflammatory diseases
such as asthma, inflammatory bowel disease, colorectal
cancer, and obesity. Several intriguing studies find that,
even today, children who grow up on dairy farms are less
likely to develop allergies and asthma. The reason is that
our microbiome helps train our immune system (discussed
later and in Chapter 24). Exposure to more microbes and
other environmental antigens, especially early in life, may
produce a more tolerant, well-controlled immune system
less prone to inflammatory and autoimmune diseases (disorders in which the immune system reacts against the self).
The following sections describe the microbiota of various
body sites and discuss the benefits and risks of a microbiome.

Skin

The human adult, on average, is covered with 2 square
meters (over 21 square feet) of skin (epidermis) populated
by 1012 microorganisms. Skin microbiota include aerobes,
anaerobes, and facultative bacteria. There are, for instance,
approximately 104 –105 microbes per sweat gland at a ratio of
1 aerobe to 10 facultative or anaerobic species. As with all colonized body sites, resident (normal) and transient members of
the microbiota inhabit the skin. But even a resident microbe
exhibits diversity as different strains colonize at different
times. Thus, a human’s microbiome is not a static population,
but represents a vibrantly changing mix of strains and species.
Several features of epidermis make it difficult to colonize. Large expanses of skin are subject to drying,
although some areas harbor enough moisture to support
microbial growth; moist areas include scalp, ear, armpit,

and genital and anal regions. The skin has an acidic pH
(pH 4–6) owing to the secretion of organic acids by oil
and sweat glands. As noted in Section 5.4, organic acids
inhibit microbial growth by lowering bacterial cytoplasmic
pH. Epidermal secretions are high in salt and low in water
activity (see Section 5.3), and they contain enzymes, such
as lysozyme, that degrade bacterial peptidoglycan.
Despite these hurdles, many species of bacteria manage
to colonize the epidermal habitat. Most of these organisms are Gram-positive, because Gram-positive bacteria
tend to be more resistant to salt and dryness. Staphylococcus epidermidis, various Bacillus species, and yeasts
such as Candida are common examples of normal skin
microbes. Though normal, they are not always innocuous. One member of the skin’s resident microbiota—the
Gram-positive, anaerobic rod Propionibacterium acnes—
causes acne, a very visible plague of adolescence. During
the teen years, increased hormonal activity stimulates oil
production by the sebaceous glands (Fig. 23.2). P. acnes
A.

Epidermis

Dermis

Subcutaneous
tissue

Hair
follicle

Sebaceous
gland

Blood
vessels

Sweat
gland

B.

ALICE LIANG, NYU AND DOUG WEI, CARL ZEISS INC.; ARTIFICIAL
COLORING BY ERIC ROTH, NYU

904

FIGURE 23.2

■ Microbiology of skin and the development
of acne. A. The location of sebaceous glands in skin. B. Acne.

CHAPTER 23

readily degrades the triglycerides in this oil, turning
them into free fatty acids that then promote inf lammation of the gland. One consequence of the inf lammatory
response is the formation of a blackhead, a plug of f luid
and keratin that forms in the gland duct. The result is
the typical skin eruptions of acne. Because of its microbial basis, treatments for acne include tetracycline (oral)
or clindamycin (topically applied) to kill the bacteria.

■

HUMAN MICROBIOTA AND INNATE IMMUNITY

Nasopharynx

Uvula
Tonsil
Oropharynx

Eye

Within hours after birth, a human infant’s mouth becomes
colonized with nonpathogenic Neisseria species (Gramnegative cocci), Streptococcus, Actinomyces, Lactobacillus (all Gram-positive), and some yeasts. These organisms
come from the environment surrounding the newborn,
such as the mother’s skin and garments. As teeth emerge in
the newborn, the anaerobic space between teeth and gums
supports the growth of anaerobes, such as Prevotella and
Fusobacterium (Fig. 23.3B and C). Whatever the organism, colonizers of the oral cavity must be able to adhere to
surfaces, like teeth and gums, to avoid mechanical removal
and flushing into the acidic stomach. The teeth and gingival crevices are colonized by over 500 species of bacteria.
Organisms such as Streptococcus mutans (which
attaches to tooth enamel) and Streptococcus salivarius
(which binds gingival surfaces) form a glycocalyx that
enables them to firmly adhere to oral surfaces and to
each other. They are but two of the microbes that lead to
dental plaque formation. The acidic fermentation products of these organisms demineralize teeth and cause
dental caries (tooth decay).
Important microbial habitats of the throat include the
nasopharynx, which is the area leading from the nose to
the oral cavity, and the oropharynx, which lies between the

Epiglottis
Hypopharynx
Larynx
B. Prevotella

BSIP/SCIENCE SOURCE

SCIENCE VU/VISUALS UNLIMITED

C. Fusobacterium

D. Periodontal disease

BIOPHOTO ASSOCIATES/SCIENCE SOURCE

Oral and Nasal Cavities

905

A. Oral and nasal cavities

Tongue

The eye is exposed to the outside environment, so is it
heavily colonized? Actually, it’s not, because colonization
is inhibited by the presence of antimicrobial factors, such
as lysozyme, in the tears that continually rinse the eye surface (conjunctiva). Despite this protection, a few transient
commensal bacteria can be found on the conjunctiva. Skin
microbiota such as Staphylococcus epidermidis and diphtheroids (Gram-positive rods that look like clubs), as well as
some Gram-negative rods, such as Escherichia coli, Klebsiella, and Proteus, manage, at least temporarily, to make
the eye their home without causing damage. (The traits of
these genera were discussed in Chapter 18.) Occasionally,
bacteria such as Streptococcus pneumoniae and Haemophilus
influenzae, as well as some viruses, can cause an ocular disease known as pinkeye, in which the eye becomes reddened
with a watery discharge.

■

FIGURE 23.3 ■ Examples of anaerobic oral microbiota and
periodontal disease. A. Structures of the oral and nasal cavities.

B. Prevotella (colorized TEM; each cell approx. 2 μm long).
C. Fusobacterium (SEM; each cell approx. 1–5 μm long). D. Symptoms
of periodontal disease include red, swollen gums; bleeding gums;
gum shrinkage; and teeth drifting apart.

soft palate and the upper edge of the epiglottis (Fig. 23.3A).
Organisms like Staphylococcus aureus and Staphylococcus epidermidis populate these sites. The nasopharynx and oropharynx can also harbor relatively harmless streptococci such
as Streptococcus salivarius and Streptococcus oralis, as well as
Streptococcus mutans, a major cause of tooth decay. Other
oropharyngeal organisms include a large number of diphtheroids and the small Gram-negative rod Moraxella catarrhalis.
Within the tonsillar crypts (small pits along the tonsil surface)
lie anaerobic species such as Prevotella, Porphyromonas, and
Fusobacterium.

906

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

microbiota. Estimates in the lower respiratory
tract are 10–100 bacteria per 1,000 human cells,
Vegetation
the most prominent members being from the
phyla Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes.
Many organisms entering the nasopharynx
become trapped in the nose by cilia that beat
toward the pharynx. The microbes are propelled
toward the acidic stomach and death. Microorganisms that slip into the trachea are trapped by
mucus produced by ciliated epithelial cells lining
airways. Cilia usher the microbes up and away
from the lungs. The ciliated mucous lining of the
trachea, bronchi, and bronchioles makes up the
mucociliary escalator (Fig. 23.5). The mucocilFIGURE 23.4 ■ Gross pathology of subacute bacterial endocarditis
iary escalator constantly sweeps foreign particles
involving the mitral valve. A. An open, normal mitral valve shows cords that
up and out of the lungs. This action is extremely
tether it to the heart wall. B. The left ventricle of the heart has been opened
important for preventing respiratory infections.
to show mitral valve fibrin vegetations due to infection. These growths are not
When the mucociliary escalator fails, as when it
present in a normal heart.
is covered with tar from years of heavy smoking,
or when it is overwhelmed by the inhalation of too many
infectious microbes, infections such as the common cold
The oral microbiota are normally harmless, but they can
(for example, rhinovirus) or pneumonia (for example, Strepcause disease. Dental procedures, for instance, will often
tococcus pneumoniae) can result.
cause these organisms to enter the bloodstream, producing
what is called bacteremia (infection of the bloodstream).
Normal immune mechanisms typically clear these transient
Genitourinary Tract
bacteremias quite easily; but in patients who have a mitral
Much of the genitourinary tract is normally free from
valve prolapse (heart murmur), microbes can become
microbes. These areas include the kidneys (which remove
trapped in the defective valve and form bacterial vegetawaste products from the blood) and the ureters (which
tions. Vegetations are biofilms that contain a large number
remove urine from the kidneys). The urinary bladder,
of bacterial cells encased within glycocalyx (a polysaccharide
which holds urine until it is excreted, was thought to
or peptide polymer secreted by the organism) and fibrin
be sterile but is now known to harbor microbes, mainly
(produced by clotting blood). Because the onset of disease
anaerobes. The distal urethra, however—because of its
is often insidious (slow), it is called subacute bacterial endocarditis (Fig. 23.4). Once ensconced within a vegetation,
the microbes are extremely difficult to kill with antibiotics.
Immunocompetent individuals are at very low risk of valve
infection. Immunocompromised patients, however, are at
much higher risk and receive prophylactic treatment with
antibiotics before any dental procedure.
B.

23.1 How can an anaerobic microorganism grow on skin or in
the mouth, both of which are exposed to air?

Respiratory Tract

The respiratory tract has a surface area of approximately
246 square feet (75 square meters) directly exposed to
the environment. Originally thought to be sterile, the
lungs and trachea are now recognized to harbor normal

DR. DAVID M. PHILLIPS/VISUALS UNLIMITED

Thought Question

SCIENCE SOURCE

VIDEO SURGERY/GETTY IMAGES

A.

FIGURE 23.5

Mucociliary escalator. Movement of these
hairlike cilia ushers particles up and out of the trachea and lungs
(colorized SEM; diameter between 0.5 and 1 μm).
■

proximity to the outside world—normally contains Staphylococcus epidermidis, Enterococcus species, and some members of Enterobacteriaceae. Some of these organisms can
cause bladder disease (known as urinary tract infection, or
UTI) if they make their way into the bladder (for example,
via catheterization).
The large surface area and associated secretions of the
female genital tract make it a rich environment for microbes,
including bacteria and yeasts. Firmicutes are the largest bacterial contributor to the vaginal microbiome; however, composition changes with the menstrual cycle, owing
to changing nutrients and pH. The mildly acidic nature
of vaginal secretions (approximately pH 4.5) discourages
the growth of many bacteria. As a result, the acid-tolerant
Lactobacillus crispatus is among the most populous vaginal species. Healthy women appear to fall into two broad
categories: 70% have lactobacillus as the primary member
of their vaginal microbiota, while 30% have mixed species
with few lactobacilli. Women in the latter group appear to
be more susceptible to sexually transmitted infections.
The balance between different species that comprise
vaginal microbiota is crucial to preventing disease. Antibiotic therapy to treat an infection anywhere in the body
can also affect the vaginal microbiota. The resulting imbalance can allow overgrowth of Candida albicans, otherwise
known as a yeast infection. C. albicans, as a fungus, is not
susceptible to antibiotics designed to kill bacteria.

Stomach

We have known for a hundred years that the stomach contents are acidic and that gastric acidity can kill bacteria. Just
how important that acidity is for protection against microbes
is illustrated by the infection caused by Vibrio cholerae, the
causative agent of cholera. Cholera is a severe diarrheal disease endemic to many of the poorer countries of the world.
Although cholera actually affects the intestines, not the stomach, the bacteria must survive passage through the stomach to
reach the intestines. The organism, however, is extremely acid
sensitive. Healthy volunteers must ingest a trillion organisms
before contracting disease. Despite the high infectious dose,
cholera epidemics in developing countries kill tens of thousands of people every year. Part of the reason is that the poor,
malnourished populations in these countries suffer from hypochlorhydria (decreased stomach acid). The less-acidic stomach gives ingested microbes more time to enter the intestine,
where they can thrive and cause devastating disease. Compare
the astronomical number of acid-sensitive V. cholerae needed
to cause disease to the mere ten organisms needed to develop
disease from Shigella, a very acid-resistant pathogen.
Although the stomach contents are very acidic, the mucous
lining of the stomach is much less so. It is there that some bacteria can take refuge, primarily Actinobacteria and Firmicutes

■

HUMAN MICROBIOTA AND INNATE IMMUNITY

■

907

H. pylori

1 μm

FIGURE 23.6

■

SPL/SCIENCE SOURCE

CHAPTER 23

Helicobacter pylori defies stomach acidity.

H. pylori growing in the mucus on stomach epithelium (colorized
SEM). H. pylori bacteria attach to gastric epithelial cells and induce
specific changes in cellular function, such as an increase in the expression of laminin receptor 1, a protein associated with malignancy.
Peptic ulcers can result.

(see Fig. 23.1). In fact, the stomach harbors a diverse microbiota, as detected using cultural and molecular techniques.
Estimates are between 10 and 1,000 organisms per gram.
A classic stomach pathogen is Helicobacter pylori. This
organism has a remarkable ability to resist acidic pH. (It survives at pH 1, using the enzyme urease to generate ammonia,
which neutralizes acid.) However, H. pylori will not grow in
strong acid pH conditions, but it can grow in the mucous lining of the stomach, where the pH is closer to 5 or 6 (Fig. 23.6).
The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
estimates that Helicobacter colonizes the stomachs of half the
world’s population. Most of the time, Helicobacter does not
cause any apparent problem, but on occasion, the organism
can produce gastric ulcers and even cancer. On the plus side,
recent data suggests that H. pylori colonization in children is
associated with a reduced risk for allergic disease.

Intestine

The intestine is an extremely long tube consisting of
several sections, each of which supports the growth of
different combinations of bacterial species. Pancreatic
secretions (at pH 10) enter the intestine at a point just
past the stomach and raise the intestinal pH to about
pH 8, which immediately relieves the acid stress placed
on microbes. The relatively high pH and bile content of

908

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

phyla: Bacteroidetes (for example, Bacteroides species) and Firmicutes (for
example, Clostridiales clusters XIV and
Roseburia (light blue)
Bifidobacterium (gray)
IV) followed by Proteobacteria (for
example, Escherichia coli) and Actinobacteria (for example, Bifidobacterium
Parabacteroides (yellow)
species). Besides bacteria, other inhabitants are the yeast species Candida albicans, and protozoa such as Trichomonas
hominis and Entamoeba hartmanni.
Some 200 different bacterial speOther Bacteroides (black)
Bacteroides (red)
cies and a few methanogenic archaea
comprise the intestinal microbiome.
One reason the intestine can support
such a large and eclectic mix of species
Days
is that different bacteria attach to difFIGURE 23.7 ■ Variability of gut microbiota over time. Daily fecal samples taken
ferent host cell receptors. Another reafrom one individual were analyzed to identify and quantify resident bacterial families by
son is that many different food sources
sequencing 16S rRNA. Selected genera are identified. Colored segments at each time
are available to support diverse groups
point represent the proportions of specific genera relative to the entire population.
of microbes (discussed previously, in
Chapter 21). Even human breast milk
evolved to encourage the growth of specific subpopulations
of microbiota. Breast milk contains carbohydrates that
the duodenum and jejunum allow colonization by only
nourish babies (lactose), but also includes complex carbohya few resident, mostly Gram-positive, bacteria (enterodrates that only our microbiota can digest.
cocci, lactobacilli, and diphtheroids). These particular
Makeup of the gut microbiome within a single indiGram-positive organisms (Firmicutes phylum) possess
vidual is relatively constant but still varies over time. Figa bile salt hydrolase that helps them grow in the presure 23.7 follows the fecal biota from a single individual
ence of intestinal bile salts. The distal parts of the human
over a period of 14 months. The relative proportions of
intestine (ileum and colon) have a slightly acidic pH (pH
bacterial families fluctuate significantly but tend to return
5–7) and a lower concentration of bile salts—conditions
to typical adult composition. Across the spectrum of the
that support a more vibrant ecosystem. The intestine
human population, however, the composition of intestinal
actually contains roughly 1011–1013 bacteria per gram of
microbiota is a continuum of many different combinations
feces. This generally anaerobic environment is populated
of microbes (enterotypes). At one end of the spectrum are
by both anaerobic and facultative microbes in a ratio of
microbiomes dominated by Bacteroides, while at the other
1,000 anaerobes to one facultative organism. Why is the
end are communities dominated by Prevotella (another
intestinal lumen anaerobic? The small amount of oxygen
Gram-negative anaerobic species). One study showed, for
that diffuses from the intestinal wall into the lumen is
example, that people with high protein and animal-fat diets
immediately consumed by the facultative bacteria, such
have fecal communities enriched with the Bacteroidesas E. coli, which renders the environment anaerobic (disdominant enterotype, while those with carbohydrate-rich
cussed in Chapter 21).
diets have fecal communities dominated by Prevotella. The
significance of this difference is not yet clear.
Acquisition of gut microbiota. Infant intestines are initially colonized by large numbers of E. coli and streptoKeeping our microbiome at bay. Clearly, our intestines
cocci that quickly generate a reducing environment able to
are packed with microbes. Why don’t they cause chronic
support growth of strict anaerobic species—mainly Bifiintestinal inflammation? Lora Hooper (Fig. 23.8A) and
dobacterium, Bacteroides, Clostridium, and Ruminococcolleagues at the University of Texas Southwestern Medicus. The intestines of breast-fed babies are dominated by
cal Center discovered part of the answer: an antimicrobial
bifidobacteria, possibly because of growth factors present
“force field” made of antimicrobial lectins (carbohydratein breast milk. In contrast, the microbiota of formula-fed
binding proteins). Whenever bacteria contact epithelial
infants is more diverse, with high numbers of Enterobaccells, these lectins are secreted into the mucus layer linteriaceae, enterococci, bifidobacteria, Bacteroides, and closing the intestine and kill bacteria that get too close. Figtridia. As seen in Figure 23.1, by adulthood over 90%
ure 23.8B shows that microbes (green) are kept away from
of the bacteria in the intestine are composed of just two
Akkermansia (pale green)

0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
170
180
190
200
210
220
230
240
250
260
270
280
290
300
310
320
330
340
350
360
370
380
390
400
410
420
430
440

CAPORASO, ET AL. GENOME BIOL 2011. 12: R50. © CAPORASO, ET AL.
LICENSEE BIOMED CENTRAL LTD. 2011

Faecalibacterium (beige)

CHAPTER 23
A.

■

HUMAN MICROBIOTA AND INNATE IMMUNITY

■

909

B.

8.9 nm (outer diameter)

~50 lm

VAISHNAVA, ET AL. 2011. SCIENCE 334: 255

DAVID ARELLANO, CARMEL STUDIOS PHOTOGRAPHY

1.8 nm (inner diameter)

30 μm

FIGURE 23.8

■ Keeping the gut microbiome at bay. A. Lora Hooper. B. Separation of the microbiome from intestinal mucosal surface.
Bacteria are green (FISH using a DNA probe that hybridizes to bacterial 16S rRNA genes), and the nuclei of intestinal mucosal cells are blue
(DAPI stained). Inset: Model of the RegIIIα pore that forms in Gram-positive cell membranes.

the intestinal villi (blue) of the mouse intestine, in part
because of these lectins. The separation between microbiome and host mucosal cells minimizes microbiome activation of an immune response that could severely damage
the intestinal lining. Two of the antimicrobial lectins are
RegIIIα and RegIIIγ. Hooper’s group discovered that
antimicrobial lectin RegIIIα (Fig. 23.8B, inset; cryo-EM
map) forms a membrane-penetrating pore in Gram-positive microbes. RegIIIα and -γ, therefore, promote peaceful coexistence between host and microbiome. Other
immune mechanisms that control microbiota in the intestinal mucosa, such as secretory IgA antibodies, are described
in Chapter 24.

biota influences susceptibility to sexually transmitted
infections.
■

■

■

■

Microbe-free areas of the body include blood, cerebrospinal fluid, and internal organs.
Normal microbiota can cause disease if organisms
gain access to the circulation or deeper tissues.
Opportunistic pathogens infect only compromised
hosts.
The intestine is populated by 1011–1013 microbes per
gram of feces. Principal phyla are Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, Proteobacteria, and Actinobacteria. The ratio
of anaerobes to facultative bacteria is 1,000:1. The gut
microbiome includes bacteria, archaea, fungi, and viruses.

Thought Questions

23.2 Why do many Gram-positive microbes that grow on the
skin, such as Staphylococcus epidermidis, grow poorly or not
at all in the gut?

23.3 Why can the colon be considered a fermenter?

To Summarize
■

The normal microbiota present on skin and mucosal
surfaces is acquired at birth but changes over a lifetime.
Skin microbiota consists primarily of Gram-positive
microbes, including Propionibacterium acnes, which
can cause acne. Oral and nasal surfaces are colonized
by aerobic and anaerobic microbes. Vaginal micro-

23.2

Benefits and Risks
of Microbiota

Our colonizing microbes are not hostile armies camped at
our body’s gates (also called portals of entry) waiting to
invade. These microorganisms are of great benefit to us,
and we, as good hosts, reciprocate. Microbes in our gut, for
instance, have enzymes to catabolize foods that we cannot
digest. Some bacteria synthesize vitamins that we cannot
make (E. coli, for instance, makes vitamin B12). In addition,
chemical signals released by members of the microbiome
promote host tissue development. Germ-free animals raised
in laboratories, for instance, have very thin intestinal walls.
The short-chain fatty acid products of fermentation affect

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

host gene expression and can influence host immune system
function. Acetate, for instance, tends to promote inflammation, whereas butyrate tends to inhibit inflammation.
We, for our part, maintain our gut microbiome by secreting complex carbohydrates that members of the microbiome can use, and chemical factors, such as hormones, that
can alter microbiome gene expression.

Examples of Beneficial Gut Microbiota

An important gut microbe that promotes host tissue rejuvenation is Akkermansia muciniphila, a Gram-negative, anaerobic
bacterium (Verrucomicrobia phylum) that degrades mucin,
the glycosylated protein layer that covers gut epithelium.
Mucin degradation by A. muciniphila fosters continuous
rejuvenation of the protective mucin layer. The short-chain
fatty acids produced by this organism feed epithelial metabolism and modulate inflammatory responses of immune cells.
A well-studied model anaerobe, Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, benefits us by breaking down the complex carbohydrates we eat. Much of this organism’s genome is dedicated
to taking many of the complex carbohydrates we eat and
breaking them down into products that can be absorbed by
the body or used by other members of the microbiome. We
humans actually absorb 15%–20% of our daily caloric intake
in this way. A detailed example is discussed in Chapter 21.
Other benefits our microbiota provide include limiting
infections by competing with pathogens for food sources
and attachment receptors on host cells. Colonizing bacteria
can also make antimicrobial compounds that limit growth
of potential pathogens. For example, nonpathogenic gut E.
coli produces bacteriocin (a secreted protein toxin), which
directly inhibits growth of the related pathogen enterohemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC; see Chapter 25).
Gut microbes also influence the development and efficiency of our immune system. A polysaccharide produced
by Bacteroides fragilis stimulates production of an antiinflammatory cytokine that will prevent gastrointestinal colitis caused by Helicobacter hepaticus. Cytokines
are small, secreted host proteins that bind to cells of the
immune system and regulate their function. (Cytokines are
discussed in Sections 23.5 and 24.3.)
The intestinal microbe Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, a member of the order Clostridiales (Firmicutes phylum), elicits powerful anti-inflammatory effects on human
immune cells through secreted bacterial factors and interactions with Toll-like receptors (see Section 23.5). For
example, it inhibits induction of the inflammatory cytokine
IL-8 and increases the population of an anti-inflammatory
T-cell lymphocyte population (T regulatory cells; see Chapter 24). The absence of this organism in human intestines
has been linked to painful inflammatory intestinal diseases
such as Crohn’s disease.

Another important group of intestinal anaerobes consists of the segmented filamentous bacilli (SFBs) in mice and
probably humans (see Special Topic 18.1). These spore formers are important for developing a healthy immune system.
We will discuss the connections between gut microbiota
and the immune system more fully in Chapter 24. The antiinflammatory effects of these and other microbes protect the
intestinal mucosa from an overzealous immune system.

Containment Breaches and
Disrupted Balance

Everything works well, as long as the composition of our
microbiota is balanced and stays where it belongs. However, the accidental penetration of certain organisms
beyond a site of colonization or an imbalance in microbiome composition, called dysbiosis, can cause infections and inflammatory diseases, respectively. A cancerous
lesion in the colon, for example, can provide a passageway for microbes to enter deeper tissues and cause infection. Bacteroides fragilis, a harmless anaerobe in the gut,
can invade tissues through surgical wounds, causing intraabdominal abscesses and even gangrene after abdominal
surgery (Fig. 23.9). Other infections caused by specific
gut microbes escaping the intestine include urinary tract
infections (cystitis), septicemia, and meningitis.
Emotional stress, a change in diet, or antibiotic therapy
can alter gut microbiome balance. The resultant dysbiosis can
lead to poor digestion, pseudomembranous enterocolitis [an
infectious disease caused by Clostridioides difficile (formerly
Clostridium difficile)] (Fig. 23.10), or an extremely painful

WWW.MEDSCAPE.COM/VIEWARTICLE/460749_2

910

FIGURE 23.9 ■ Anaerobic gas gangrene of the abdominal
wall caused by Bacteroides. This infection was an unfortunate

result of bowel surgery. Organisms escaped from the intestine and
initiated infection in the abdominal wall.

DAVID M. MARTIN

CHAPTER 23

Exudative plaques

FIGURE 23.10

■ Pseudomembranous enterocolitis caused by
Clostridioides difficile (formerly Clostridium difficile). The or-

ganism is often a part of the normal intestinal microbiota, but antibiotic
treatment can kill off competing microbes, leaving C. difficile to grow
unabated. C. difficile toxins kill host cells, causing exudative plaques to
form on the intestinal wall. The small plaques coalesce to form a large
pseudomembrane that can slough off into the intestinal contents.

inflammatory disease such as inflammatory bowel disease
(IBD) or Crohn’s disease.
Some people favor restoring natural microbial balance by
orally ingesting living microbes such as the lactobacilli present in yogurt. Taking these supplements, called probiotics
(from the Greek meaning “for life”), is thought to restore
balance to the microbial community and return the host
to good health. The most commonly used probiotic genera are Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium (Fig. 23.11).
The potential mechanisms by which they improve intestinal

■

911

health include competitive bacterial interactions (normal
biota prevent growth of pathogenic bacteria), production
of antimicrobial compounds, and immunomodulation (an
ability to change the activity of cells of the immune system).
Claire Fraser and colleagues at the University of Maryland School of Medicine recently showed that ingestion of
a single probiotic microbe, Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG,
does not alter microbiome composition but will orchestrate broad transcriptional changes in other members
of the microbiome—functions that could promote antiinflammatory pathways in the resident microbes.
Probiotics are now being tested for treating several gastrointestinal disorders, including inflammatory bowel disease
(IBD). Realize, though, that using probiotics such as yogurt
to treat complex diseases such as IBD is still very controversial.
An extreme, but clinically proven, form of delivering probiotic microbes to the intestine is the so-called fecal transplant
(fecal bacteriotherapy). In its original forms fecal transplant
transferred the intestinal microbiome of a healthy person to a
relative with a severe intestinal disease such as pseudomembranous enterocolitis. Restoring a “normal” microbiome in this
way has successfully “cured” patients with repeated C. difficile infections that did not respond to antibiotics. Today the
procedure uses a “super donor” rather than relatives and may
someday be a personalized bacterial cocktail delivered in pill
form. Probiotics in the form of vaginal suppositories are also
used to treat patients prone to vaginal infections.

The Link between Obesity and Dysbiosis

Obesity is epidemic in industrialized and developing countries.
Over 500 million people worldwide are obese and predisposed to develop related diseases such as diabetes, cardiovascular disease, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, cancer, and
some immune disorders. Obesity involves complex, puzzlelike interactions among genes, diet, and a long-term imbalance

■

2 µm

Commonly used probiotic microorganisms. A. Bifidobacterium (note the Y shape of some cells). B. Lactobacillus

acidophilus. Colorized SEMs.

SCIMAT/SCIENCE SOURCE

2 µm

FIGURE 23.11

HUMAN MICROBIOTA AND INNATE IMMUNITY

B.

SCIMAT/SCIENCE SOURCE

A.

■

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY
FIGURE 23.13 ■ Adiposity of germfree mice transplanted with fecal
preparations from human twins.

FIGURE 23.12

Fecal contents from sets of monozygotic
human twins—one obese (Ob), the other
lean (Ln)—were transplanted orally into
germ-free (GF) mice. Mice were cohoused
(ch) in different combinations. Changes in
fat mass were measured after 10 days. * =
P value of ≤0.05; ** = P ≤ 0.01.

Monozygotic
twins

Fecal
transplants

Source: (Germ-free mice) tiripero/Getty Images;

Germ-free
mice

■ Jeffrey I. Gordon, MD. Gordon (second from
left) is a recipient of the 2015 Keio Medical Science Prize. He stands
with some of the researchers who work in his lab at Washington
University School of Medicine (from the left: Tarek Salih, Lihui Feng,
Mark Charbonneau, Sid Venkatesh, and Laura Blanton).

(obese and lean mice) Human Genome wall for SC99
on ornl. gov./Wikimedia.

Obese

Lean

Obese and lean;
cohoused

Obese, lean, and
germ free; cohoused

15

10

*

5

*

*
0

–5

**
–10

WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF MEDICINE

between energy intake and expenditure, which together
yield an excessive increase in body fat. Compelling evidence now points to gut microbiota playing a prominent
role in obesity by influencing nutrient acquisition, regulating energy metabolism, and affecting fat storage.
Many studies showing connections between gut
microbiota and obesity use gnotobiotic animals. A gnotobiotic animal is an animal that is germ-free or one in
which all the microbial species present are known. To
develop a gnotobiotic colony of animals, offspring must
be delivered by cesarean section under aseptic conditions in an isolator. The newborn is moved to a separate isolator where all entering air, water, and food are
sterilized. Once gnotobiotic animals are established,
the colony is maintained by normal mating between
the members. Fecal organisms and fecal content can
be transplanted orally to these animals by syringe and
stomach tube (gavage). After the transplant, the effects
on animal physiology and disease can be observed.
Fecal transplants include mouse-to-mouse transfers or
even human-to-mouse transfers (discussed later).
Early evidence suggesting a link between the gut
microbiome and obesity included finding that germfree (GF) mice have less fat and are more resistant to
diet-induced obesity, compared to conventionally raised
(microbiome-containing) mice. Furthermore, treating
obese mice with antibiotics reduces their body weight
and improves glucose metabolism. Livestock farmers
and cattle ranchers have known for decades that adding
antibiotics in low doses to animal feed actually increases
animal growth. These studies suggest that altering an
animal’s microbiome with antibiotics can increase or
decrease weight depending on circumstances.
Newer metagenomic studies find that obese humans
and mice carry a less diverse gut microbiome and have

Percent change in fat mass

912

Ob-Ob

Ln-Ln

Obch

Lnch

GFch

an increased capacity to absorb energy compared to their
lean counterparts. The ratios of major bacterial phyla in the
colon also seem to differ between obese and lean individuals.
For instance, the gut microbiomes of obese children have
Firmicutes-to-Bacteroidetes phylum ratios that are higher
than those of lean children. Studies looking at this ratio
among adults are less clear. Some find that obese adults have
higher Firmicutes-to-Bacteroidetes ratios compared to lean
adults. Other studies indicate the opposite, and some show
no difference. The real key to microbiome effects on obesity
may be the difference in species makeup and metabolic output rather than broad phylum differences.
Can your microbiome keep you thin? A landmark study

from Jeffrey Gordon (Fig. 23.12; Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis) and colleagues demonstrated that obesity in humans is clearly linked to their

CHAPTER 23

■

HUMAN MICROBIOTA AND INNATE IMMUNITY

■

913

microbiomes. The scientists collected fecal contents from
of Mucor species increased when obese subjects lost weight,
sets of monozygotic human twins, one of whom was obese
much as was found for Bacteroidetes.
and the other lean, and then orally transplanted the fecal
preps into germ-free mice (Fig. 23.13). Mice receiving fecal
How might the microbiome influence obesity? Microbiota
microbiota from the lean human co-twin remained lean,
can influence obesity in two major ways. One is the haras measured by change in fat mass (“Ln” in Fig. 23.13).
vesting of energy from ingested foods; the other is the trigHowever, mice receiving fecal microbiota from the obese
gering of intestinal inflammation.
co-twin gained adiposity over a mere 10-day period (“Ob”
As noted in Chapter 21, the metabolic dexterity of intesin Fig. 23.13). Even more remarkable, when Ob and Ln
tinal microbes allows them to digest many foods that we
co-twin fecal-transplanted mice were cohoused (“ch”) in a
cannot. In the process, these microbes produce short-chain
single cage, the Obch mice gained less weight than the confatty acids (SCFAs) that our cells use in a variety of ways.
trol Ob mice. Metagenomic analysis of fecal contents from
The major SCFAs are butyrate, propionate, and acetate.
the mice revealed that the microbiome of Obch mice came
Numerous investigations suggest that the amounts and
ch
to resemble that of the Ln mice. Essentially, the microratios of these SCFAs influence obesity (Fig. 23.14).
biota of the Lnch mouse transferred
to the Obch mouse and was maintained. Transfer took place because
mice are naturally coprophagous
(eat feces). Even though Lnch mice
also consumed Obch mouse feces,
Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes
Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron
the Lnch fecal microbiome did not
Alter transcriptome
change. The most successful Lnch
SCFAs
More acetate
ch
invaders of the Ob microbiota
Methanobrevibacter (archaeon)
were Bacteroides species.
Intestinal
Butyrate
Propionate
Acetate
LPS (Gram-negatives)
Another aspect of this study asked lumen
High-fat diet
what would happen to germ-free mice
promotes transport
if they were cohoused with Ob and
Ln fecal-transplanted mice. Up to 5
days after cohousing, the microbiome
ntestinal
acquired by GFch mice resembled Intestinal
epithelial
Energy
that of noncohoused Ob mice, but cells
harvest
surprisingly, after 5 days the profile
dramatically shifted to that of their
Lnch cage mates. GFch mice then lost
TLR4 (pattern recognition
Gut hormone
weight (see Fig. 23.13). This result
receptor on host cells)
confirmed that the Ln-derived microbial taxa had greater fitness over the
Inflammatory
Brain
GluconeoIFN-gamma
cytokines made
Ob-derived taxa. From these studies,
genesis
Gordon concluded that a higher FirCholesterol and
Limit Hunger
lipid synthesis
micutes-to-Bacteroidetes ratio favors
Liver
Decrease fat
obesity, while the opposite favors
production
leanness. His studies also found that
Inflammation
as fat people lose weight, the proportion of Bacteroidetes to Firmicutes in
Adipose
Lipid synthesis
the gut microbiome increases.
tissue
and storage
Bacteria may not be the only
microbial link to obesity. The fungal
Anti-obesity
Pro-obesity
mycobiome was also found to differ
■
FIGURE 23.14 Effects of microbiome products on weight gain. Members of the
between obese and thin human subgut microbiome ferment ingested complex carbohydrates and produce short-chain fatty acids
jects. Mucor racemosus and M. fuscus
(SCFAs). SCFAs have varied effects on hunger, fat production, and inflammation. LPS from
were the species most represented
Gram-negative bacteria can be transported across the mucosal barrier and interact with pattern
in non-obese subjects compared to
recognition receptor TLR4. The inflammatory cytokines made can affect liver metabolism. Arobese counterparts. The abundance
rows and terms in red promote weight gain.

914

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

A.

B.
1014

Bacteria
Archaea
Methanobacteriales

Copies of 16S rDNA per gram of stool

1013
1012
1011

The small
intestine is
connected to the
stomach pouch.

1010
109
108
107
106
105
104

Unused portion
of the small
intestine.

103
102
101
1

2

3

Normal-weight patient

1

2

3

Obese patient

1

2

3

Gastric-bypass patient

FIGURE 23.15 ■ Association between Methanobacteriales, obesity, and gastric bypass. A. Relative numbers of distal colon
Bacteria, Archaea in general, and Archaea of the order Methanobacteriales (primarily Methanobrevibacter smithii) in normal-weight, obese,
and gastric-bypass patients. Organisms were quantified using real-time PCR to detect 16S ribosomal RNA genes. B. A gastric bypass.

Generally, acetate is thought to promote obesity. Acetate
is absorbed well by intestinal epithelial cells, travels to the
liver where it is used for lipid synthesis, and is distributed
throughout the body to be used as a substrate for cholesterol
synthesis (particularly in adipose tissues). Butyrate, however, seems to prevent obesity. It is used primarily by intestinal epithelial cells for energy and stimulates production
of gut hormones that limit hunger. Butyrate also reduces
the synthesis of the pro-inflammatory cytokine interferongamma (IFN-gamma), described in Sections 23.5 and
24.3. Propionate, for its part, has effects that can either
stimulate or prevent obesity. This SCFA stimulates IFNgamma synthesis, which promotes inflammation associated
with obesity. But propionate is also involved in gluconeogenesis, which diverts fatty acids away from cholesterol
synthesis and toward glucose synthesis. It also stimulates
the production of gut hormones that limit hunger, both
of which are anti-obesity effects. So, is there a correlation
between SCFA levels in the colon and obesity?
A study from Elena Comelli’s lab at the University of
Toronto found that a cohort of obese or overweight patients
generally had higher levels of SCFAs (propionate, butyrate, and acetate) than did healthy lean patients on similar
diets, and that SCFA levels did correlate to Firmicutes/
Bacteroidetes ratios. The more Firmicutes there were, the
more SCFAs were produced. However, obese and lean subjects actually had similar Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratios,
suggesting that the most important factor is which species
of Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes are present (and what they
are doing), rather than the overall phylum ratios.

Archaea in the gut might also tilt metabolic balance toward obesity. About 50% of humans have significant numbers of methane-producing archaea, primarily
Methanobrevibacter smithii (discussed in Chapter 21).
This archaeon can comprise up to 10% of the anaerobes
in the colons of healthy adults. Bruce Rittmann and colleagues from Arizona State University compared the numbers of Bacteria and Archaea in normal-weight, obese, and
post-gastric-bypass patients (Fig. 23.15). They discovered
that all three groups had highly diverse species of bacteria, but the obese group had significantly more archaea
than either the lean or gastric-bypass patients. This finding raised the possibility that Archaea may play a role in
obesity. But how?
One possible explanation comes from another study
by Jeffrey Gordon’s laboratory. His team colonized germfree mice with either Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron or
Methanobrevibacter smithii, or with both species together,
and found that when co-colonized, the methanogen dramatically altered the transcriptome of B. thetaiotaomicron.
The methanogen shifted the carbohydrate priority of Bacteroides from glucans to fructans and enticed more acetate production as a result. Higher levels of acetate could
enhance adiposity as outlined already. How the archaeon
modulated the anaerobe’s metabolism is not known, but it
may involve some form of quorum sensing.
In addition to energy harvesting, inflammation induced
by gut microbes appears to influence the development of
obesity and diabetes. Obese individuals are in a chronic
state of low-grade inflammation, characterized by elevated

CHAPTER 23

blood and tissue levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines and
markers of inflammation such as C-reactive protein (discussed in Section 23.6). The source of inflammation is
thought to be outer membrane lipopolysaccharides (LPS),
also called endotoxin, produced by Gram-negative members
of the gut microbiome. A high-fat diet promotes absorption of endotoxin across the intestinal epithelium and its
distribution to tissues via blood. LPS interacts with a cell
receptor called TLR4, present in a variety of host cells (see
Section 23.5). LPS-TLR4 interaction induces production
of pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-6, and reactive
oxygen species that interfere with the normal metabolism of liver, adipose, and skeletal muscle; all of which are
important to the regulation of glucose and lipid homeostasis. While some gut bacterial groups correlate with energy
intake, others, such as Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, influence obesity by altering inflammation. The presence of F.
prausnitzii, for example, reduces the low-grade inflammation associated with obesity and diabetes.
Can individual members of a lean-associated microbiome
treat obesity? We have gained tremendous insight into

host-microbe relationships from the various microbiome
projects under way. The data obtained thus far suggest that
different blends of microbiota influence the efficiency of
calorie harvesting from the diet, alter how derived energy is
stored, and modulate chronic inflammatory processes. But
can we pick out individual microbes or blends of microbes
to treat obesity or other gastrointestinal diseases?
Research is under way to identify individual members of
the microbiome that might individually, or in combination,
treat diseases such as IBS (irritable bowel syndrome), IBD,
or perhaps obesity. For example, Section 7.6 describes the
identification of the intestinal Firmicute Christensenella
minuta from human twins, which prevents weight gain
when transferred to germ-free mice. There is great hope
that we may one day cure or prevent these disorders using
this novel form of probiotic treatment.

To Summarize
■

■

■

Benefits of the microbiome include interfering with
pathogen colonization, producing immunomodulatory
proteins, metabolizing foods that the host cannot process (energy harvesting), producing vitamins that the
host cannot make, and honing our immune system.
Infections such as sepsis, abscesses, cystitis, and meningitis can be caused by some members of the microbiota if they breach the body’s containment mechanisms.
Dysbiosis of the microbiome can contribute to infection, obesity, and inflammatory and autoimmune
diseases.

■

■

■

HUMAN MICROBIOTA AND INNATE IMMUNITY

■

915

Probiotics are foods, or solutions, containing helpful members of a microbiome. Different probiotics can
restore balance to the intestinal or vaginal microbiomes.
Obesity has been linked to intestinal dysbiosis. An
increase in species able to harvest energy from ingested
foods and a decrease in species that temper inflammation
are involved.

23.3

Overview of the
Immune System

Given that we are surrounded by and host numerous bacteria, how is it we are not constantly infected? Here we begin
our discussion of the many layers of protection designed
to prevent infection and disease. As you will see, numerous physical and chemical barriers provide an effective first
line of defense against infection by invading microbes. As
such, they play a critical role in managing our resident ecosystems. But these barriers are not unbreachable. Organisms can still slip through. Consequently, humans, as well
as other mammals, have a more aggressive defense called
the immune system. The immune system is an integrated
system of organs, tissues, cells, and cell products that differentiates self from nonself and neutralizes potentially
pathogenic organisms or substances. This complex collection of cells and soluble proteins is capable of responding to
nearly any foreign molecular structure.

Innate and Adaptive Immunity

There are two broad types of immunity: innate immunity (often called nonadaptive immunity) and adaptive
immunity (discussed in detail in Chapter 24). Innate and
adaptive immunity have several key differences. Innate
immunity includes physical barriers such as skin, chemical barriers such as stomach acid, and relatively nonspecific
cellular responses to infection that engage if the physical
and chemical barriers are breached. The cellular innate
responses are triggered by microbial structures such as peptidoglycan and lipopolysaccharides. Innate immunity is
essentially “hardwired” into the body. It is present at birth,
so that mechanisms of innate immunity exist before the
body ever encounters a microbe. The protection afforded
by innate immunity is nonspecific, capable of blocking or
attacking many different types of foreign substances and
organisms.
In contrast to innate immunity, adaptive immunity is
designed to react to very specific structures called antigens.
An antigen is any chemical, compound, or structure foreign
to the body that elicits an immune response. The adaptive

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

immune response to a specific antigen is not launched until
the body “sees” that antigen. Adaptive immune mechanisms can recognize at least 1010 different antigenic structures and specifically launch a directed attack against each
one. Once such an attack has been activated, the organism
keeps a “memory” of the exposure in the form of specific
memory cells, and an encounter with the microbe years
later will reactivate the memory cells specific to the antigen.
The two types of immunity are illustrated by the
response of the immune system to infection by the microorganism Neisseria gonorrhoeae, which causes the sexually
transmitted disease gonorrhea. A component of the innate
immune response is complement, composed of several soluble protein factors constantly present in the blood. Within
moments of an initial infection, especially upon entering
the bloodstream, complement proteins form holes in the
bacterial membrane, thereby killing the microbe (see Section 23.6). Over time, the adaptive immune response will
generate specific antibodies made to the cells of N. gonorrhoeae that escaped the innate mechanisms. These antibodies, however, are not made until well after the organism
infects a person. Together, innate and adaptive immunity
can help ward off disease caused by this organism. Unfortunately, N. gonorrhoeae infection does not generate good
“memory,” so reinfection with this organism is possible.
It is important to know that the innate and adaptive
immune systems are interconnected. Antibodies made by
the adaptive immune system will trigger parts of the innate
immune system, such as the complement cascade that we
will discuss later. Likewise, activation of innate resistance
mechanisms will cause the release of small immunomodulatory peptides (cytokines) that influence the type and
strength of adaptive immunity brought to bear. In military
terms, it is similar to the army coordinating its actions with
those of the air and naval forces.

Infection versus Disease

Contact with an infectious agent does not guarantee that a
person will actually contract the disease. If the number of
infecting organisms is small and the immune system (innate
and adaptive) is effective, the individual may not develop
disease, although a person known to have been exposed to
certain microorganisms will be treated with antibiotics as
a preventive measure. Chapter 26 more fully discusses the
difference between being infected and having a disease.
Any microbe that launches a successful attack on a
human or other animal and causes disease must first breach
the host’s physical and chemical barriers to gain entrance to
the body. It must then survive the innate defense mechanisms and begin to multiply. Finally, the microbe must surmount the last line of defense, adaptive immunity, which
begins to respond as the microbe struggles to overcome

innate immune defenses. The rest of this chapter will discuss the various innate defense mechanisms. Adaptive
immunity is discussed in Chapter 24.
Although innate and adaptive immunity are often
treated as separate entities, certain kinds of cells and organs
play a role in both types of immunity. We thus introduce
various cells and organs of the immune system as a whole
before focusing on innate immunity. Our coverage of
innate immunity will include physical and chemical barriers
to infection, inflammation and nonspecific killing through
phagocytosis, neutrophil extracellular traps, interferon,
natural killer cells, and complement.

Cells of the Immune System

Blood is composed of red blood cells, white blood cells (also
generally known as leukocytes), and platelets (Fig. 23.16).
The many types of white blood cells are formed by the
differentiation of stem cells produced in bone marrow
(Fig. 23.17). Among these white blood cells are various
components of innate immunity that differentiated from
myeloid stem cells. These differentiated cells include:
■

Polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs)

■

Monocytes

■

Macrophages

■

Dendritic cells

■

Mast cells

White blood cell

Red blood
cell

Platelet

4 µm

FIGURE 23.16

EYE OF SCIENCE/SCIENCE SOURCE; (INSET) SCIMAT/GETTY IMAGES

916

Red blood cells, white blood cell, and a
platelet. This colorized scanning electron micrograph illustrates the
■

relative sizes and 3D morphologies of these components of blood.

CHAPTER 23

■

HUMAN MICROBIOTA AND INNATE IMMUNITY

■ Development of white
blood cell components of the immune
system. Pluripotent stem cells in bone mar-

Lymphoid
stem cell
(bone)

Myeloblast
Monoblast
Eosinophil

T cell,
processed
in thymus

Lymphocytes
Monocyte

Basophil
Neutrophil

Macrophage
Polymorphonuclear
leukocytes (PMNs)

Dendritic
cell

PMNs, also called granulocytes, are known for their
conspicuous multilobed nuclei and enzyme-rich lysosome
organelles. PMNs differentiate from an intermediate cell
called the myeloblast. There are several types of PMNs,
named for their different staining characteristics. Each cell
type has a different function. Neutrophils (Fig. 23.18A),

DR. FRED HOSSLER/VISUALS UNLIMITED

C. Monocyte

10 μm

DR. FRED HOSSLER/VISUALS UNLIMITED

B. Eosinophil

10 μm

Bacterium

10 μm

■ Types of white blood cells. A. Neutrophil
(PMN). B. Eosinophil. C. Monocyte. D. Lymphocyte (B cell or T cell).

1. Bacterium binds to the
surface of phagocytic cell.
Antibody or complement
can aid binding.

Adherence

3. Invagination of
phagocyte membrane
traps the organism
within a phagosome.

Golgi complex
Ingestion

Rough
endoplasmic
reticulum

Formation of
phagosome

Lysosome
Fusion

Phagocytic
cell

Nucleus

D. Lymphocyte (B cell or T cell)

10 μm

making up the vast majority of white cells in the blood,
can engulf microbes by phagocytosis. Phagocytosis
involves the extrusion of pseudopods that attach to and
envelop the pathogen, which ends up in a phagosome
vacuole. The phagocyte then kills the organism by fusing enzyme-gorged lysosomes with the phagosomes
(Fig. 23.19
). Enzymes spilling from the lysosome

2. Phagocyte
pseudopods
extend and engulf
the organism.

DR. FRED HOSSLER/VISUALS UNLIMITED

DR. JOHN D. CUNNINGHAM/VISUALS UNLIMITED

A. Neutrophil (PMN)

FIGURE 23.18

row divide to form two lineages. One lineage
consists of the myeloid stem cells, which
develop into polymorphonuclear leukocytes
(PMNs) and monocytes. These cells function primarily as part of innate immunity. The
other branch consists of the lymphoid stem
cells, which ultimately form natural killer cells,
B cells, and T cells. Final maturation into B
cells and T cells (the principal cells involved in
adaptive immunity) occurs in the bone marrow and thymus, respectively. Colors indicate
a group of differentiated cells that arise from
the same progenitor.

B cell,
processed
in bone
marrow

Natural killer
cell

Mast cell

917

FIGURE 23.17

Hematopoietic stem cell
(bone)
Myeloid
stem cell
(bone)

■

4. A lysosome fuses and
deposits enzymes into the
phagosome. Enzymes cleave
macromolecules and
generate reactive oxygen
species, destroying the
organism.

Phagolysosome

Destruction
of microbe

Release of
microbial debris

FIGURE 23.19

■

Phagosome-lysosome fusion.

918

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

SPECIAL TOPIC 23.1. .Are

NETs a Cause of Lupus?

It started with slight joint pain in her hands. Then, within
weeks, Annette developed searing pain in all her joints. Blood
tests revealed that Annette had systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), an autoimmune disease in which the immune system can mistakenly attack any part of the body. The name
“lupus” (Greek for “wolf”) comes from a butterfly-shaped
facial rash that resembles the pattern of fur on a wolf’s face
(Fig. 1). In addition to joint pain and skin rashes, SLE patients
may have heart arrhythmias, abdominal pain, difficulty breathing, fatigue, fever, and swollen lymph nodes—depending on
which parts of the body are under attack.
An important test used to diagnose lupus looks for antinuclear antibodies in the patient’s blood. Antibodies are small
proteins that usually bind substances foreign to the body
(see Chapter 24). Lupus patients, however, are autoreactive,
so they make antibodies to their own DNA and other “self”
proteins.
The mechanisms underlying SLE are complex and not
fully defined. One component that seems important is the
production of type I interferons. In addition to their role in
inhibiting viral replication, type I interferons increase the lytic
potential of natural killer cells (see Section 23.5) and stimulate the development of cytotoxic lymphocytes (via TH1 cells,
as discussed in Chapter 24). Both cell types can cause tissue
damage. Type I interferons can also lower the “threshold” for

making autoreactive antibodies. But what leads to increased
interferon production in lupus patients?
Recent evidence suggests that a unique subset of neutrophils present in all lupus patients can initiate a cycle of pronounced interferon production via NET formation. Figure 2
illustrates that these special neutrophils, called low-density
granulocytes (LDGs), more easily undergo NETosis, as compared to typical healthy control neutrophils or to normaldensity neutrophils from lupus patients. NETosis generates
an ample source of autoantigen, such as chromatin, to which
autoantibodies can be made, and helps propagate tissue
damage, especially to blood vessel endothelial cells, by NETentangled peroxidases and proteases.
But what stimulates interferon production? Autoantibodies that bind to antimicrobial peptides like LL-37 embedded
in NETs promote transport of DNA into circulating plasmacytoid dendritic cells, a primary source of interferon-alpha. The
subsequent interaction between DNA and Toll-like receptor 9
(TLR9 binds to CpG sequences in DNA) on these cells stimulates interferon-alpha production. Interferon-alpha not only
enhances natural killer (NK) cell and cytotoxic lymphocyte
activity, but also amplifies NET release by other LDGs (Fig. 3).
The end result is a cycle of inflammation and tissue damage that contributes to the symptoms of SLE. Stopping NET
release by LDGs could be a way to lessen those symptoms.

RESEARCH QUESTION
DR. KEN GREER/VISUALS UNLIMITED, INC.

How would you determine whether NET formation by LDGs
really stimulates interferon-alpha production by plasmacytoid
dendritic cells? Design an experiment using components of
the system and wells of a microtiter plate.

FIGURE 1

■

Characteristic butterfly rash of lupus.

into the phagosome will destroy various components
of the microbe and, ultimately, the microbe itself (see
Section 23.5).
Neutrophils also “throw” neutrophil extracellular
traps (NETs) around nearby pathogens. After interacting with bacteria, neutrophils can undergo an unusual
form of cell death, called NETosis, that spews a latticework of DNA (chromatin) impregnated with antimicrobial
compounds into the immediate area (Fig. 23.20). Much
as a fisherman’s net traps fish, NETs trap pathogens and
prevent them from spreading. Antimicrobial compounds

Villanueva, E., S. Yalavarthi, C. C. Berthier, J. B. Hodgin,
R. Khandpur, et al. 2011. Netting neutrophils induce endothelial damage, infiltrate tissues, and expose immunostimulatory molecules in systemic lupus erythematosus. Journal of
Immunology 187:538–552.

that impregnate the NET then kill the captured microbes.
NETs have also been implicated in certain autoimmune
diseases, such as systemic lupus erythematosus (Special
Topic 23.1).

Thought Question

23.4 Figure 23.20 shows how a neutrophil extracellular
trap can ensnare a nearby pathogen. What bacterial structure
might blunt the microbicidal effect of NETs?

HUMAN MICROBIOTA AND INNATE IMMUNITY

B. Lupus neutrophils

C. Lupus LDGs

■

919

DR. MARIANA J. KAPLAN, ET AL. © 2011 BY THE
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF IMMUNOLOGISTS, INC.

ca. 75 +m

■

DR. MARIANA J. KAPLAN, ET AL. © 2011 BY THE
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF IMMUNOLOGISTS, INC.

A. Control neutrophils

DR. MARIANA J. KAPLAN, ET AL. © 2011 BY THE
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF IMMUNOLOGISTS, INC.

CHAPTER 23

FIGURE 2

■ Circulating lupus low-density granulocytes undergo increased NETosis. Representative images of control
neutrophils (A), lupus normal-density neutrophils (B), and lupus low-density granulocytes (LDGs) (C) isolated from peripheral blood.
Cells were fixed to coverslips and stained for nuclei and NETs. Blue structures are fluorescently stained nuclei (Hoechst stain); NETs
are stained green by a fluorochrome-tagged antibody that binds to a protein (elastase) embedded in NET strands. Even without provocation, lupus LDGs release NETs.

1. Autoantibodies bind
neutrophil antimicrobial
peptide LL-37.
SLE
LL-37-specific
autoantibody

LL-37

2. Neutrophils
release NETs coated
with peptide LL-37.
NET

3. Autoantibody-dependent
uptake of DNA by
plasmacytoid dendritic cells.

Uptake of
self DNA
pDC
Antibody
to LL-37

CD32
RNP-specific
autoantibody

IFN-α

5. IFN-α enhances LL-37
expression on neutrophils,
which increases NET release.

NK cells
Cytotoxic

4. DNA binds to
TLR9 in vacuoles.
TLR9 stimulates
production of IFN-α.

FIGURE 3

■ NET stimulation of IFN-alpha. In systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), autoantibodies specific for ribonucleoproteins
(RNPs) and the antimicrobial peptide LL-37 accelerate the release of NETs by neutrophils (low-density granulocytes). The progressive increase in proteases and peroxidases released by NETs and the activation of natural killer (NK) cells and cytotoxic lymphocytes
enhance tissue damage. (CD32 is a membrane receptor for antibodies.) Source: Modified from Alberto Mantovanti et al. 2011. Nat. Rev. Immunol.

11:519–531.

Basophils, which stain with basic dyes, and eosinophils (Fig. 23.18B), which stain with the acidic dye eosin,
do not phagocytose microbes or throw NETs, but release
products, such as major basic protein, that are toxic to
the microbe. These two types of blood cells also release
chemical mediators (called vasoactive agents) that affect
the diameter and permeability of blood vessels (the significance of which is discussed in Section 23.5). Eosinophils play a major role in killing multicellular parasites such
as helminth worms. Mast cells are similar to basophils
in structure but differentiate in a lineage separate from

PMNs. Unlike PMNs, mast cells are residents of connective tissues and mucosa and do not circulate in the bloodstream. Basophils and mast cells also contain high-affinity
receptors for a class of antibody called immunoglobulin E (IgE) associated with allergic responses (detailed in
Section 24.7).

Note:

Because neutrophils constitute the vast majority of PMNs, the terms “neutrophil” and “PMN” are often used
interchangeably.

920

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY
A. Macrophage engulfing bacteria

NET

EYE OF SCIENCE/SCIENCE SOURCE

JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY, VOL 191, NO 3, 11/1/2010

Klebsiella

B. Dendritic cell

Monocytes (Fig. 23.18C) are white blood cells with a
single nucleus (not multilobed like a PMN); they engulf
(phagocytose) foreign material. Monocytes circulating in
the blood can migrate out of blood vessels into various
tissues and differentiate into macrophages and dendritic
cells (Fig. 23.21). Macrophages are phagocytic and form
a major part of the amorphous reticuloendothelial system, which is widely distributed throughout the body. The
reticuloendothelial system is a group of cells with the ability to take up and sequester particles. In addition to macrophages, the system is composed of specialized endothelial
cells lining the sinusoids (special capillaries) of the liver
(Kupffer cells), spleen, and bone marrow, as well as reticular
cells of lymphatic tissue (macrophages) and of bone marrow
(fibroblasts). The function of macrophages and the reticuloendothelial system is to phagocytose microorganisms.
Macrophages are present in most tissues of the body and
are the cells most likely to make first contact with invading pathogens. They have two functions. As part of innate
immunity, they kill invaders directly. Protrusions from the

DAVID SCHARF PHOTOGRAPHY

FIGURE 23.20 ■ Neutrophil extracellular trap (NET). An
infected mouse lung shows a Klebsiella pneumoniae bacterium (colorized; size approx. 1 μm) snared in a neutrophil extracellular trap
(green), a web of decondensed chromatin released by neutrophils to
catch and kill pathogens.

FIGURE 23.21

■ The innate immune system depends
on white blood cells called macrophages and dendritic
cells. A. Membrane protrusions from a macrophage (20 μm long)

detecting and engulfing bacteria (pink; E. coli, 1.5 μm long).
B. Dendritic cell. Colorized SEMs.

macrophage surface extend and clasp nearby bacteria, pulling them into the cell (Fig. 23.21A). Once ingested by the
macrophage, the bacteria are destroyed. Subsequently, as
the first step in adaptive immunity, the remnants are processed (degraded) into smaller peptides (called antigens),
which are then presented on the macrophage cell surface.
Specific white blood cells called T cells (a type of lymphocyte; see Chapter 24) can bind the displayed antigens and
become activated as part of the adaptive immune response.
Thus, macrophages are considered antigen-presenting
cells (APCs; see Chapter 24).

CHAPTER 23

Natural killer cells

■

921

the outside of the cell membrane. MHC I is an indicator
of “self.” (MHC II molecules are discussed in Chapter 24.)
NK cells have specific receptors that bind to self MHC I
molecules on the surfaces of other cells in the body. An
NK cell that “touches” a self MHC I–containing cell from
the same person will not attack that cell. However, if a
host cell lacks MHC class I molecules, NK cells perceive
the target as foreign and a potential threat. Host cells can
lose their MHC molecules during infection or as a result
of malignant transformation. When an NK cell encounters a host cell lacking these markers, the NK cell inserts a
pore-forming protein (perforin) into the membrane of the
target cell, through which cytotoxic enzymes are delivered.
Natural killer cells also contain antibody Fc receptors on their cell surface. The second killing mechanism,
called antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity
(ADCC), is activated when the Fc receptor on the NK cell
links to an antibody-coated host cell. Why would host cells
be coated with antibodies? During their replication, many
viruses place viral proteins in the membrane of the infected
cell. Antibodies to those viral proteins will coat the compromised cell, tagging it for ADCC. Once the compromised cell has been targeted, it is killed by the NK cell in
the same way as described for cells lacking MHC—namely,
by insertion of a perforin molecule. This killing mechanism is another example of cooperation between innate
immunity (NK cells) and adaptive immunity (antibodyproducing lymphocytes).
Diagnostic value of white blood cell ratios. Many diseases,

including infections, can alter the ratios of white blood
cells (WBCs). A WBC differential is a test that physicians
often order to help them diagnose infections and other syndromes. Table 23.1 presents general guidelines for interpreting a WBC differential, indicating which cell types
increase or decrease in response to infections with
bacteria, viruses, or parasites (protozoa or worms).
Notice that total WBC counts increase in each case,
but the type of WBC that increases in number differs with the infectious agent.

Infected target cell
Pseudopod extension
2 µm

FIGURE 23.22

HUMAN MICROBIOTA AND INNATE IMMUNITY

■ Natural killer cells. Natural killer (NK) cells attack
eukaryotic cells infected by microbes, not the microbes themselves. Perforin
produced by the NK cell punctures the membranes of target cells, causing
them to burst (colorized SEM).

EYE OF SCIENCE/SCIENCE SOURCE

Macrophages are not the only APCs; dendritic cells
(Fig 23.21B) are also APCs. Present in the spleen and
lymph nodes, they, like macrophages, can take up, process,
and present small antigens on their cell surface. Dendritic
cells are different from macrophages in structure and in the
fact that dendritic cells primarily take up small soluble antigens from their surroundings in addition to phagocytosing
whole bacteria.
Platelets are small, puzzle piece–shaped cell fragments
(they lack a nucleus) that derive from megakaryocytes, cells
that differentiate from the precursors of red blood cells.
Platelets, which circulate in the bloodstream, are required
for efficient blood clotting. When activated by damaged
endothelial cells (cells lining blood vessels), platelets clump,
become trapped by fibrin, and form plugs that stop bleeding. Several factors produced by platelets also help wound
repair. In addition to mediating blood clots and wound
repair, recent evidence shows that platelets are part of the
innate immune system. Invading bacteria can bind platelets and trigger the release of antimicrobial peptides (see
Section 23.4). Bacterially activated platelets can also induce
NET formation by neutrophils.
Natural killer (NK) cells derive from the lymphoid
stem cells shown in Figure 23.17 and are also part of
innate immunity. Instead of killing microbes, however, the
mission of NK cells is to kill host cells that harbor microorganisms or that have been transformed into cancer cells
(Fig. 23.22). Natural killer cells recognize changes in cellsurface proteins of infected or cancer cells (MHC class I
molecules; see Section 24.3) and then degranulate to
release chemicals that kill those cells.
Natural killer cells recognize their targets in two basic
ways: by the absence of MHC class I molecules on host
cells, or by the presence of antibodies on host cells. A normal host cell displays two classes of MHC molecules on

■

Lymphoid Organs

The lymphoid stem cells shown in Figure 23.17
produce lymphocytes as well as natural killer cells,
described earlier. Lymphocytes (Fig. 23.18D),
which are the main participants in adaptive immunity, are present in blood at about 2,500 cells per
microliter, accounting for over one-third of all
peripheral white blood cells. However, an individual lymphocyte spends most of its life within specialized solid tissues (lymphoid organs) and enters
the bloodstream only periodically, where it migrates

922

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

TABLE 23.1.Guidelines for Interpreting White Blood Cell (WBC) Counts*
Normal

Elevated during:

4,500–11,000
per mm3

Bacterial infection (12,000–30,000 per mm3); also viral and
parasitic infections, and allergy

Neutrophils

54%–62%

Bacterial infection (also high immature forms, band cells)

Eosinophils

1%–3%

Parasitic infection

Basophils

0%–0.75%

Allergy

Lymphocytes

25%–33%

Viral infection

Monocytes

3%–7%

Chronic infections

Total WBC count
(total leukocyte count)
Differential:

*These are general guidelines. Individual organisms or certain noninfectious medical conditions or immunological defects can alter the findings.

from one place to another, surveying tissues for possible
infection or foreign antigens. Consequently, most lymphocytes are found in the lymph nodes or spleen. No more
than 1% of the total lymphocyte population circulates in
the blood at any one time.
The tissues of the immune system, where the great
majority of lymphocytes are found, are classified as primary
or secondary lymphoid organs or tissues, depending on
their function (Fig. 23.23). The primary lymphoid organs
and tissues are where immature lymphocytes mature into
antigen-sensitive B cells and T cells. B cells, which ultimately produce antibodies (see Chapter 24), develop in
bone marrow tissue. whereas T cells, which modulate various facets of adaptive immunity, develop in the thymus, an
organ located above the heart.
The secondary lymphoid organs serve as stations where
lymphocytes can encounter antigens. These encounters
lead to the differentiation of B cells into antibody-secreting
plasma cells, and of T cells into antigen-specific helper cells,
as will be discussed in Chapter 24. The spleen is an example of a secondary lymphoid organ. It is designed to filter
blood directly and detect microorganisms. Macrophages in
the spleen engulf these organisms and destroy them, and
then migrate to other secondary lymphoid organs and present pieces of the microbe (called antigens) to the B and
T cells, which then become activated.
The lymph nodes are another kind of secondary lymphoid organ. Lymph nodes are arranged to trap organisms from local tissues, not from blood. Lymph nodes are
situated at various sites in the body where lymphatic vessels converge (for example, under the armpits). Lymphoid
tissues are also present in the mucosal regions of the gut
and respiratory tracts (for example, Peyer’s patches and
gut-associated lymphoid tissue, or GALT, discussed later).
Other secondary lymphoid organs are the tonsils, adenoids,
and appendix.

To Summarize
■

■

■

■

■

■

■

The immune system consists of both innate and adaptive mechanisms that recognize and eliminate pathogens.
Innate immunity includes physical and chemical barriers and some cellular responses to various microbial
structures.
Adaptive immunity is a cellular response to specific
structures (antigens) in which a memory of exposure is
produced.
Myeloid bone marrow stem cells differentiate to form
cells of the innate immune system—namely, phagocytic
PMNs, monocytes, macrophages, antigen-presenting
dendritic cells, and mast cells. Platelets are derived from
a different cell line.
Lymphoid stem cells differentiate into natural killer
cells (part of the innate immune system) and lymphocytes (cells of the adaptive immune system). Lymphocytes are classified as B cells, which ultimately
produce antibodies, and T cells, which regulate adaptive immunity.
Natural killer (NK) cells are a class of white blood
cells that continually patrol tissues for cancer cells, cells
infected with microbes, or host cells coated with antibody (antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity,
ADCC). NK cells kill by inserting pores of perforin
into target cell membranes.
Primary lymphoid organs include bone marrow (where
B cells develop) and the thymus (where T cells develop).
Secondary lymphoid organs (spleen, lymph nodes,
Peyer’s patches, tonsils, appendix) are where lymphocytes
encounter antigens.

CHAPTER 23

■

HUMAN MICROBIOTA AND INNATE IMMUNITY

■

923

infectious disease are composed of physical, chemical,
and cellular barriers designed to prevent a pathogen’s
access to host tissues. Although generally described as
nonspecific, some innate defense systems are more specific than others.

Tonsils and adenoids
Lymph nodes

Thymus
Lymph nodes

Spleen

Peyer’s patches
Appendix
Lymph nodes
Lymphatic vessels

The first line of defense against any potential microbial invader (either commensal or pathogenic) is found
where parts of the body interface with the environment. These interfaces (skin, lung, gastrointestinal
tract, genitourinary tract, and oral cavities) have similar
defense strategies, although each has unique characteristics. A defense common to all host surfaces involves
tight junctions—watertight adhesions that link adjacent epithelial cells at mucosal surfaces and endothelial
cells lining blood vessels. Tight junctions prevent bacteria, and even host cells, from moving between internal
and external host compartments. The “glue” that holds
tight junctions together is a series of interconnecting
glycoprotein molecules (Fig. 23.24).
Skin. Few microorganisms can penetrate skin, because

Bone marrow

Primary organs
Secondary organs

FIGURE 23.23

23.4

Physical Barriers to Infection

■

Lymphoid organs.

Physical and Chemical
Defenses against Infection

When defending a castle in medieval times, the first lines of
defense included physical barriers (the castle wall), chemical barriers (boiling oil tossed onto invaders trying to scale
the wall), and finally, hand-to-hand combat once the wall
was breached. Similarly, the body’s initial defenses against

of the thick keratin armor produced by closely packed
cells called keratinocytes. Keratin protein is a hard substance (hair and fi ngernails are made of it) that is not
degraded by known microbial enzymes. An oily substance (sebum) produced by the sebaceous glands also
covers and protects the skin. Its slightly acidic pH inhibits bacterial growth. Competition between species also
limits colonization by pathogens, and microorganisms
that manage to adhere are continually removed by the
constant shedding of outer epithelial skin layers.
Other, more specialized cells just under the skin can
recognize microbes managing to slip through the physical barrier. They are part of a consortium of cells called
skin-associated lymphoid tissue (SALT). Langerhans cells make up a significant portion of SALT.
They are specialized dendritic cells that can phagocytose microbes. Once a lymphoid Langerhans cell
has ingested a microbe, the cell migrates by ameboid
movement to nearby lymph nodes and presents parts of the
microbe to the immune system to activate antimicrobial
immunity.

Note:

Do not confuse phagocytic Langerhans cells with the
pancreatic “islets of Langerhans,” which secrete insulin.

Mucous membranes. Mucosal surfaces form the largest
interface (200–300 square meters) between the human host
and the environment (the intestine alone is 7–8 meters, or

924

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

23–26 feet, long). Mucous membranes in general present
sent
ntt a
containment problem. They must be selectively permeable
meab
b
ble
in order to exchange nutrients, as well as to export products
ducct
ctss
and waste components. At the same time, they mustt conco
onon
Lumen
stitute a barrier against invading
Tight junction
pathogens. Mucosal membranes
are covered with special tightly
Plasma membranes
knit epithelial layers that support
of adjacent cells
this barrier function. The mucus
secreted from stratified squamous
epithelial cells coats mucosal surMembrane proteins
that form tight junctions
faces and traps microbes. Compounds within the mucus can
Tight junction
serve as a food source for some commensal organisms,
s, but
b t
Epithelial cell
other secreted compounds—like the enzymes lysozyme
zym
me
xidase
ase
(which cleaves cell wall peptidoglycan) and lactoperoxidase
(which produces superoxide radicals)—can kill an organism
i
trapped in the mucus.
Semispecific innate immune mechanisms are also associated with mucosal surfaces. Host cells, even epithelial cells,
in mucosa have evolved mechanisms to distinguish harmless compounds from microorganisms. Patterns of conEpithelial cell
served structures on microbes, called microbe-associated
molecular patterns (MAMPs), are recognized by host
FIGURE 23.24 ■ Tight junctions hold adjacent cells
cell-surface receptors such as various Toll-like receptors and
together. Tight junctions are formed by an interconnected series
CD14 (discussed in Section 23.5). Once a MAMP has been
of glycoproteins (blowup). By tightly linking adjacent cell membranes
recognized, the host cell sends out chemicals that can actitogether, tight junctions produce a barrier through which bacteria,
viruses, and other host cells cannot easily pass.
vate immune system cells involved with innate and adaptive
immune mechanisms.

Note:

MAMPs were previously called PAMPs, for “pathogenassociated molecular patterns.” Because the structures recognized
are also present on nonpathogenic bacteria and viruses, the term
was changed to MAMP.

of mucosal immunity to pathogens. However, M cells can
also serve as a portal for some pathogens to gain entry to
the body.

Like skin, the gastrointestinal system possesses an
innate mucosal immune system, in this case called gutassociated lymphoid tissue (GALT). GALT includes
tonsils, adenoids, and Peyer’s patches (Fig. 23.25A).
These tissues include specialized M cells that dot the
intestinal surface and are wedged between epithelial cells.
“M” stands for “microfold,” which describes their appearance (Fig. 23.25B). These are fixed cells that take up
microbes (microbiota or pathogens) from the intestine
and release them, or pieces of them, into a pocket formed
on the opposite, or basolateral, side of the cell. Other
cells of the innate immune system, such as macrophages
(which migrate through tissues), gather here and collect
the organisms that emerge. Macrophages engulf and try
to kill the organism and then place small, degraded components of the organism on the macrophage cell surface,
where other immune system cells can recognize them. As a
result, M cells are extremely important for the development

The lungs. The lungs also have a formidable defense. In
addition to the mucociliary escalator discussed in Section 23.1, microorganisms larger than 100 μm become
trapped by hairs and cilia lining the nasal cavity and trigger
a forceful expulsion of air from the lungs (a sneeze). The
sneeze is designed to clear the organism from the respiratory tract. Organisms that make it to the alveoli are met by
phagocytic cells called alveolar macrophages. These cells
can ingest and kill most bacteria.
Another important factor that prevents lung infections is
an epithelial membrane protein called cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR). CFTR is a
membrane chloride channel that regulates chloride movement across the membrane—an essential part of hydrating
mucus in healthy individuals. Cystic fibrosis patients have
a defective CFTR and are much more susceptible to lung
infections, especially those caused by Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The P. aeruginosa strains posing the most serious

CHAPTER 23

■

HUMAN MICROBIOTA AND INNATE IMMUNITY

■

925

WWW.BU.EDU/HISTOLOGY/P/12001OBA.HTM

Peyer’s patch

P. aeruginosa

FIGURE 23.26

■ Mucoid strains of Pseudomonas
aeruginosa that infect cystic fibrosis patients. The

B. M cell

organism is shown growing in a biofilm with strings of
dehydrated exopolysaccharide (EPS) connecting cells. This
EPS material gives colonies of these strains a very mucoid
appearance. (Cells 2–3 µm long; SEM.)
Antigens or
bacteria are taken
up by the M cell.

Chemical Barriers to Infection

M cell
Lymphocyte
Macrophage

Antigens or bacteria that
exit the M cell are taken
up by macrophages.

FIGURE 23.25

■

Gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT).

A. A Peyer’s patch located on the small intestine. B. Diagram of an
M cell (microfold cell).

threat produce a thick slimy material (alginate) that retards
other lung clearance mechanisms (Fig. 23.26). How
CFTR helps protect lungs from infection is not clear. One
hypothesis is that normal CFTR is a receptor for P. aeruginosa lipopolysaccharide (LPS), which enables endocytosis
and killing of the microbe by phagolysosome mechanisms.
Another hypothesis is that normal CFTR helps maintain an
airway pH optimal for the activity of secreted antimicrobial
peptides. Either way, CFTR is part of the innate barrier
guarding against lung infection.

Some examples of chemical barriers were mentioned
previously, such as the acidic pH of the stomach,
lysozyme in tears, and generators of superoxide. In
addition, a variety of human cells generate small
antimicrobial, cationic (positively charged) peptides
called defensins (Table 23.2). These antimicrobial peptides are important components of innate
immunity against microbial infections.
Defensins range in length from 29 to 47
amino acids and are found in mammals, birds,
amphibians, and plants. Defensins (and other antimicrobial peptides) destroy an invading microbe’s
cytoplasmic membrane and are effective against
Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria, fungi,
and even some viruses (those with membranes,
like HIV). To kill, the peptides must bind the negatively charged outer membrane lipopolysaccharides (LPS)
of Gram-negative bacteria and move into the periplasm.
Defensins are then pulled into the cytoplasmic membrane
of either Gram-positive or Gram-negative bacteria by the
transmembrane electrical potential, about –150 mV in bacteria (that is, the cell interior is more negative than the
exterior). The peptides assemble into channels that destroy
the cytoplasmic membrane barrier, killing the bacterial cell.
Defensins generally do not affect eukaryotic cells, which
have a much lower membrane potential (–15 mV). Antimicrobial peptides are produced by many human cells,
including cells of the skin, lungs, genitourinary tract, and
gastrointestinal tract (Fig. 23.27). Specific defensins produced by different animals may partially explain pathogenhost specificity (see eTopic 23.1).

SEBASTIEN VILAIN/WWW.UNIV-ROUEN.FR/M2C/BACTERIES/
PSEUDOMONAS.HTML

A. Peyer’s patch

926

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

TABLE 23.2.Categories of Natural Antimicrobial Peptides
Class (Examples)

■

Major presence in humans (Source)
a

■

Alpha defensins (-1, -2, -3, -4)

Neutrophils (Stored in granules)

Alpha defensins (-5, -6)

Paneth cells, small intestine (Stored in granules)

Cathelicidins (LL-37, hCAP18)

Neutrophils (Secreted)

Histatins

Saliva (Secreted)

Beta defensins (HBD-1, -2)

Epithelia (Secreted)

Kinocidins (tPMP,b PF-4)

Platelets (Secreted)

■

Other species
Maganins

Frogs

Protegrins

Pigs

Indolicidin

Cattle

a

Alpha defensins are named alpha defensin-1, alpha defensin-2, etc.

Phagocytic alveolar macrophages inhabit
lung tissues, contributing to nonspecific
defense.
Chemical barriers against disease
include cationic defensins, acid pH in the
stomach, and superoxide produced by
certain cells.
Microbe-associated molecular patterns (MAMPs) are recognized by Tolllike receptors (TLRs) found on many
host cells, such as macrophages. Binding triggers release of chemical signaling
molecules that activate innate and adaptive immune mechanisms.

A.

b

tPMP = thrombin-induced platelet microbicidal protein.

Villus

Paneth cells

Crypt
B.
Membrane bleb

Thought Question

23.5 Why do defensins have to be so small? Do defensins kill
normal microbiota?

To Summarize
■

■

■

Skin defenses against invading microbes include closely
packed keratinocytes and a SALT lymphoid system made
up largely of phagocytic Langerhans cells.
Mucous-membrane defenses involve secreted enzymes,
cytokines, and GALT tissues, such as Peyer’s patches,
that contain phagocytic M cells.
M cells in gut-associated lymphoid tissues sample bacterial cells at their surface and release pieces of them to
immune system cells.

ca. 0.1 μm

G. MARTINEZ DE TEJADA ET AL. 1995. INFECTION AND IMMUNITY 63:3054.
© AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR MICROBIOLOGY HTTP://IAI.ASM.ORG/CGI/
REPRINT/63/8/3054.PDF

One form of vertebrate defensins (alpha) are stored in
membrane-enclosed granules within neutrophils and in
Paneth cells in the small intestine (Fig. 23.27A). When
stimulated, these cells degranulate (release their granule
contents) by fusing their granule membranes to cytoplasmic
or vacuolar membranes, dumping their contents into the
surroundings or into phagocytic vacuoles, where the alpha
defensins can destroy engulfed microbes (Fig. 23.27B). In
contrast, the beta defensins are not stored in cytoplasmic
granules. The synthesis of beta defensins is activated only
after contact with bacteria or their products. Other cationic
antimicrobial peptides are listed in Table 23.2. Neutrophil
cathelicidins are discussed in eTopic 23.2.

FIGURE 23.27 ■ Defensins. A. Certain defensins are produced
in the crypts of the intestine. The crypts contain granule-rich
Paneth cells (blowup) that discharge their granules into the crypt
lumen in response to the entry of bacteria or as a result of foodrelated stimulation by acetylcholine. B. Effect of cationic peptides
on E. coli O111. Polymyxin B is a small cationic peptide antibiotic
that mimics the action of defensins. In this micrograph, polymyxin B
causes blebs of membrane to ooze from the surface of the cell.

CHAPTER 23

23.5

Innate Immunity:
Surveillance, Cytokines,
and Inflammation

CULTURA RM/ALAMY STOCK PHOTO

SPL/SCIENCE SOURCE

The boil shown in Figure 23.28 is an inflammatory
response triggered by infection with the organism Staphylococcus aureus. Inflammation is a critical innate defense
in the war between microbial invaders and their hosts. It
provides a way for phagocytic cells (such as neutrophils)
normally confined to the bloodstream to gain access to

FIGURE 23.28

Inflammation caused by infection. Boil
resulting from infection of a hair follicle by Staphylococcus aureus
(size 0.5–1.0 µm). Blowup: Colorized SEM.
■

HUMAN MICROBIOTA AND INNATE IMMUNITY

■

927

infected sites within tissues. Movement of these cells out of
blood vessels is called extravasation or diapedesis, which
we discuss shortly. Once at the infection site, the neutrophils begin engulfing microbes. The white pus associated
with an infection is teeming with these white blood cells.
The five cardinal signs of inflammation, first described
over 2,000 years ago, are: redness, warmth, pain, swelling, and altered function at the affected site. In this section
we describe the pathophysiology of these signs and other
aspects of innate immunity.
Although many things can trigger inflammation,
we focus here on how microbes cause the response. The
process begins with the infection itself. Microorganisms introduced into the body—for example, on a wood
splinter—will begin to grow and produce compounds that
host cells sense or that damage host cells (Fig. 23.29 ).
Resident macrophages that wander into the infected area
engulf these organisms and then release inflammatory
mediators (chemoattractants) that “call” for more help.
These mediators include vasoactive factors such as leukotrienes, platelet-activating factor, and prostaglandins,
which act on blood vessels of the microcirculation, increasing blood volume and capillary permeability to help deliver
white blood cells to the area. In addition, small protein
molecules called cytokines are secreted, diffusing to the
vasculature and stimulating the expression of specific
receptors (selectins) on the endothelial cells of capillaries
and venules. But how are cytokines made in response to
an infection?

Extravasating
phagocyte

Pathogens
Capillary

■

Cytokines,
chemical
alarm signals

Macrophage

Phagocyte
Infection via splinter

FIGURE 23.29

Resident macrophages
engulf pathogens and
release cytokines.

Vasoactive factors and
cytokines help deliver
additional phagocytes.

Some cytokines initiate
healing as pathogens
are destroyed.

■ Basic inflammatory response. Neutrophils (a type of phagocyte) circulate freely through blood vessels and can squeeze
between cells in the walls of a capillary (extravasation) to the site of infection. They then engulf and destroy any pathogens they encounter.

928

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

TABLE 23.3.Examples of Toll-Like Receptors and NOD-Like Receptors
Receptor

MAMPs recognized

Source

Host cells

Location

TLR1

Lipopeptides

Bacteria

Monocytes/macrophages,
dendritic cells, B cells

Cell surface

TLR2

Glycolipids, lipoteichoic acids

Bacteria

Monocytes/macrophages, dendritic cells,
mast cells

Cell surface

TLR3

Double-stranded RNA

Viruses

Dendritic cells, B cells

Cell compartment

TLR4

Lipopolysaccharide,
heat-shock proteins

Bacteria

Monocytes/macrophages, dendritic cells,
mast cells, intestinal epithelium

Cell surface

TLR5

Flagellin

Bacteria

Monocytes/macrophages, dendritic
cells, intestinal epithelium

Cell surface

TLR6

Diacyl lipopeptides

Mycoplasma

Monocytes/macrophages, mast
cells, B cells

Cell surface

TLR9

Unmethylated CpG residues in DNA

Bacteria

Monocytes/macrophages

Cell compartment

NOD 1

Component of Gram-negative
peptidoglycan

Gram-negative
bacteria

Many cell types

Inflammasome

NOD 2

Peptidoglycan component

Bacteria

Macrophages, dendritic cells, epithelia
of lung and GI tract

Inflammasome

NLRP-3

Peptidoglycan

Bacteria

Many cell types

Inflammasome

NLRP-4

Flagellin, CpG, ATP, dsRNA

Bacteria

Many cell types

Inflammasome

Sensing the Invader:
Pattern Recognition
Receptors and Cytokines

The faster the body can detect the
presence of pathogens, the more
quickly it can begin to deal with
them. The more quickly it deals
with them, the better the outcome
of an infection. It takes time, however, for the adaptive immune system to make antibodies specific for
a microbe (see Chapter 24). All the
while, the pathogen can grow and
cause disease. Fortunately, bacteria
and viruses possess unique structures that immediately tag them
as foreign. Structures such as peptidoglycan, flagellin, and lipoteichoic acids are not normally present
in tissues unless bacteria or viruses
are present. These structures have
microbe-associated molecular patterns (MAMPs) that can be recognized by Toll-like or NOD-like
receptors (TLRs or NLRs) present on or in various host cell types
(Fig. 23.30; Table 23.3). TLRs
and NLRs are tantamount to burglar alarm systems that activate

Lipoteichoic
acid
opeptide
Lipopeptide

TLR2
2

Flagellin
Lipopolysaccharide
Lip
Lipopolysacch

TLR5
5

TLR4

TLR
R1
TLR1

1. M
MAMPs bind TLRs.
Sign
Signal is sent to nucleus to
induce cytokine synthesis.
indu

Cytokines

2. Some cytokines
are synthesized
and released.
Signal
pathways

Nucleus
Cytokines

6. Some cytokines
made as precursors
must be cleaved via
inflammasomes
before release.

MAMP
Pro-cytokines

3. NLRs bind
intracellular MAMPs.
NLR
4. Some NLRs activate
transcription of cytokines.

Cytokines
Inflammasome
5. Other NLRs trigger
assembly of inflammasomes.

FIGURE 23.30

■ TLRs, NLRs, and inflammasomes. Stimulation of TLRs and some NLRs
activates transcription factors to induce production of cytokines and other factors. Some cytokines
are directly released (for instance, IL-1, IL-8). Others are made as inactive precursors (procytokines)
that must be cleaved by inflammasomes. Inflammasome assembly is orchestrated by certain NLRs.

CHAPTER 23

upon encountering an intruder. Collectively, TLRs, NLRs,
and similar proteins are called pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) because they recognize MAMPs.
Toll-like receptors. First discovered in insects and named
Toll receptors, Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are evolutionarily conserved cell-surface glycoproteins present on the cells
of many eukaryotic genera (Fig. 23.30). The term “Toll”
came from Christiane Nüsslein-Volhard’s 1985 exclamation,
“That’s crazy!” (in German, “Das ist ja toll!”), when shown
the underdeveloped posterior of a mutant fruit fly. Thus, the
gene was dubbed “Toll.” TLRs in mammals display sequence
similarities to the Toll genes involved with insect embryogenesis (Nüsslein-Volhard was co-winner of the 1995 Nobel Prize
in Physiology or Medicine for her research on the control of
embryonic development). TLRs are transmembrane proteins
with an extracellular Toll/interleukin 1 receptor domain (TIR
domain). Humans have numerous Toll-like receptors, each of
which recognizes different MAMPs present on pathogenic
microorganisms, making them an innate defense mechanism
with some degree of specificity. For example, TLR2 binds to
lipoarabinomannan from mycobacteria, zymosan from yeasts,
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) from spirochetes, and peptidoglycan. TLR4, on the other hand, binds LPS, as well as host
proteins released at sites of infection (for example, heat-shock
protein 60). CD14, another host cell-surface protein, serves
as a coreceptor for LPS. Note that these receptors bind fragments of structures after they are released from the microbe.
They don’t interact with the whole organism.
Once bound to their ligands, the TLRs trigger an intracellular transcription regulatory cascade via their TIR
domain, causing the host cell to make and release cytokines that diffuse away from the site, bind to receptors on
various cells of the immune system (see Table 23.3), and
direct them to engage the invader. Cytokines are discussed
further here and in Chapter 24. The cells that respond to
cytokines can be part of innate immunity, adaptive immunity, or both. TLR recognition of MAMPs can also trigger autophagy in infected cells. Bruce Beutler and Jules
Hoffman shared the 2011 Nobel Prize in Physiology or
Medicine for their work on the role of TLRs in immunity.
NOD-like receptors. While TLRs are important sensors of
external MAMPs (or of MAMPs in endosomes), NODlike receptor (NLR) proteins are important cytoplasmic
sensors of MAMPs (see Table 23.3). NLRs are structurally similar to a family of plant proteins called NODs
(nucleotide-binding oligomerization domains) that provide
resistance to pathogens. In mammals, some NLRs bound
to a MAMP send a signal to the nucleus to activate cytokine
production. Other NLRs become part of large, intracellular
complexes of proteins called inflammasomes on which the
protease caspase-1 oligomerizes (see the Current Research
Highlight). Some cytokines (IL-1β and IL-18) are made as

■

HUMAN MICROBIOTA AND INNATE IMMUNITY

■

929

large, inactive precursor proteins (procytokines) that must
be processed by caspase-1 cleavage to make an active cytokine. The array of cytokines released stimulates inflammation and activates adaptive immune mechanisms.

Type I Interferons Are
“Intruder-Alert” Cytokines

When a community is threatened by a thief, a neighbor who
has been robbed alerts others to take precautions. Something similar happens during viral infections. In 1957, it was
discovered that cells exposed to inactivated viruses produce
at least one soluble factor that can “interfere” with viral
replication when applied to newly infected cells. The term
interferon was coined to represent these molecules. Interferons are low-molecular-weight cytokines (14–20 kDa)
produced by many eukaryotic cells in response to intracellular infection. The action of interferons is usually species
specific (interferon from mice will not work on human cells)
but virus nonspecific (human interferon will help protect
against both poliovirus and influenza virus, for example).
There are two general types of interferons, which differ
in the receptors they bind and the responses they generate.
Type I interferons have high antiviral potency; they consist
of IFN-alpha (IFN-α), IFN-beta (IFN-β), and IFN-omega
(IFN-ω). Type II interferon, IFN-gamma (IFN-γ), has more
of an immunomodulatory function, discussed in Chapter 24.
Type I interferons can bind to specific receptors on
uninfected host cells and render those cells resistant to
viral infection. The host cell becomes resistant because
interferon induces the intracellular production of two
classes of proteins. One class encompasses double-stranded
RNA-activated endoribonucleases that can cleave viral
RNA. Proteins in the second class are protein kinases that
phosphorylate and inactivate eukaryotic initiation factor 2 (eIF2), which is required to translate viral RNA.
These mechanisms affect both RNA and DNA viruses
because protein synthesis is required for the propagation
of all viruses. However, RNA viruses are better than DNA
viruses at inducing interferon. Type I interferons are used
to treat certain viral infections (for example, hepatitis C).
Type II interferon functions by activating various white
blood cells—for example, macrophages, natural killer cells,
and T cells—to, among other things, increase the number
of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) antigens on
their surfaces. MHC proteins are important for recognizing self and for presenting foreign antigens to the adaptive
immune system. They are discussed more fully in Chapter 24.

Acute Inflammation

In medicine, the term “acute” means “rapid onset.” Acute
inflammation, for instance, is inflammation that develops
rapidly, usually within a day, after a foreign object such as

930

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

selectins snag neutrophils zooming by in the bloodstream, slow them down, and cause them to roll
along the endothelium (Fig. 23.31). Rolling neutrophils that encounter inflammatory mediators are
activated to produce and display integrin adhesion
molecules on their surface. Integrins on neutrophils lock onto the endothelial adhesion molecules
ICAM-1 (intercellular adhesion molecule 1) and
VCAM-1 (vascular cell adhesion molecule 1). Binding to these endothelial adhesion molecules stops
the neutrophils from rolling and initiates extravasation in which the white blood cells squeeze through
the endothelial wall and into the tissues.
The passage of neutrophils through vascular walls
also requires relaxation of adhesion between endothelial cells. Vasoactive factors such as bradykinin,
a nine-amino-acid polypeptide released by damaged
tissue cells and macrophages, increase vascular permeability so that neutrophils can pass through vessel
walls (Fig. 23.32). Increased vascular permeability
also allows blood plasma to escape into tissues, causing swelling (edema). Even though tight junctions

1. Cytokine signaling molecules
made by damaged cells activate
synthesis of endothelial cell selectins.
Progressive activation

ICAM-1 and VCAM-1
Neutrophil

Bacteria
Extravasation
Endothelium

2. Selectins capture
neutrophils, which begin
to roll along the vessel wall.

3. White-cell integrins
are made and bind to
ICAM-1 and VCAM-1.

4. Neutrophils
squeeze between
endothelial cells.

FIGURE 23.31

■ Mechanism of extravasation. Extravasation is the process by which neutrophils move from the bloodstream into surrounding tissues.

a splinter or infectious agent is introduced into the body. Chronic inflammation develops over long periods of
time. The function of acute inflammation is to wall off, kill, or digest the
intruder, thereby quickly resolving an
infection and promoting healing of the
affected area. Neutrophils play a central role in the inflammatory process.
Neutrophils, however, normally
reside in the circulation. How do they
find the infection site? Certain cytokines
synthesized after MAMPs bind to PRRs
are called chemokines (examples are
IL-8 and MCP-1). Chemokines diffuse
from a site of infection toward nearby
capillaries and form a concentration gradient. Then, like a fox following a prey’s
scent, neutrophils leave the bloodstream
and follow the gradient back to the
infection. But how do neutrophils pass
through blood vessel walls?
The events leading to extravasation
begin when the cytokines interleukin 1
(IL-1) and tumor necrosis factor alpha
(TNF-alpha), released by macrophages,
stimulate the production of adhesion
molecules (selectins) on the inner lining of the capillaries. P-selectin is produced first, followed by E-selectin. The

1. Bacteria
infect tissue.

Bacteria

Tissue

2. Macrophages engulf
bacteria and release
chemical mediators.
6. Peptides from the bacteria and
chemical signals from the infected
tissues are released and attract
neutrophils.
Macrophage

Mast
cell

Nerve

Chemokines
Cytokines
3. Cytokines induce
selectins on capillary
endothelia that
bind to neutrophils.

fMetLeu-Phe

Histamine
Bradykinin

Vasoactive
factors

Selectins ICAM/
VCAM

Integrin
Neutrophil

FIGURE 23.32

4. Vasoactive factors induce
integrins on neutrophils, which
bind ICAM and VCAM.

■

Summary of the inflammatory response.

Prostaglandins

5. Bradykinin loosens
junctions to allow
extravasation and
triggers prostaglandin
synthesis.

Capillary

CHAPTER 23

are loosened, to actually pass between endothelial cells, activated neutrophils need the enzyme sialidase to temporarily
break carbohydrate linkages that hold tight junctions together.
Bradykinin also triggers degranulation of mast cells. The histamine released from mast cells further loosens the endothelial
cell junctions. More fluid enters tissues and accumulates.
In addition to increasing vascular permeability, bradykinin and histamine relax smooth muscles within blood
vessel walls so that vessel diameter increases (vasodilation).
Vasodilation slows blood flow and, as a result, increases
blood volume in the affected area. Increased vascular permeability and vasodilation cause the localized swelling,
redness, and heat associated with inflammation.
Thought Question

■

© NATIONAL INSTITUTE FOR MEDICAL RESEARCH

A. White blood cell attacking bacteria

23.7 What happens to all the neutrophils that enter a site of
infection once the infection has resolved?

Phagocytes Recognize Alien
Cells and Particles

For phagocytosis to proceed, macrophages and neutrophils must first recognize the surface of a particle as foreign (Fig. 23.33). When a phagocyte surface interacts with

C. Macrophage engulfing bacteria

D. Streptococcus pneumoniae
and capsule

5 µm

ca. 0.5 µm

2 µm

CDC

2 µm

DENNIS KUNKEL MICROSCOPY, INC.

Capsule

FIGURE 23.33

931

Thought Question

B. Contacts between phagocyte
and target microbe

RUSS SALTER, PH.D. AND MARC RUBIN, MBA

■

Once neutrophils have passed through the vascular wall,
chemokines lure them to the proper location. In addition,
neutrophils can sense certain microbial chemoattractants—
fMet-Leu-Phe peptide, for instance. Many bacterial proteins
have fMet (N-formylmethionine) as their N-terminal amino
acid, but mammalian proteins, in general, do not. Bacteria will often cleave off the fMet peptide, which can then
diffuse away from the bacterium. The fMet peptide binds
to neutrophil receptors and stimulates pseudopod projections aimed toward the microbe. As a result, the white
blood cell migrates in the direction of the infection. Once
phagocytes arrive at the site of infection, they begin devouring microbes. Realize, however, that much of the damage
caused by an infection is not due directly to the microbe but
is the result of the body’s reaction to its presence.

23.6 As illustrated in Figure 23.31, integrin is important for
neutrophil extravasation. Some individuals, however, produce
neutrophils that lack integrin. What is the likely consequence
of this genetic disorder?

What causes the pain of inflammation? Bradykinin
induces capillary cells to make prostaglandins that cause
pain by stimulating nerve endings in the area. A key
enzyme involved in prostaglandin synthesis is cyclooxygenase (COX). Aspirin, ibuprofen, and the anti-inflammatory
agent naproxen are COX inhibitors that prevent the synthesis of prostaglandins and thus reduce inflammatory pain.

HUMAN MICROBIOTA AND INNATE IMMUNITY

Images of phagocytosis. A. A white blood cell phagocytosing Mycobacterium cells (green, 2 μm long; colorized SEM). B. Contacts
between phagocyte and target microbe, illustrating how phagocytes “grab”
the target bacterium. C. A macrophage engulfing bacteria on the outer surface
of a blood vessel (SEM, magnification 1,315×). D. Streptococcus pneumoniae
and capsule (India ink preparation). The slippery nature of the polysaccharide
capsule makes phagocytosis more difficult.
■

932

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

the surface of another body cell, the phagocyte becomes
temporarily paralyzed (unable to form pseudopods). Paralysis allows the phagocyte to evaluate whether the other cell
is friend or foe, self or nonself. Self recognition involves
glycoproteins located on the white blood cell membrane
binding inhibitory glycoproteins present on all host cell
membranes. The inhibitory glycoprotein on human cells is
called CD47. Because invading bacteria lack these inhibitory surface molecules, they can readily be engulfed.
Although many bacteria, such as Mycobacterium or Listeria species, are easily recognized and engulfed by phagocytosis (Fig. 23.33A–C), others, such as Streptococcus
pneumoniae, possess polysaccharide capsules that are too
slippery for pseudopods to grab (Fig. 23.33D). This is
where innate immunity and adaptive immunity join forces.
Adaptive immunity produces anticapsular antibodies that
aid the innate immune mechanism of phagocytosis through
a process known as opsonization (Fig. 23.34). The anticapsular antibodies coat the surface of the bacterium, leaving the tail end of the antibodies, called the Fc region (see
Section 24.2), pointing outward. These bacteria are said
to be “opsonized.” The Fc regions of these antibodies are
recognized and bound by specific receptors on phagocyte
cell surfaces. As a result, the antibodies stick the opsonized
bacteria to phagocytic Fc receptors, which allow the phagocyte to more easily engulf the invader.

Thought Question

23.8 If NK cells can attack infected host cells coated with
antibody, why won’t neutrophils?

Oxygen-Independent and -Dependent
Killing Pathways

During phagocytosis, the cytoplasmic membrane of the
phagocyte flows around, and then engulfs, the bacterium,
producing an intracellular phagosome, as described earlier. Subsequent phagosome-lysosome fusion (producing
a phagolysosome; see Fig. 23.19) results in both oxygenindependent and oxygen-dependent killing pathways. Mechanisms independent of oxygen include enzymes like lysozyme
to destroy the cell wall, compounds such as lactoferrin to
sequester iron away from the microbe, and defensins, small
cationic antimicrobial peptides (described in Section 23.4).
Oxygen-dependent mechanisms are activated through Tolllike receptors (discussed later in this section) and kill through
the production of various oxygen radicals. NADPH oxidase,
myeloperoxidase, and nitric oxide synthetase in the phagosome membrane are extremely important. NADPH oxidase
yields superoxide ion (•O2–), hydrogen peroxide, and, ultimately, hydroxyl radicals (•OH) and hydroxide ions (OH–).
NADPH oxidase
superoxide dismutase
NADPH + 2O2 ⎯→ NADP+ + H+ + 2•O2 – ⎯→
myeloperoxidase
H 2O2 + Cl– ⎯→ OH– + HOCl
Myeloperoxidase, present only in neutrophils, converts hydrogen peroxide and chloride ions to hypochlorous acid (HOCl).
Macrophages, mast cells, and neutrophils also generate
reactive nitrogen intermediates that serve as potent cytotoxic
agents. Nitric oxide (NO) is synthesized from arginine by NO
synthetase. Further oxidation of NO by oxygen yields nitrite
(NO2–) and nitrate (NO3–) ions. All of these reactive oxygen

Opsonization: Antibodies bind to bacteria,
and the Fc portion of the antibodies binds to
receptors on the macrophage surface.
Extracellular
bacteria approach
macrophage.

Fc receptor

Antibody

Extracellular
bacteria
Fc region

Fc receptor
Ingestion by macrophage:
Antibodies link bacteria and
macrophage, aiding
phagocytosis.

FIGURE 23.34

Digestion in
lysosome

■ Opsonization. Opsonization is a process that facilitates phagocytosis. Here, macrophage Fc receptors bind to the Fc
region of antibodies binding to bacteria.

CHAPTER 23

■

HUMAN MICROBIOTA AND INNATE IMMUNITY

■

933

species attack bacterial membranes and proteins. These mechanisms greatly increase oxygen consumption during phagocytosis, called the oxidative burst. The reactive chemical
species formed during the oxidative burst do little to harm the
phagocyte because the burst is limited to the phagosome and
because the various reactive oxygen species, such as superoxide, are very short-lived. Although phagocytes are very good
at clearing infectious agents, many bacteria have developed
ways to outsmart this aspect of innate immunity.

clear themselves of intracellular pathogens. During autophagy, the cell constructs a double membrane around the
organism (or damaged organelle). This structure, called the
autophagosome, sequesters the microbe from the nutrientrich cytosol. Lysosomes then fuse with the autophagosome,
depositing degradative enzymes that digest the organism.
Ever-adapting intracellular microbes, however, have found
ways to suppress autophagy and survive.

Autophagy and Intracellular Pathogens

Chronic Inflammation Causes
Permanent Damage

E. Crohn’s disease

DAVID M. MARTIN, M.D./SCIENCE SOURCE

Granulomas

FIGURE 23.35

C. Liver granuloma

RUSSELL, ET AL. 2010. CELL HOST & MICROBE. 8: 68–76.

B. Fish tank granuloma

HTTP://EASYPEDIATRICS.COM/PEDIATRIC-CROHNS-DISEASE

D. Healthy colon

Inflammation that persists over months or years is called
chronic inflammation and is provoked by the long-term
presence of a causative stimulus. Chronic inflammation
inevitably causes permanent tissue damage, even though the
body attempts repair. The causes of chronic inflammation
are many. For example, infectious organisms such as Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Actinomyces bovis, and various protozoan parasites can avoid or resist host defenses (Fig. 23.35).

WWW.AQUATOUCH.COM/GRANULOMA.HTM

A. Mycobacterium tuberculosis

CENTER FOR TUBERCULOSIS RESEARCH, JOHNS HOPKINS UNIVERSITY

Intracellular pathogens that grow in eukaryotic cytoplasm
can be a serious problem for the host. Many pathogens,
such as Mycobacterium tuberculosis, the cause of tuberculosis, enter the host cell in ways that bypass endosome formation or, if they do enter via an endosome, can escape from
that compartment. These pathogens block normal host cell
clearance pathways. To circumvent this problem, eukaryotic host cells (not just phagocytes) use a process that normally degrades damaged organelles (called autophagy) to

■ Chronic inflammation. A. The fluorescent orange organisms shown here are Mycobacterium tuberculosis (2 μm
long; fluorescence microscopy) within macrophages in a tuberculosis abscess. B. Fish tank granuloma. Mycobacterium marinum can cause
tuberculosis-like infection in fish. The organism accidentally enters the human body through an open wound or abrasion during cleaning of an
aquarium containing infected fish. The infection is first noted as a lesion that heals very slowly on the hand or forearm. Once it does heal, it often forms a granuloma at the site that contains live organisms. C. Cross section of liver showing a necrotizing granuloma caused by M. tuberculosis that spread through the bloodstream to this site after escaping the lung. D. Healthy colon. E. Intestinal granulomas of Crohn’s disease.

934

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

As a result, they persist at the site and continually stimulate the basic inflammatory response. The continual
stimulation of an inflammatory response leads to chronic
inflammation.
Nonliving, irritant material like wood splinters, inhaled
asbestos particles, or surgical implants can also cause
chronic inflammation. Autoimmune diseases are another
important cause. Autoimmunity (reaction against self)
occurs when there is a failure to regulate some aspect
of adaptive immunity (see Chapter 24). As a result, the
immune system recognizes a part of the body as foreign
(not self) and begins to react against it. Rheumatoid arthritis is one example of the body attacking itself.
Whatever causes chronic inflammation, macrophages
and lymphocytes are continually recruited from the circulation. The body may attempt to “wall off” the site of
inflammation by forming a granuloma. A granuloma
begins as an aggregation of the mononuclear inflammatory
cells surrounded by a rim of lymphocytes. The body then
deposits fibroconnective tissue around the lesion, causing
tissue hardening known as fibrosis.
Several forms of granulomas are shown in Figure 23.35.
M. tuberculosis, for example, has a thick, waxy cell wall that
protects mycobacteria against the mechanisms used by
macrophages to destroy microorganisms. As a result, the
organisms live for prolonged periods within macrophages
(Fig. 23.35A). Resistance to host defenses can produce
long-term chronic infections and granulomas. For example, skin infections caused by Mycobacterium marinum will
produce skin granulomas (Fig. 23.35B), while M. tuberculosis can cause liver granulomas (Fig. 23.35C). Another
disease thought to involve granuloma formation is Crohn’s
disease, which commonly manifests as abdominal pain,
frequent bowel movements, and rectal bleeding. Crohn’s
disease has been attributed to an autoimmune reaction possibly activated by intestinal microbiota. In this case, the
intestinal bacteria are thought to cause a chronic inflammation resulting in characteristic granulomas (compare
Fig. 23.35D and E).

To Summarize
■

Acute inflammation begins when host cells are damaged or infected. The process walls off and digests invading microbes, and initiates the healing of affected areas.
Damaged cells or tissue macrophages release vasoactive
factors that produce vasodilation and increased vascular permeability, cytokines that stimulate the production
of blood vessel selectin receptors, and chemoattractant
molecules that cause neutrophil movement (extravasation) from the bloodstream into infected tissues.
Bradykinin causes the release of prostaglandins, which

produce pain in the affected area. The cardinal signs of
inflammation include redness, warmth, swelling, pain,
and loss of function.
■

■

■

■

■

■

Surface Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and cytoplasmic
NOD-like receptors (NLRs) in most host cells recognize microbe-associated molecular patterns (MAMPs)
and synthesize cytokine proteins that diffuse and activate other cells of the immune system.
Interferons are one group of cytokines that can nonspecifically interfere with viral replication (type I) or
modulate the immune system (type II).
Phagocytic cells have oxygen-independent and
oxygen-dependent mechanisms of killing initiated
by the fusion of lysosomes and bacteria-containing
phagosomes.
The oxidative burst, a large increase in oxygen consumption during phagocytosis, results in the production
of superoxide ions, nitric oxide, and other reactive oxygen species.
Autophagy is a process by which intracellular bacteria can be sequestered from the cytoplasm (via an
autophagosome) and killed following fusion with a
lysosome.
Chronic inflammation results from the persistent presence of a foreign object.

23.6

Complement and Fever

White blood cells (WBCs) engulf and kill pathogens, but
can simple serum proteins also kill microbes? Yes, a series
of 20 serum proteins (complement factors) that make up
the complement cascade can also attack bacterial invaders.
Complement was first discovered as a heat-labile component of blood that enhances (or complements) the killing
effect of antibodies on bacteria. Several complement factors
are proteases that sequentially form and cleave other complement factors. (The liver is the main source of complement proteins.) Once a complement cascade is triggered,
several things happen. Pores are inserted into bacterial
membranes, causing cytoplasmic leaks, while pieces of some
complement proteins attract WBCs and facilitate phagocytosis (opsonization).

Complement Activation Pathways

The three routes to complement activation are officially
known as the classical pathway, the alternative pathway,
and the lectin pathway. The classical complement pathway

CHAPTER 23

depends on antibody, so it is part of adaptive rather than
innate immunity and is discussed in the next chapter
(Section 24.4). The lectin pathway requires the synthesis of mannose-binding lectin by the liver in response to
macrophage cytokines. Lectin coats the surface of invading microbes and activates complement without antibody.
The lectin pathway connects to the classical complement
pathway. We focus here in Chapter 23 on the alternative
pathway because it is a well-characterized part of innate
resistance. Like the lectin pathway, the alternative pathway
is a nonspecific defense mechanism that does not require
antibody for activation. The alternative complement pathway can attack invading microbes long before a specific
immune response can be launched.
One goal of the complement cascade is to insert pores
into target microbial membranes. The pores destroy membrane integrity, and thus kill the cell. The alternative
complement pathway begins with the complement factor C3. In blood, C3 slowly cleaves into C3a and C3b
(Fig. 23.36, step 1). C3b, under normal circumstances,

1. In blood, C3 spontaneously
cleaves slowly into C3a
C3
and C3b.

HUMAN MICROBIOTA AND INNATE IMMUNITY

■

935

is rapidly degraded—a process that thwarts inadvertent
complement activation. However, if C3b meets LPS on
an invading Gram-negative microbe, the bound C3b
becomes stable and binds another factor, designated factor B (step 2), and makes factor B susceptible to cleavage
by yet another protein, factor D (step 3). The resulting
complex, called C3bBb, has two roles. It is a C3 convertase that can quickly cleave more C3 to amplify the cascade and is changed by another serum protein (properdin)
into what is called C5 convertase (step 4). From this point
on, all complement pathways are identical. C5 convertase cleaves C5 in serum to C5a and C5b (step 5), and
C5b then forms a prepore complex by binding to C6 and
C7 (step 6). The resulting C5bC6C7 complex binds to
membranes. Finally, C8 and C9 factors join in to form the
membrane attack complex (MAC), becoming a destructive pore (step 7).
In Gram-negative bacteria, MAC pores first form
in the outer membrane (Fig. 23.36, step 7). Lysozyme (present in serum) enters through the MAC outer

C3a
C3b

2. If C3b meets lipopolysaccharide (LPS) on an
invading Gram-negative microbe, the bound C3b
becomes stable and binds another factor,
designated factor B . . .
3. . . . and makes factor B susceptible to
cleavage by yet another protein, factor D.
4. The resulting complex, called
C3bBb, is changed into C5
convertase by properdin, another
serum protein.

5. C5 convertase cleaves C5
in serum to C5a and C5b.

■

C3b
B

C3b
B

D

C3 convertase
Gram-negative cell

Ba
Properdin
C5
C3b
Bb

C5a

+

C5 convertase

C5b

C6
C7

6. C5b now starts to form a
prepore complex by binding
to C6 and C7.

Membrane
attack
complex

C6 b
C5 7
C
C6
C5b
C7
C8

C8
7. The resulting C5bC6C7 complex binds to
membranes. Finally, C8 and C9 factors join in to form
the membrane attack complex (MAC), becoming a
destructive pore in the membrane of the target cell.
C9

FIGURE 23.36
innate defense.

■

The alternative complement pathway. Although called “alternative,” this complement cascade is part of the first-line

936

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

KENNETH EWARD/BIOGRAFX/SCIENCE SOURCE

membrane pores and cleaves peptidoglycan, making the
cell membrane more susceptible to the membrane attack
complex. The inner membrane MAC pores destroy membrane integrity and, with it, proton motive force. Grampositive bacteria are resistant to complement because
they lack an outer membrane (and therefore have no LPS
to efficiently start the cascade) and have a thick peptidoglycan layer that hinders access of complement components. Even in the absence of LPS, however, there
are ways to activate complement that involve antigenantibody complexes (see Section 24.4). Eukaryotic cells
infected with viruses and coated with antibody can also
activate complement via the antibody-dependent classical
complement pathway.

Thought Question

23.9 Figure 23.36 shows how the complement cascade can

destroy a bacterial cell. Factor H (not shown) is a blood protein
that regulates complement activity. Factor H binds host cells
and inhibits complement from attacking our cells by accelerating degradation of C3b and C3bBb. How could bacteria take
advantage of factor H?

Other Roles for Complement
Peptides in Innate Immunity

Factor C3b, in addition to initiating the complement cascade, is a potent opsonin. An opsonin is any factor that can
promote phagocytosis (related to opsonization, described
earlier). PMNs (neutrophils) have specific C3b receptors on
their surface. Thus, when C3b binds to a bacterial cell surface, it tags that cell and makes it easier for PMNs to grab
and engulf the organism.
The complement fragments C5a (which forms part
of the prepore complex) and C3a have many roles in
immune function. They are anaphylatoxins, which trigger degranulation of vasoactive factors such as histamine
from endothelial cells, mast cells, or phagocytes. They can
also stimulate chemotaxis of immune cells. C5a and C3a
bind to separate receptors on WBC plasma membranes
and activate separate signal cascade pathways. C5a triggers Ca 2+ release from intracellular stores and stimulates
the actin polymerization needed for cell migration. Conversely, C3a triggers Ca 2+ influx, which facilitates extravasation. These peptide mediators also stimulate the release
of certain cytokines, such as IL-4 from monocytes and
mast cells, that prepare capillary endothelium for the rolling and adhesion of neutrophils. C5a will also up-regulate
P-selectin and ICAM-1. Thus, some complement factors not only help directly destroy target bacterial cells,
but also facilitate phagocytosis and contribute directly to
inflammation.

FIGURE 23.37

■ C-reactive protein. The 3D structure of
pentameric human C-reactive protein (CRP) is unique. CRP is
synthesized as a 206-amino-acid polypeptide that folds to form a
flattened jelly roll structure, which then assembles into a radially
symmetrical pentamer that circulates in serum. This structure can
bind bacterial cell surfaces and C3 complement factor.

Acute-Phase Reactants,
Complement, and Heart Disease

As noted earlier, inflammation is associated with the
production of various cytokines by macrophages. Some
of these cytokines (such as IL-1, TNF-alpha, and IL-6)
travel to the liver, where they stimulate synthesis of several
so-called acute-phase reactant proteins, including C-reactive protein. Named for its ability to activate complement, C-reactive protein is an acute-phase reactant that
will bind to components of bacterial cell surfaces but not
to host cell membranes (Fig. 23.37). Once tied to the
bacterial cell surface, C-reactive protein will bind complement factor C1q of the classical complement pathway
(see Chapter 24), ultimately converting factor C3 to C3b,
propagating the complement cascade. C-reactive protein
accelerates C3b production at the bacterial surface, where
it can do the most damage. Note that an elevated level of
C-reactive protein in serum is considered a general indicator of inflammation, not just inflammation caused by
infection.

Fever

What is fever, and why is it a good thing? To understand
fever, we first need to know how the body controls its temperature (themoregulation). Heat in a human body is produced as a consequence of metabolic reactions. The liver

CHAPTER 23

and muscles are the major generators of heat and will warm
the blood that passes through them. In a healthy person,
body temperature is kept between 36°C and 38°C (97°F
and 100°F), despite large differences in surrounding temperature and physical activity. Fever is defined as an oral
temperature above 100.4°F.
How do we normally maintain a body temperature
of 37°C? Heat sensors located throughout the skin and
large organs and along the spinal cord send information
about the body’s temperature to the thermoregulatory
center in the hypothalamus, a small organ located in the
brain near the brain stem. The hypothalamus acts as a
thermostat by controlling blood flow through the skin
and subcutaneous areas. Vasoconstriction (tightening of
blood vessel diameter) prevents the release of body heat
when we are cold, whereas vasodilation secures its quick
release when we are hot. If skin temperature is too high,
the hypothalamus directs vasodilation to accelerate heat
release. If body temperature is too low, blood flow will
decrease to conserve heat, and shivering begins as a way
to generate more heat.
Fever is a natural reaction to infection and is usually
accompanied by general symptoms such as sweating, chills,
and the sensation of being cold. Substances that cause fever
are known as pyrogens. Exogenous pyrogens (for example,
certain bacterial toxins) originate outside the body, whereas
internal or endogenous pyrogens (such as tumor necrosis
factor and the interferon IL-6) are made by the body itself.
External pyrogens generally cause fever by inducing the
release of internal cytokine pyrogens.
Pyrogenic cytokines cross the blood-brain barrier and
bind to neurons in the thermoregulatory center of the anterior hypothalamus. Cytokine-receptor interaction stimulates the production of phospholipase A2, an enzyme
required to make prostaglandins. Prostaglandin E2 is made
and changes the responsiveness of thermosensitive neurons.
In other words, prostaglandin E2 turns up the thermostat.
The body “thinks” it is cold, so the hypothalamus sends
signals via the autonomic nervous system (which acts below
the level of consciousness) to constrict peripheral blood
vessels (vasoconstriction). Heat is not released and builds
up to cause fever. Involuntary muscle contractions (shivering and chills) also generate heat.
What are the advantages of fever? Because the ideal
growth temperature for many microbes is 37°C, elevated
temperature can place the pathogenic organism outside its
“comfort zone” of growth. There is also evidence that fever
reduces iron availability to bacteria (cytokine release causes
an increase in iron storage protein). Slower growth of the
pathogen “buys” the immune system time to subdue the
infection before it is too late. Consequently, interventions
that reduce a moderate fever caused by infection may actually slow recovery.

■

HUMAN MICROBIOTA AND INNATE IMMUNITY

■

937

Thought Question

23.10 If increased fever limits bacterial growth, why do bacteria make pyrogenic toxins?

To Summarize
■

■

■

■

■

■

■
■

■

Complement is a series of 20 proteins naturally present
in serum.
Activation of the complement cascade results in a pore
being introduced into target membranes.
The three pathways for activation are the classical,
alternative, and lectin pathways.
The alternative activation pathway begins when complement factor C3b is stabilized by interaction with the
LPS of an invading microbe.
The cascade of protein factors, C3b ⎯→ factor B ⎯→
factor D ⎯→ properdin ⎯→ C5 ⎯→ C6 ⎯→ C7 ⎯→
C8 and C9, results in the formation of a membrane
attack complex in target membranes.
C-reactive protein in serum is activated when bound to
microbial structures and will convert C3 to C3b, which
can start the complement cascade.
The hypothalamus acts as the body’s thermostat.
Exogenous and endogenous pyrogens elevate body
temperature by stimulating prostaglandin production.
Prostaglandins change the responsiveness of thermosensitive neurons in the hypothalamus.

Concluding Thoughts
The human body plays host to numerous species of
microbes (our microbiota), many of which contribute to
our health and well-being. The various “hardwired” innate
immune mechanisms described here in Chapter 23 keep
our microbiota at bay and provide an effective first line
of defense against potential pathogens. The next chapter
addresses what happens when microbes breach these innate
defenses. Unlike the general protective mechanisms just
discussed, the system of adaptive immunity generates a
molecular defense specifically tailored to a given pathogen.
Keep in mind that innate and adaptive immune systems
“talk” to each other and collaborate to present the most
effective response to a given pathogen, whether bacterial,
viral, or parasitic.

CHAPTER 24

■

THE ADAPTIVE IMMUNE RESPONSE

■

941

CHAPTER 24

The Adaptive Immune Response
24.2 Antibody Structure, Diversity, and Synthesis
24.3 T Cells Link Antibody and Cellular Immune

Systems
24.4 Complement as Part of Adaptive Immunity
24.5 Gut Mucosal Immunity and the Microbiome
24.6 Immunization
24.7 Hypersensitivity and Autoimmunity

C U R R E N T R E S E A RC H

highlight

Lymphocyte traffic. Lymph node follicles contain separate
T-cell and B-cell zones. For a B cell to become a plasma cell,
antigen-activated helper T cells must move across the T-B
border and directly interact with antigen-activated B cells
(see figure below). Chemokines emanating from the B-cell
zone start recruitment, but Hai Qi discovered that unactivated “bystander” B cells were also needed. ICOS ligand (ICOSL)
protein on bystander B cells must interact with ICOS (inducible T-cell costimulator) on T cells to initiate coordinated
movement of T-cell pseudopods. Migration of T cells fails if
the B cells lack ICOSL.
Source: Zu et al. 2013. Nature 496:523–527.

ICOSL+/+ B cells

ICOSL–/– B cells

B-cell zone
T-cell zone

Migrating
T-cell

100 +m

No
migration

B cells
T cells
Antigen-activated
T cells

O

nce an infecting pathogen eludes our innate
immune defenses, it faces an even more
daunting foe: an adaptive immune system
that stirs only when challenged. Adaptive immunity is
composed of special lymphocytes called B cells and
T cells that multiply during an infection and “remember” the specific invader for years. These specially
trained lymphocytes are poised to respond quickly
to a second infection by the pathogen. Left unregulated, however, adaptive immunity can turn on us,
producing autoimmune disease.

A N I N T E RV I E W W I T H
HAI QI, IMMUNOLOGIST, TSINGHUA-PEKING CENTER FOR
LIFE SCIENCES, BEIJING, CHINA
SCHOOL OF MEDICINE, TSINGHUA UNIVERSITY

24.1 Overview of Adaptive Immunity

Why are chemokines and B-cell ICOSL
needed for T-cell migration into the
B-cell zone?

Available data indicate that a factor made
in the follicle antagonizes chemokinedependent phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
(PI3K) activation signals in T cells needed
for optimal cytoskeleton reorganization
and motility. Consequently, PI3K activated only by the folliclehoming chemokine CXCL13 is insufficient for T-cell movement
into the B-cell zone. This is why ICOSL-mediated activation of
ICOS, which strongly activates the PI3K pathway, becomes
necessary for T-cell migration at the T-B border.
The B-cell ICOSL–/– chimeric mice you constructed failed
to move T cells into the B-cell zone. Were these mice able
to make antibody?
These mice do not efficiently make antibody to T-dependent
antigens. However, they are still able to respond to
T-independent antigens.
Do you foresee a potential clinical application for your
findings?
Yes. ICOSL can be massively induced in inflamed tissues
where effector T cells are recruited. This is beneficial to
fighting infections but detrimental to tissue homeostasis.
Understanding how bystander B-cell ICOS activation regulates T-cell migration may provide new ways to therapeutically augment or reduce inflammatory infiltration.
941

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

COURTESY OF TEXAS CHILDREN’S HOSPITAL

Our immune system evolved to render
A.
B.
harmless any microbe that gains entry into
our body. The system is complex but controlled by many checks and balances to prevent overreaction. The Current Research
Highlight illustrates one small but very
important part of immunity: the segregation of T-cell and B-cell lymphocytes in the
lymph node and the recruitment of T cells
into the B-cell zone. Once recruited, the
T cell helps a cognate, antigen-stimulated B
cell to become an antibody-secreting plasma
cell. This and other parts of the immune
system are needed to prevent and cure
infections, but its complexity makes us susceptible to potentially catastrophic genetic
FIGURE 24.1 ■ Living without an immune system. A. David Vetter, the bubble
defects. A dramatic example is David Philip
boy, inside his environmental bubble. The tube behind him is a port that was used to
Vetter, better known as “the bubble boy.”
introduce sterile food, clothes, and other items. B. Adrian J. Thrasher conducted a sucDavid Vetter was born in 1971 without
cessful gene therapy trial on children with severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID).
an immune system. He was the only human
known to live in a plastic, germ-free bubble for his entire
12 years of life (1971–1984) (Fig. 24.1A). His predicament
material enters the nucleus, the healthy copy of the gene
stemmed from a genetic disease known as severe combined
functions and the corrected stem cells are reintroduced
immunodeficiency (SCID). In the most serious form of
into the patients. If the gene replacement is successful, the
SCID (caused by a defective cytokine receptor), the patient
child makes his own T cells with the correct receptor and
forms no T cells and has dysfunctional (or sometimes no)
develops a functional immune system. SCID dramatically
B cells. Severe SCID patients cannot launch a meaningful
illustrates the importance of our immune system and how
immune defense against any invading microbe—whether
fragile its development is. All it takes is a small defect in a
pathogen or normal microbiota. Because David’s older
single gene to subvert the entire process.
brother had died of SCID, physicians knew David might
In Chapter 24 we describe the two types of adaptive
have the disorder too. Within seconds of his birth, David
immunity: antibody-dependent immunity in which B cells
was transferred to a sterile environment to await a bone
differentiate into plasma cells that make antibodies,
marrow transplant. Water, air, food, diapers, clothes—all
and cell-mediated immunity whereby specific T-cell
were disinfected with special cleaning agents before enterlymphocytes develop to directly kill infected host cells.
ing his sterile plastic bubble. He lived for 12 years physiYou will also learn how certain types of T cells balance
cally isolated in this plastic, sterile environment, venturing
antibody and cell-mediated responses to a given infection.
out only in a NASA-designed sterile space suit. A bone
Along the way we will explore how gut mucosal immunity
marrow transplant was attempted in 1984, but his defective
mediates coexistence with our microbiome. Ultimately, you
immune system failed to protect him from Epstein-Barr
will appreciate that adaptive immunity is a major reason
virus, which went undetected in the transplanted cells. He
humans still exist.
died just before his thirteenth birthday.
Today, bone marrow transplants from antigenically
compatible donors are the only approved treatment of
SCID. However, an experimental gene therapy pioneered
by Dr. Adrian Thrasher of University College London
(Fig. 24.1B) is a promising new approach to curing the
disease. In this strategy, the gene encoding the normal
Recall from Chapter 23 that the immune system has
cytokine receptor is inserted into a defective virus that can
both nonadaptive and adaptive mechanisms. Nonadapinfect cells without causing disease. The debilitated virus
tive (innate) immune mechanisms are present from birth,
is used to deliver the normal cytokine receptor gene into
whereas adaptive immunity develops as the need arises.
the patient’s stem cells. Stem cells are undifferentiated, and
For instance, adaptive immunity against malaria does not
capable of changing into many different cell types, includdevelop until the individual has encountered the plasmoing B cells and T cells (see Section 23.3). Once the genetic
dial parasite that causes the disease. The adaptive immune

24.1

Overview of Adaptive
Immunity

COURTESY OF UCL NEWS.

942

CHAPTER 24

response—adaptive immunity—is a complex, interconnected, and cross-regulated defense network.

THE ADAPTIVE IMMUNE RESPONSE

■

943

immune system does not recognize the whole microbe,
but innumerable tiny pieces of it. Each small segment of an
antigen that is capable of eliciting an immune response is
called an antigenic determinant or epitope. Many singleprotein antigens are recognized when the larger antigen is
broken into smaller segments upon being phagocytosed.
Even distinct tertiary (3D) shapes within a protein may
be counted as antigenic determinants if they produce a
specific response. Immune responses to 3D shapes are
possible when stretches of amino acids far removed from
each other in a protein’s primary sequence align side by side
in 3D space after folding (Fig. 24.2). Such a 3D structure
may be recognized by the immune system as a single entity
or antigen. Besides proteins, other structures in the cell,
such as complex polysaccharides, can have linear and 3D
epitopes. So the immune response to a microbe is really
a composite of thousands of B-cell responses to different
epitopes. The response to each individual epitope is clonal;
that is, it gives rise to a population of cells that originate
from a single B cell. This means that each clone of B cells
will target a unique epitope.
The humoral immune response requires several
cell types and cell-to-cell interactions. What are those
interactions, and where do they take place? As illustrated
in Figure 24.3, the process begins with an infection
somewhere in the body. Dendritic cells and macrophages
patrolling the area gather up the foreign antigens and
present them on their cell surface. Any phagocytic cell that
degrades large antigens into smaller antigenic determinants
and places those determinants on their cell surface is called
an antigen-presenting cell (APC). Many types of cells can
be antigen-presenting. They include “professional” APCs,
such as macrophages (monocytes), mast cells, or dendritic

Note:

The terms “adaptive immune response” and “immune
response” are often used interchangeably.

Antibody-Dependent versus
Cell-Mediated Immunity

Two types of adaptive immunity are recognized: humoral
immunity and cell-mediated immunity. In humoral
immunity, antibodies are produced that directly target
microbial invaders. The term “humoral” means “related
to body fluids.” Thus, antibodies are proteins that circulate in the bloodstream and recognize foreign structures
called antigens. An antigen (also called an immunogen)
is any molecule that, when introduced into a person, will
elicit the synthesis of antibodies that specifically bind the
antigen. Antigens stimulate B cells (B lymphocytes) to differentiate into antibody-producing cells. Cell-mediated
immunity, the second type of adaptive immunity, employs
teams of T cells (T lymphocytes) that recognize antigens
and then destroy host cells infected by the microbe possessing the antigen. The humoral and cellular immune
responses are intertwined, each relying on some facet of
the other to work efficiently. T cells serve a central role
in adaptive immunity by determining whether humoral or
cell-mediated mechanisms predominate in response to a
specific antigen.
What triggers an immune response, and how long
does it take? Adaptive immunity develops over a 3- to
4-day period after exposure to an invading microbe. The

A.

■

B.

Conformational
epitope

Denature

Conformational
epitope
Native antigen

Linear
epitopes
Denatured antigen

GUSTAFSSON, ERIKA ET AL. BMC IMMUNOLOGY, 2009 10:13, 1471-2172.

FIGURE 24.2 ■ Antigens and
epitopes. A. Native proteins
fold into a 3D shape, where
several regions separated in the
linear sequence can reside next
to each other to form a conformational epitope. Denaturing
the protein with the detergent
sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)
and reducing agents like dithiothreitol (to remove disulfide
bonds) will unfold the protein
and separate the various amino
acid stretches that formed the
conformational epitope. B. A 3D
protein structure showing, in
red, four amino acids that form a
conformational epitope.

944

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

A.
1. Dendritic cell (an APC)
engulfs a microbe and places
pieces (antigens) of the
microbe on its surface.

Lymph node
2. APC travels to nearby lymph
node and presents the antigen
to a specific T cell, which
recognizes the antigen and
becomes activated.

Microbe

Periphery

T cell
MHC
Antigen

Dendritic cell

Bone marrow
4. B cell is stimulated
to generate a plasma
cell that secretes
antibody against the
antigen.

3. Activated T cell links
to B cell that has
bound the same
antigen.
B cell

Antigen

Activated
T cell

Synthesize
antibody
Antigen
Plasma cell
B.

FIGURE 24.3

Cell-cell interactions involved in making
antibody. A. Two basic cell-cell interactions are required to make
■

ZACH VEILLEUX/ROCKEFELLER UNIVERSITY

an antibody: (1) An APC (dendritic cell) presents antigen to a helper
T cell. (2) The activated T cell links to and activates a B cell bound
to the same antigen. The two interactions can be broken down into
four steps, as illustrated. B. Ralph Steinman discovered dendritic
cells.

cells; and, under the right circumstances, “nonprofessional”
APCs (for example, endothelial cells or fibroblasts).
Because dendritic cells are so important to the immune
response, their discoverer, Ralph Steinman (1943–2011),
was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in
2011 (Fig. 24.3B).
Once decorated with antigen, the professional antigenpresenting cell travels to secondary lymphoid organs
(lymph nodes) where B cells and T cells await. Specific
T cells in the node then link to the antigen presented
on the APC and become activated T cells. One type of

activated T cell then binds to and activates a lymph node
B cell that encountered the same antigen. That interaction
authorizes B cells to generate plasma cells (usually shortlived) able to pump out large amounts of specific antibody.
(Note that plasma cells are not B cells.) The activated B cells
also produce long-lived memory B cells that remember the
exposure and stand ready to quickly generate plasma cells,
should the antigen be encountered months or years later.
Once formed, the memory B cells and most plasma cells
leave the lymph node and migrate to the bone marrow.
Other plasma cells remain in the lymph node. In the bone
marrow, memory B cells patiently wait to be called to
future sites of infection.
The cell-mediated immune response shares some aspects
of the humoral immune response. A type of T cells, called
cytotoxic T cells, also bind to microbial antigens presented
on an APC and become activated. Activated cytotoxic

CHAPTER 24

T cells seek out and directly kill any host cell infected with
the microbe. In addition to directly killing infected cells,
cytotoxic T cells synthesize and secrete growth factors,
called cytokines (see Sections 23.2 and 23.5), that incite
nearby macrophages to indiscriminately attack cells in the
local area. Thus, cellular immunity, in general, is critical
for dealing with intracellular pathogens such as viruses,
whereas humoral immunity is most effective against
extracellular bacterial pathogens like Streptococcus pyogenes,
one cause of wound infections and sore throat.
As we proceed through this chapter, we will reveal
in layers how the immune system functions, with each
layer building on the previous one. We will periodically
return to a particular aspect of the immune response—
for example, B-cell differentiation into plasma cells—to
integrate seemingly distinct parts of the immune system
into a unified concept of immunity.
Thought Question

24.1 Two different stretches of amino acids in a single

protein form a 3D antigenic determinant. Will the specific
immune response to that 3D antigen also respond to one of
the two amino acid stretches alone?

Immunogenicity

Immunogenicity measures the effectiveness by which
an antigen elicits an immune response. One antigen can
be more immunogenic than another. For example, proteins are the strongest antigens, but carbohydrates can
also elicit immune reactions. Nucleic acids and lipids are
usually weaker antigens, in part because these molecules
are both made of relatively uniform repeating units that
are very f lexible. The f lexible units present a variable 3D
structure that does not easily interact with antibodies.
Proteins are more effective antigens for three reasons:
Different proteins have different shapes, they maintain
their tertiary structure, and they are made of many different amino acids that can be assembled in many different combinations. These features provide stronger
interactions with antibodies in the bloodstream and
enable better recognition by lymphocytes, the cellular
workhorses of the immune system.
Several other factors contribute to the immunogenicity of
proteins (see eTopic 24.1). For example, the larger the antigen,
the more likely it is that phagocytic cells will “see” and engulf
it. This is important because, as noted earlier, an immune
response cannot occur until phagocytic antigen-presenting
cells (such as macrophages and dendritic cells) first engulf
large antigens and degrade them, presenting the epitopes on
their cell surface. The immune response begins when a B cell
binds to a foreign peptide and a T lymphocyte binds to the

■

THE ADAPTIVE IMMUNE RESPONSE

■

945

same foreign peptide displayed on the surface of an antigenpresenting cell. The B cell–APC and T cell–APC binding
events are independent of each other.
The presentation of antigens on APCs forces the antigen
to be placed on a membrane surface protein structure
called the major histocompatibility complex, or MHC
(discussed later). The more tightly an antigen can bind to
these MHC surface proteins, the more immunogenic it
is. The stronger the binding, the easier it is for T cells to
recognize the complex.
Each specific antigen shows a different threshold dose
needed to generate an optimal response. A dose higher or
lower than that threshold will generate a weaker immune
response. Lower doses activate only a few B cells, whereas
exceedingly high doses of antigen can cause B-cell
tolerance, a state in which B cells have been overstimulated
to the point that they do not respond to subsequent
antigen exposures and make antibody. Tolerance is part of
the reason your immune system does not react against your
own protein antigens.
As you might expect, the body must regulate the immune
system carefully so that a response is not leveled against
itself. In effect, the immune system must become “blind”
to its own antigens; as a result, the host will often be blind
to foreign antigens that resemble epitopes of its own cells.
Therefore, the more complex the foreign protein is, the
more likely it will possess antigenic determinants that a
lymphocyte can recognize as nonself. The farther an antigen
is from “self,” the greater its immunogenicity will be.

Immunological Specificity

Our earliest clues into the nature of immunity came from
smallpox. Smallpox is a devastating disease that caused
enormous suffering and killed millions of people in the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries (see Chapter 1 and
Fig. 24.4). There was no cure, and the only available preventive treatment was to take dried material from the lesions
of a previous smallpox sufferer, place it on a healthy person,
and hope the person survived. Those who survived were
protected from subsequent bouts of smallpox but were still
susceptible to other diseases. This early observation gave
rise to the idea of immunological specificity, which means
that an immune response to one antigen is not effective
against a different antigen. In other words, the immune
response to smallpox will not protect someone against the
plague bacillus (Yersinia pestis), which is antigenically different from the smallpox virus.
While immunological specificity is important, it is not
absolute. As described in Chapter 1, an English country
physician named Edward Jenner (see Fig. 1.18B) in the late
eighteenth century (long before viruses were discovered)
learned to protect townsfolk from deadly smallpox disease

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

A. Smallpox patient

(live, attenuated) strains of the pathogenic
microbe or inactivated microbial toxins (for
example, diphtheria toxin).
Cross-protection, in which immunization against one microbe protects against
a second, will work only if two proteins
critical to the pathogenesis of the two different microorganisms share key antigenic
determinants. Cross-protection will not
take place if these determinants differ significantly. A good example is the common cold, which is caused by hundreds of
closely related rhinovirus strains (rhinitis, a
runny nose, is one of the symptoms of this
viral disease). Infection with one strain will
not immunize the victim against a second
strain. The reason is that the structures
of rhinovirus proteins that attach to the
ICAM-1 surface protein on host cells differ dramatically between different strains of
rhinovirus (Fig. 24.5A). Antibodies called
neutralizing antibodies, which bind to the attachment protein on one strain of rhinovirus, will prevent infection by
that strain (Fig. 24.5B) but will not bind an antigenically
distinct ICAM-1 receptor protein from a different strain. A
key to one lock will not work in a different lock.

CDC

B. Variola major

FIGURE 24.4

patient covered with white pox pustules. B. The
smallpox virus, variola major (300 nm long;
TEM). The photo shows the dumbbell-shaped,
membrane-enclosed nucleic acid core. C. The
vaccinia virus that causes cowpox (360 nm long;
EM). Edward Jenner recognized the similarity
between the deadly smallpox and less severe
cowpox diseases and used cowpox scrapings to
vaccinate humans against smallpox.

HOLLINSHEAD, M. ET AL. J. OF VIROLOGY,
FEBRUARY 1999, P. 1503-1517, VOL. 73,
NO. 2.© 1999, AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR
MICROBIOLOGY. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.

■ Immunological specificity is the basis of vaccination. A. Smallpox

C. Vaccinia

(caused by variola virus) by inoculating them with scrapings
from lesions produced by cowpox (a tamer disease caused
by vaccinia virus; see Fig. 24.4C). This story illustrates that
an immune reaction against one organism or virus may be
sufficient to protect against an antigenically related, if not
identical, organism. The technique of exposing individuals
to “tame” microbes to protect them against pathogens, now
generally called vaccination, has been used to protect humans
against many bacterial and viral pathogens (Table 24.1).
Most vaccinations today involve administering crippled
A. Rhinovirus

REPRODUCED WITH PERMISSION OF THE ASM MICROBELIBRARY
(HTTP://WWW.MICROBELIBRARY.ORG)

946

Thought Question

24.2 How does a neutralizing antibody that recognizes a viral
coat protein prevent infection by the associated virus?

B. Antibody-coated rhinovirus

Cell receptor
(ICAM-1)

Cell

FIGURE 24.5

Antibody to virus
receptor protein

■ Antibodies prevent rhinovirus attachment to cell receptors. A. The
complex rhinovirus capsid is pictured here attaching to the cell-surface molecule ICAM-1 (intercellular adhesion molecule, shown in reddish brown). (PDB code: 1rhi) B. Rhinovirus coated
with protective (neutralizing) antibodies (green) that block the ICAM-1 receptors on the virus.
As a result, the virus fails to attach to and infect the host cell. (PDB code: 1RVF)

Antigens and
Immunogens

Antigens that, by themselves, can
elicit antibody production are
called immunogens. Molecules of
molecular weight less than 1,000,
however, are generally not immunogenic, because they do not bind
MHC molecules. Nevertheless,
these small molecules, called haptens (from the Greek word meaning “to fasten” and the German
word for “stuff”), will elicit the
production of specific antibodies if they are covalently attached
to a larger carrier protein or other
molecule (Fig. 24.6). Haptens can
be thought of as small, incomplete
antigens. An example of a hapten is
the antibiotic penicillin, a serious

CHAPTER 24

■

THE ADAPTIVE IMMUNE RESPONSE

■

947

TABLE 24.1+Vaccines Against Viral and Bacterial Pathogens
Disease

Vaccine

Vaccination recommended for:

Chickenpox

Attenuated strain (will still replicate)

Children 12–18 months

Hepatitis A

Inactivated virus (will not replicate)

Children 12 months

Hepatitis B

Viral antigen

Newborns

Influenza

Inactivated virus or antigen

Everyone, after 6 months old, yearly

Measles, mumps, rubella (MMR)

Attenuated viruses; MMR combined vaccine

Children 12 months

Polio

Inactivated (injection, Salk)

Children 2–3 months

Rabies

Inactivated virus

Persons in contact with wild animals

Yellow fever

Attenuated virus

Military personnel

Anthrax

Bacillus anthracis, toxin components;
unencapsulated strain

Agricultural and veterinary personnel; key
health care workers

Cholera

Killed Vibrio cholerae, toxin components

Travelers to endemic areas

Diphtheria

Toxoid (inactivated toxin)

Children 2–3 months

Lyme disease

Borrelia burgdorferi, lipoproteins OspA
and OspC surface antigens

Canines; human vaccine discontinued

Meningitis caused by Haemophilus
influenzae type b (Hib)

Bacterial capsular polysaccharide

Children under 5 years

Meningococcal disease

Neisseria meningitidis, bacterial capsular
polysaccharides

Children >2 years; adults >50 years

Pertussis

Acellular Bordetella pertussis

Children 2–3 months

Pneumococcal pneumonia

Streptococcus pneumoniae, bacterial capsular
polysaccharides

Children; adults >50 years

Tetanus

Toxoid

Children 2–3 months

Tuberculosis (Mycobacterium
tuberculosis)

Attenuated Mycobacterium bovis
[BCG (Bacille Calmette-Guérin) vaccine]

Exposed individuals

Typhoid fever

Killed Salmonella Typhi

Individuals in endemic areas

Typhus

Killed Rickettsia prowazekii

Medical personnel in endemic areas;
scientists; discontinued

Viral diseases

Bacterial diseases

cause of immune hypersensitivity reactions in some individuals (see Section 24.7).
Consider the following: A protein carrier such as bovine
serum albumin (BSA) injected into a mouse elicits antibodies that react against BSA (Fig. 24.6). BSA antigen is an
immunogen because it elicits an immune response to itself.
In contrast, a mouse injected with the hapten benzene sulfate fails to produce antibodies to benzene sulfate. However,
when the hapten chemical is attached to BSA protein and
the hapten-BSA complex is injected, the mouse produces
not only antibodies that react to the carrier (BSA), but also
other antibodies that react against the benzene hapten. The
reason for this carrier effect will become evident later in
the chapter, when we describe how antigens are processed
by cells of the immune system. Thus, antigens include

immunogens that elicit an immune response by themselves,
and haptens that must be attached to an immunogen in
order to generate an immune response. Karl Landsteiner
uncovered the antigen-immunogen-hapten relationship in
the early 1900s, along with discovering the ABO blood
group system that first defined the concept of immunological specificity (eTopic 24.2).
Thought Question

24.3 The attachment proteins of different rhinovirus strains
all bind to ICAM-1. How can all these proteins be immunologically different if they find the same target (ICAM-1)? Why
won’t antibodies directed against one rhinovirus strain block
the attachment of other rhinovirus strains?

948

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

■

C
Carrier-specific
aantibodies
■

Protein c
carrier
arrier
The smallll hapten
h tten molecule
mo
ollecule
l benzene
be
b
enzene cannot
cannot
stimulate antibody production
n in a mouse
mouse.

Immunological specificity means that antibody made
to one epitope will not bind to different epitopes (antibodies can cross-bind weakly to similar epitopes; for
example, antibody to cowpox virus will bind to a similar
epitope on smallpox virus).
A hapten is a small compound that must be conjugated
to a larger carrier antigen to elicit the production of an
antibody.

24.2
No response
N

Benzene
ne
eh
hapten
apte
en

Ca
Carrier-specific
C
p
and
an
nd hapten-specif
n
hapten-specific
antibodies
an
ntibodies
n
Protein-hapten
haapten
complex
Attaching the
h hapten
hapten to
to a larger
l er carrier molecule
large
m
(e.g., BSA protein) will result in production
d ti off
antibodies to both the carrier and the hapten molecules.

FIGURE 24.6

■ This basic schematic shows how haptens
can elicit antibody production.

To Summarize
■

■

■

■

■

An antigen can elicit an antibody response. An antigen
usually consists of many different epitopes (antigenic
determinants), each of which binds to a different, specific antibody.
Humoral immunity against infection is the result
of antibody production originated by B cells. A subgroup of T cell lymphocytes stimulate B cells to become
antibody-secreting plasma cells.
Cell-mediated (cellular) immunity involves another
subgroup of T cells called cytoxic T cells that can directly
kill host cells.
Proteins are better immunogens than nucleic acids and
lipids because proteins have more diverse chemical forms.
Antigen-presenting cells (APCs), such as phagocytes,
degrade microbial pathogens and present distinct pieces
on their cell-surface MHC proteins.

Antibody Structure,
Diversity, and Synthesis

What are antibodies, and why are they important? Antibodies, also called immunoglobulins, are members of the larger
immunoglobulin superfamily of proteins. Made by the body
in response to an antigen, antibodies are the keys to immunological specificity. Members of the immunoglobulin superfamily of proteins have in common a 110-amino-acid domain
with an internal disulfide bond. The immunoglobulin superfamily includes antibodies and other important binding proteins, such as the major histocompatibility proteins and parts
of the B-cell receptor described later.

Note:

Antibodies are called immunoglobulins and belong to
the immunoglobulin superfamily of proteins. However, this superfamily includes many other cell-surface-binding proteins, such as
the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) proteins and various
cytokine receptor proteins. These latter proteins are not antibodies and are not called immunoglobulins. The term “immunoglobulins” is reserved for antibodies.

Like miniature “smart bombs,” antibody immunoglobulins
individually circulate through blood, ignoring all antigens
except those for which they were designed. When an antibody
finds its antigenic match, it binds to the antigen and initiates
several events designed to destroy the target. Antibodies, in
addition to being free-floating, are strategically situated on
the surface of B cells, where they enable the B lymphocytes to
recognize specific antigens (B-cell receptors are discussed later
in this section).
A typical antibody consists of four polypeptide chains.
There are two large heavy chains and two smaller light
chains (Fig. 24.7). The four polypeptides combine to form
a Y-shaped tetrameric structure held together by disulfide
bonds. Two bonds connect the two identical heavy chains
to each other. One light chain is then attached near its
carboxyl end to the middle of each heavy chain by a single
disulfide bond. The antigen-binding sites are formed at the
amino-terminal ends of the light and heavy chains. One
antibody molecule possesses two identical antigen-binding
sites, one on each “arm” of the molecule.

CHAPTER 24
A.

■

THE ADAPTIVE IMMUNE RESPONSE

■

949

B.

Antigen

+

F(ab)

+

NH3

NH3

Antigen-binding sites

F(ab)

Heavy chain
+

+

H3N

NH3

S

S

S
S S

S

Light chain

S S
–

COO–

OOC

Fc
COO–

COO–

FIGURE 24.7 ■ Basic antibody structure. A. Each antibody contains two heavy chains and two smaller, light chains held together by disulfide bonds. The Y-shaped structure contains two antigen-binding sites, one at each arm of the molecule. These two sites are formed by the
amino-terminal regions of the heavy- and light-chain pairs. B. The 3D structure of an antibody. The heavy chains are shown in green, the light
chains in yellow. The F(ab) regions represent the antigen-binding sites. The Fc portion points downward and is used to attach the antibody to
different cell-surface molecules. (PDB code: 1R70)

Antibody Structure Enables
Immunoprecipitation

A typical antibody molecule has two antigen-binding sites,
each of which binds identical antigens. Because a single
antibody can bind two identical epitopes, antibodies can
cross-link antigens in solution, ultimately forming complexes that are too large to remain soluble, so they fall out
of solution (Fig. 24.8). The phenomenon, called immunoprecipitation, is normally observed only in vitro, where
the concentrations of antigen and antibody can be manipulated experimentally.
Immunoprecipitation occurs only with appropriate
ratios of antigen and antibody molecules. Too many
antigen molecules (antigen excess; Fig. 24.8A) or too few

antigen molecules (antibody excess; Fig. 24.8B) result in
complexes too small to immunoprecipitate. Large complexes
are formed only at an appropriate antigen/antibody ratio,
called equivalence (Fig. 24.8C). Equivalence is the point
where the number of antigenic sites is roughly equal to the
number of antigen-binding sites.
Immunoprecipitation is the basis for many experimental
immunological techniques. For example, the concentration
of an antigen can be determined in vitro, or antibodies
can be used to identify and remove specific antigens
from a complex mixture because the specific antigenantibody complex precipitates. eAppendix 3 describes some
experimental uses for immunoprecipitation, such as radial
immunodiffusion and western blotting.

Antigen with two
identical epitopes
A. Antigen excess

No complex is possible,
because there are
more antigens than
antigen-binding sites.

FIGURE 24.8

B. Antibody excess

No complex is possible, because
there are more antigen-binding
sites than antigens.

C. Equivalence

Complexes are possible when
antigen numbers equal the
number of antigen-binding sites.

■ Basis of immunoprecipitation. Immunoprecipitation cannot occur when there is an excess of either antigens (A) or antibodies (B). Only when the numbers of epitopes and antigen-binding sites are roughly equivalent (C) will a large complex form and fall out of solution.

950

■

PART 5

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

■

Antibodies Have Constant
and Variable Regions

amino-terminal ends of the light and heavy chains. These
variable regions are referred to as the V L and V H regions,
respectively (Fig. 24.9). The rest of each immunoglobulin chain is composed of the highly conserved constant
regions. CH1, CH 2, and CH3 denote the three different
constant regions in each heavy chain. Shortly, we will discuss the genes that code for these regions and the combinatorial possibilities underlying the formation of different
antibody molecules.
In addition to the two “arms” that bind antigens, every
antibody contains a “tail” called the Fc region (Fig. 24.9).
The Fc region is not involved in antigen recognition but is
important for anchoring antibodies to the surface of certain
host cells and for binding components of the complement
system.

There are five classes of antibodies, defined by five different types of heavy chains, called alpha (α), mu (μ), gamma
(γ), delta (δ), and epsilon (ε). The heavy-chain classes are
distinguished one from another by regions of highly conserved amino acid sequences, known as constant regions
(denoted CH for the heavy chain) (Fig. 24.9). Antibodies
containing gamma heavy chains are called IgG; those with
alpha, mu, delta, and epsilon heavy chains are called IgA,
IgM, IgD, and IgE, respectively. Each antibody class serves
a specific purpose in the immune system.
In contrast to heavy chains, there are only two classes of
light chains—kappa (κ) and lambda (λ)—which are defined
by their own constant regions (CL). A single antibody of
any heavy-chain class (for example, IgG) may contain two
kappa light chains or two lambda light chains, but never
one of each. Two-thirds of all antibody molecules carry
kappa chains; the rest have lambda chains.
The antigen-binding part of an antibody is formed
by highly variable amino acid sequences situated at the

Thought Question

24.4 Can an F(ab´)2 antibody fragment prevent the binding

of rhinovirus to the ICAM-1 receptor on host cells? And can an
F(ab´)2 antibody fragment facilitate phagocytosis of a microbe?

Heavy chain

Antigenbinding site

FIGURE 24.9

■ Constant and
variable regions in antibody
structure. As this schematic

+

NH3

VH
Papain
F(ab)2

gorh

S

CL

The Fc region is the
part of an antibody
that reacts with
complement or
binds to the surface
of cells such as
macrophages.

Light
chain

CH1

VL

representation of IgG shows, the
variable sequences present at the
amino termini of the heavy and light
chains form the antigen-binding sites.
Functional parts of the antibody
can be separated following certain
protease treatments. Papain specifically cleaves the hinge regions of the
heavy chains and releases separate
F(ab) arms. Pepsin cleaves in the CH2
constant region and releases the two
F(ab) regions as one piece [F(ab´)2]
from the Fc region.

+

NH3

S

S

S

S S
S S
COO—

CH2

Pepsin

Complement
activation

Heavy
chain

Fc
CH3
Macrophage
binding
COO—

Papain digestion separates
individual antigen-binding
sites [F(ab) fragment] from
the antibody molecule.

COO—

VH

Pepsin
digest
F(abv)2

Papain
digest

CH1

VL

VH

VL

Heavy chain

+ a _
b or¡

CL

S

S

S

S

S S
S S

F(ab)
CL

CH1
S S

Pepsin digestion separates the
Fc region from the F(abv)2
portion that contains both
antigen-binding sites.

Light
chain

CHAPTER 24

Isotypes, Allotypes,
and Idiotypes

■

■

THE ADAPTIVE IMMUNE RESPONSE

Sherrie

Antibody diversity involves a hierarchy
of protein sequence differences found
among antibodies.
■

■

Isotype sequences defi ne the
various heavy chains of a species.

Isotype
differences

Allotype sequences define individuals within a species.
Idiotype sequences define antibodies
within an individual.

IgE

951

John

Idiotype
differences
in antigenbinding sites

IgE vs. IgG
heavy chain

■

IgG against
antigen A

IgG against
antigen B

Allotype
differences
in antibody
constant
regions
between
IgG against
individuals
antigen B

FIGURE 24.10 ■ Isotype, idiotype, and allotype differences on antibodies. Colors
indicate different amino acid sequences (or epitopes) within an individual (Sherrie) or between individuals (Sherrie and John).

Understanding how an antibody’s isotype, allotype, and idiotype differ is important because
these terms reflect how antibodies carry out different functions in a host and bind different antigens.
“Isotype” refers to the amino acid differences in the
constant regions of heavy-chain classes (what makes IgG
different from IgE). These differences will be the same
in all members of a species (for example, Homo sapiens).
“Allotype” refers to any amino acid sequence differences
in the constant regions of either heavy or light chains that
make IgG from one person different from IgG in another
person. “Idiotype” refers to amino acid sequence differences between two molecules of the same isotype (IgG,
for example) in a single person. Idiotype differences usually
occur in the antigen-binding region of an antibody.
In real terms, consider two different people, John and
Sherrie. Blood of both John and Sherrie carries the human
IgG isotype. However, all of the IgG molecules circulating
in John have small, allotypic amino acid differences from
the IgG antibodies circulating in Sherrie (John and Sherrie
have different IgG allotypes) (Fig. 24.10). Within Sherrie
herself, the antigen-binding site of an IgG molecule that
binds a herpes virus epitope possesses idiotypic amino acid
differences from an IgG molecule in her that binds to a rhinovirus epitope. The synthesis and functional purpose of

these different levels of antibody diversity will be described
in the next several sections.
Note that antibodies are proteins too, and are themselves
antigens. Thus, the amino acid differences found within a
single class of antibody—IgG, for example—also represent
different antigenic epitopes within that class. Isotypic, allotypic, and idiotypic epitopes in antibody molecules can be
detected using the immunological techniques described in
eAppendix 3.
Thought Question

24.5 (refer to Fig. 24.10) What types of antibodies will IgG

taken from Sherrie raise when injected into John (for example,
anti-isotype, anti-allotype, or anti-idiotype)?

Antibody Isotype Functions
and “Super” Structures

All antibody isotypes have the same basic structure. However, each isotype has a unique superstructure (for example,
monomer or dimer), and each is designed to carry out a different task. Some key properties of the five different immunoglobulin classes are listed in Table 24.2.

TABLE 24.2+Properties of Human Immunoglobulins
IgG

Property
Serum half-life (days)
% Total serum Ig
Antigen-binding sites
Produced by fetus

IgG1

IgG2

IgG3

IgG4

IgA

IgM

IgD

IgE

21

20

7

21

6

10

3

2

70%

15%–20%

5%–10%

0.2%

0.002%

2

2–4

2–10

2

2

Poor, if at all

Poor, if at all

Yes

?

Poor, if at all

Transmitted across placenta

Yes

No

No

No

No

Binds complement

Yes

No

Yes

No

No

Opsonizing

Yes

No

No

No

No

Binds mast cells

No

No

No

No

Yes

952

■

PART 5

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

■

VH

A. IgM
IgM forms a pentamer held
together by disulfide bonds
and the J chain. IgM can
bind ten antigens.

CH1

S

S

S

CL
CH2

S S

S

VL

S

CH3

S

S

S

CH4

S

S S

S S

S

S

S

S

S

receptors that can attach to the Fc region of the antibody to
gain a fi rmer “grip” on the microbe, facilitating phagocytosis (discussed in Section 23.5). IgG can also directly
neutralize viruses by binding to virus attachment
sites, and it is one of only two antibody types
that can activate complement by the classical
pathway (described in Section 24.4).
S
S
Another critical feature of IgG is that it
can cross the placenta and enter a fetus.
Other antibody isotypes cannot. This
selectivity is due to an antibody transport
system in the placenta, called the neonatal Fc transporter, which is specific for
the Fc region of IgG. The transporter
does not recognize the Fc amino acid
sequences of other antibody isotypes.

S

S

S

S

J chain links
adjacent IgMs.

Carbohydrate

S

S

S

S

S

S

S

S S
S S

S S
S S

CH2
CH3

S S
S S
S S
S S

CH1

S S

J chain

CL
VH1

S

VL

S S

Secretory piece

FIGURE 24.11 ■ Structures of IgM and IgA. The antibodies are
made as multimers of five immunoglobulin molecules, in the case of
IgM (A); or two, in the case of IgA (B).

IgG. The simplest and most abundant antibody in blood and

tissue fluids is IgG (its superstructure is shown in Fig. 24.9).
It is made as a monomer but has four subclasses. Each subclass varies in its amino acid composition and number of
interchain cross-links. IgG molecules carry out several missions for the immune system. First, they bind and opsonize
microbes; that is, they make microbes more susceptible to
phagocytes. Opsonizing IgG antibodies use their antigenbinding sites to stick to microbes, thereby causing their Fc
regions to protrude outward. Phagocytes possess surface Fc

S

IgA is secreted as a dimer held together
by the secretory piece and J chain and
can bind four identical antigens.

S

B. IgA

IgM. Circulating IgM is a huge, Ferris wheel–shaped molecule formed from
five monomeric immunoglobulins tethered
together by the J-chain protein (Fig. 24.11A).
It can also be found in monomeric form on the
surface of B cells, where it forms part of the B-cell
receptor. IgM is the first antibody isotype detected
during the early stages of an immune response.

IgA. IgA is secreted across mucosal surfaces (linings
of the respiratory, gastrointestinal, urinary, and reproductive tracts) and is most commonly found as a dimer
(Fig. 24.11B). This explains why IgA can bind four molecules of antigen (each monomer can bind two). The components of the IgA dimer are linked by disulfide bonds to
a protein called the J chain, which joins two IgAs by their
Fc regions. A sixth protein, the secretory piece, is wrapped
around the IgA dimer during the secretion process. The
secreted molecule, now called sIgA (secretory IgA), is
found in tears, breast milk, and saliva, and on other mucosal surfaces. The molecule sIgA is important for mucosal
immunity against pathogens that infect mucosal linings.
IgD. The last two antibody isotypes, IgD and IgE, are pres-

ent at very low levels in the blood. IgD is a monomer that
can neither bind complement nor cross the placenta. IgD
molecules, however, are abundant on the surface of B cells.
Attached to B-cell surfaces by Fc regions, IgD, along with
monomeric IgM, can bind antigen and signal B cells to differentiate and make antibody.

IgE. IgE, also present in only trace amounts in the blood,

is found more prominently bound to the surfaces of mast
cells and basophils, where it has potent biological activity. Mast cells and basophils contain granules loaded with
inflammatory mediators. The primary role of IgE is to

CHAPTER 24
A. Mast cell (SEM)

■

THE ADAPTIVE IMMUNE RESPONSE

B. Mast cell (TEM)

■

953

C. Hay fever

1 +m

MARK CLARKE

DR. LAURA HALE, DUKE UNIVERSITY AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR
MICROBIOLOGY

5 +m

DR. LAURA HALE, DUKE UNIVERSITY REPRODUCED WITH
PERMISSION OF THE ASM MICROBE LIBRARY

Granule

FIGURE 24.12

■ Mast cells. A. Mast cell (SEM). B. Granules (arrow) inside a mast cell (TEM). C. Hay fever is the result of degranulation of
IgE-coated mast cells, which release histamine and other pharmacological mediators.

amplify the body’s response to invaders. Once secreted into
serum, IgE attaches to mast cells (Fig. 24.12A and B),
again by way of its Fc region, and, like a Venus flytrap, waits
until its matched antigen binds to its antigen-binding site.
When two surface IgE molecules on a mast cell are crosslinked by antigen, a signal is sent internally that triggers
degranulation (see Section 24.7). The subsequent release
of histamine and other pharmacological mediators from
these granules helps orchestrate the acute inflammation that
takes place during early host responses to microbial infection (that is, while the antibody response is gearing up). The
system also causes severe allergic hypersensitivities (such as
anaphylaxis) and milder forms like hay fever (Fig. 24.12C).

differentiate into plasma cells and secrete antibody. Plasma
cells are much larger than B cells because of an enormous
increase in protein synthesis and secretion machinery.
The net result of the primary antibody response is the
early synthesis and secretion of pentameric IgM molecules
specifically directed against the antigen (also called the
immunogen). Later during the primary response, a process
known as isotype switching (class switching) occurs, and
the predominant antibody type produced becomes IgG
rather than IgM (discussed shortly). Antibodies made during
the primary response, while specific for the immunogen, are
actually not of the highest affinity. Later responses by memory
B cells increase antibody affinity (see the next section).

Primary and Secondary
Antibody Responses

Primary
response
Serum titer of antibodies

Once you have been infected with a microorganism or
have been given a vaccine, what happens? After a lag
period of several days, antibodies begin to appear in
the serum (the fluid that remains after blood clots).
During the lag period, a series of molecular and cellular events causes a distinct subset of B cells (located in
lymph nodes and spleen) to proliferate and differentiate into antibody-secreting plasma cells and memory
B cells. Each B cell is genetically programmed to make
antibodies to one antigen or epitope—a process called
the primary antibody response.
A subsequent exposure to the antigen, which can
take place months or years after the initial encounter,
will trigger a rapid, almost instantaneous increase in the
production of antibodies and is called the secondary
antibody response (Fig. 24.13). This quick response
occurs thanks to the memory B cells formed during the
primary response. Once stimulated, memory B cells rapidly

Secondary
response
IgG

Booster
dose
Primary
vaccination
IgM
0

1

2

FIGURE 24.13

3
4
Time (weeks)

5

6

7

Primary versus secondary antibody
response. Primary vaccination or infection leads to the early
■

synthesis of IgM, followed by IgG. Reinfection or a second, booster
dose of a vaccine results in a more rapid antibody response consisting mainly of IgG due to memory B cells formed during the primary
response. Note that the time course and level of antibody made vary
with the immunogen and the host.

954

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

As the immunogen is cleared from the body, the levels
of both IgG and IgM decline because the plasma cells that
produced them die. Plasma cells have an average life span of
only 100 days. However, the immune system has been primed
to respond more aggressively to the immunogen, should it
encounter it again. A rapid response to a second encounter
is possible because memory B cells produced during the
primary response are maintained in lymph nodes or bone
marrow and continue to divide. If a person later encounters
the same antigen, these memory B cells quickly proliferate and
differentiate into plasma cells with no lag phase. Thus, memory
B cells rapidly initiate the secondary antibody response (or
anamnestic response, from the Greek anamnesis, meaning
“remembrance”). Memory B cells comprise approximately
40% of the B-cell population.
During the secondary response, memory B cells that
have undergone isotype switching from IgM to IgG
become plasma cells that secrete copious amounts of IgG
antibody. These antibodies have a higher specificity for the
antigen than do the antibodies produced during the primary response (see “Making Memory B Cells” at the end
of this section). The higher specificity—a result of hypermutation—causes some plasma cells to produce antibodies
that bind their antigens more strongly than those produced
Antigen binding to
the right B cell

Different B cells have
different antibody
receptors.

Clonal expansion

by the clonal ancestor. Small amounts of IgM are also produced from the few memory cells that did not undergo isotype switching during the primary response.
The secondary antibody response is why vaccinations
work. Before vaccinations, the only way to be protected from
an infection by a given pathogen was to have already been
infected by that pathogen. Memory cells made during the
primary response will protect you against a second infection,
but pathogens can do considerable harm during the lag phase
of the primary response. To avoid this harm, an innocuous
version of a pathogen, or a harmless piece of it, can be
injected into a person to trigger a primary response without
producing disease (or, at worst, producing only a mild form
of the illness). Immunization thus primes the immune system
to respond efficiently and without delay upon encountering
the real pathogen. Table 24.1 lists a variety of viral and
bacterial diseases for which immunizations are available.
Thought Question

24.6 The mother of a newborn was found to be infected with
rubella, a viral disease. Infection of the fetus could lead to serious consequences for the newborn. How could you determine
whether the newborn was infected in utero?

B Cells Differentiate into Plasma
Cells by Clonal Selection

As mentioned earlier, each B cell circulating throughout the body or nestled
1C
in a lymphoid organ is programmed
to synthesize antibody that reacts
with a single epitope (for example,
a small portion of a protein). In a
Memory B cell 4C
process called clonal selection,
2C
an invading antigen will inadvertently select which B-cell clone
will proliferate to large numbers
4C clone
and differentiate into antibodyproducing plasma cells or memory B cells. In this way, large
3C
amounts of antibody specific
4C cell releases
for the antigen are made. The
antibodies.
mechanism of clonal selection
begins with the antigen binding to a matching B cell (a B cell
4C
preprogrammed to bind to that
Antigen binds to the B cell
antigen; see the discussion of
coated with matching antibody.
4C plasma cell
B-cell receptors that follows)
(Fig. 24.14).
FIGURE 24.14 ■ Clonal selection. The B-cell population is composed of individuals that have
Mature but naive B cells (those
specificity for different antigens. When a B cell contacts its cognate antigen, an intracellular signal is
that
have not previously encoungenerated, leading to proliferation and differentiation of that clone (clonal expansion). Plasma cells
tered antigen) can produce only
and memory B cells result.

CHAPTER 24

IgM and IgD, which have identical antigen specificities.
These two antibody classes are displayed like tiny satellite
dishes on the B-cell surface, anchored by their Fc regions
through hydrophobic transmembrane segments. These
surface antibodies are the keys to stimulating the proliferation and differentiation of B cells into antibody-producing
plasma cells or memory B cells. Upon binding to its corresponding antigen via these surface antibodies, the B cell is
said to become activated, whereby it multiplies and differentiates into a plasma cell that ultimately synthesizes only
one antibody isotype (for example, IgG1 or IgA2). Clonal
selection has begun. In addition to antigen binding, most
B cells require help from T cells to become plasma cells and
memory B cells (discussed later).

■

THE ADAPTIVE IMMUNE RESPONSE

B-cell
receptors

Antigen

S

S

Monomeric IgM

S

S S
S S

Carbohydrates

Outside
Igβ
Inside

FIGURE 24.15

Igα

Igα

Igβ
Membrane

B-cell receptor. The B-cell receptor is formed
as a complex consisting of a monomeric IgM plus Igα and Igβ in the
membrane.
■

Antigen with two
identical epitopes

Binding antigen causes the surface
B-cell receptors to cluster (capping)
and activate Igα and Igβ.

Activation

FIGURE 24.16

■ Capping and activation of the B cell. Two
B-cell receptors can bind two identical epitopes on a pathogen. The
resulting capping process initiates a signal cascade that activates
differentiation and proliferation of the B cell independent of T-cell
help. Antigens with repeating epitopes, such as polysaccharides, can
directly cross-link B-cell receptors.

the end of the BCR cascade stimulate transcription of genes
that contribute to cellular proliferation. Some of these activated B cells can differentiate into plasma cells and secrete
IgM antibody as part of the primary immune response.

Antigen-binding sites

S

955

Mature B cell

B-cell receptor. Each antibody bound to a B-cell membrane

is associated with two other membrane proteins, called Igα
and Igβ (these are not immunoglobulins, but they are designated “Ig” because they associate with the surface antibody). The complex is called the B-cell receptor, or BCR
(Fig. 24.15). Each B cell may have upward of 50,000
B-cell receptors. A microbe generally has multiple copies
of the same epitope on its surface (think about a virus capsid). Each epitope can bind adjacent B-cell receptors on one
B cell. Once bound, surface B-cell receptors begin to cluster in a process called capping. Capping activates Igα and
Igβ to initiate a phosphorylation signal cascade directed
into the nucleus (Fig. 24.16). In a phosphorylation cascade, a phosphate group donated by ATP is passed from
one protein to another, usually ending up on, and activating, a transcriptional regulator. The transcription factors at

■

T cell–dependent and –independent antibody production.

There are two routes by which antigens can stimulate
B cells to differentiate into plasma cells. In one, called
the T cell–independent route, antigens that possess multiple repeating epitopes (for example, polysaccharide antigens) can directly cross-link B-cell receptors (the capping
process)—a step necessary for triggering differentiation
(see Fig. 24.16 and Special Topic 24.1). Proteins, however, which are the largest group of antigens, do not contain multiple repeating units. Proteins possess many small,
discrete, single epitopes, making the cross-linking of B-cell
receptors difficult. B-cell responses to these types of antigens require help from specific T cells, and this constitutes
the second route to B-cell activation. Thus, B cells usually
require multiple signals to initiate a primary response. How

956

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

SPECIAL TOPIC 24.1+ + Can Retroviruses Help B Cells?
The differentiation of B cells into antibody-producing plasma
cells first requires that antigen bind to B-cell receptors
(BCRs). However, a second signal to the B cell is required
to complete B-cell activation. For most antigens, the second signal involves B-cell interaction with helper T cells
(T cell–dependent antigens; see Section 24.3). However, some
antigens successfully stimulate B-cell differentiation without
T-cell help. These antigens are called T cell–independent (TI)
antigens and come in two forms: TI-1 antigens bind BCR and
engage Toll-like receptors (TLRs) as the second signal. TI-2
antigens are large molecules with highly repetitive structures;
for example, bacterial capsular polysaccharides and viral capsids. These highly repetitive structures cause extensive crosslinking of surface BCR molecules. Until recently, the second
signal for TI-2 antigens was unknown.
In a surprising finding, Bruce Beutler (who received the
2011 Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine for the discovery of Toll-like receptors) (Fig. 1A) and his colleagues at the
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center discovered
that endogenous retroviruses provide the help B cells need
to respond to TI-2 antigens. Endogenous retroviral DNA
sequences are the “footprints” of previous retroviral infections (see Chapter 11). Mammalian genomes, including human,
are rife with latent retroviruses, some of which can still replicate to form virus-like particles. It is startling that these remnants of past infection may also play a role in immunity. So,
what led the scientists to this conclusion?

Suspecting that an innate immune signaling pathway in the
B cell was involved in TI-2 responses, Beutler’s team screened
a series of genetically engineered mice missing different pattern recognition receptors (such as TLRs and NLRs) or signaling pathways for an ability to make IgM when challenged
with a TI-2 antigen called NP (Fig. 1B). Of all the pathways
tested, only mice missing the cGAS-STING or Mavs pathways
were deficient in producing NP-specific IgM. So, too, were
lkbkg mutant mice that are defective in the synthesis of the
transcription factor NF-κB. The STING and cGAS proteins
are components of a cytoplasmic DNA sensor, whereas the
Mavs protein is an adaptor for the cytoplasmic RNA sensor
RIG-I. The results indicated that cytoplasmic RNA or DNA is
required for TI-2 antigen stimulation of B cells.
Where did these cytoplasmic nucleic acids come from? An
external source was highly unlikely, but could the cytoplasmic nucleic acids come from endogenous retroviruses (ERVs)
lying latent in the cell nucleus? When tested, NP-specific
B cells isolated from mice immunized with NP had higher levels of various ERV RNAs bound to the RNA sensor RIG-I than
did nonspecific B cells (Fig. 2A). The scientists then showed
that cross-linking BCR with anti-IgM antibodies also induced
ERV replication (Fig. 2B) and that inhibiting reverse transcriptase before NP immunization limited anti-NP antibody
production. Retroviral reverse transcriptase synthesizes ERV
RNA from retroviral DNA templates.

B.

FIGURE 1

■

1.5
1.0
0.5

Pa

in
cG g
M as
Ik av
bk s
g

0

ti
rk ose
2/
Pa
rk
2
gt
/g
t
–/
–
o–
/
pa –
nr
2/
Y

NP-specific LgM
(absorbance at 450 nm)

2.0

****
****
****
****

C
U 57
nc B
93 L/
b1 6J
3d
/3
Tl Tlr d
3
r
Tl 7 rs –/–
r9 C q1/
pG rsq
Tl 3/Cp 1
r2 In G3
Tl gd/I
r
n
C 4 Isp3/ gd
Ti
d3 Isp
ca
6 3
m
1 Lp Tic My obl/ob
am d8 l
s2
/L
ps Ir
1 L 8 –/
2 ak
; I 4 o ps2/L –
ra tios ps2
k e
N 4 otio /otio
irp se se
3 /o

THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS SOUTHWESTERN MEDICAL CENTER

2.5

St

A.

NP-specific IgM production in mice (C57BL/6J) defective in various pattern recognition receptors or pathways.

A. Bruce Beutler (right) and postdoc Ming Zeng. B. Mutant strains of mice are identified on the x-axis. Superscript designations such as
“3d/3d” or “–/–” indicate that the mouse is homozygous for the defective gene. The y-axis shows NP-specific IgM measured in blood 4.5
days after NP injection. Each dot represents a single mouse. **** = statistical P value ≤0.0001.

CHAPTER 24

A.

THE ADAPTIVE IMMUNE RESPONSE

■

■

957

B.
1.5
NP-specific B cells
Non-NP-specific B cells

60

NP-specific IgM
Absorbance at 450 nm

****
40
****

****
**

20

*

**

***

****

*

****

****

1.0

*

*

0.5

FIGURE 2

s –/–
av

s –/–

;M

av
cG

as –

/–

M

as –
cG

g gt/
in
St

7B
C5

L

R

V-

aL

ER

M

M

D
ET
n

K

P

TV

us

M

M

M

V-

IA

ER
M
M

G

eM

LV

LN
xM
L
m V
pM
LV
pM
LV

L/

0

/–

gt

0
6J

Relative abundance of EVR RNA
compared to a control cellular RNA

80

Endogenous retroviruses stimulate B-cell response to TI-1 antigens. A. Immunoprecipitation (see eAppendix 3) of
ERV RNAs bound to RIG-I protein. B cells were collected from mouse spleens and separated into NP-specific and nonspecific B cells. PCR was
used to identify the specific ERV RNA transcripts identified on the x-axis. B. The Mavs and cGAS-STING pathways collaborate in stimulating NPspecific IgM production. Statistical P values: * = ≤0.05; ** = ≤0.01; *** = ≤0.001; **** = ≤0.0001.
■

Antigen
BCR

Bruton’s tyrosine kinase

RNA
sensor

NF-κB

DNA
sensor

Endogenous
retrovirus RNA

Nucleus

Genes (activation,
proliferation)

From these and many other experiments, the authors propose the following events after TI-2 immunization (Fig. 3): (1)
TI-2 antigens cross-link BCRs on B cells, setting off a signal
cascade leading to the production of the NF-κB transcription
factor. (2) NF-κB stimulates transcription of ERV proviruses,
and the resulting RNAs are transported to the cytoplasm. (3)
ERV mRNAs are translated to produce reverse transcriptase
along with other viral proteins. (4) Reverse transcriptase produces cDNA from ERV mRNA. (5) ERV mRNAs and cDNAs
present in the cytoplasm activate RIG-I and cGAS, respectively.
The result is B-cell activation and differentiation to IgM-producing plasma cells.
One possible ramification of this finding is that the continuous stimulation of mucosal B cells by microbiota might
increase the expression of endogenous retroviruses. The
effect that retroviral expression might then have on antibody
production at mucosal surfaces is unclear.

RESEARCH QUESTION
FIGURE 3

Proposed retrovirus participation in the TI-2
antibody response. TI-2 antigens are presented by APCs to B
■

cells. Extensive cross-linking activates a signal cascade leading to
transcription of retroviral DNA. Resulting viral RNA and/or cDNA
activate the cytoplasmic RNA-sensing (e.g. Rig-1) and/or DNAsensing (e.g. cGAS-STING) pathways. Resulting signals induce
the activation and expansion of B cells and differentiation into
plasma cells.

This report provides compelling, but circumstantial, evidence
of retroviral involvement in TI-2 antibody responses. What
“heroic” experiment would definitively prove that ERVs produce the second signal needed for this response?
Zeng, Ming, Zeping Hu, Xiaolei Shi, Xiaohong Li, Xiaoming
Zhan, et al. 2014. MAVS, cGAS, and endogenous retroviruses
in T-independent B cell responses. Science 346:1486–1492.

958

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE
INE AN
AND
ND IMMUNOLO
IMMUNOLOGY
OGY
FIGURE 24.17

■ Steps in antibody formation. Steps 1 and 2
(gene rearrangements) happen in bone marrow before encountering antigen. Steps 3–6 happen after encountering antigen in the
spleen, in the circulation (T cell–independent B-cell activation), in
the thymus, in the mucosa-associated lymphoid tissues (MALT), or
in the lymph nodes (T-cell activation and T cell–dependent activation of the B cells).

Bone Marrow
1. DNA rearrangements in
progenitor B-cell heavychain and light-chain genes
produce DNA encoding
antigen-binding sites.

Progenitor B cell

Heavy-chain VDJ rearrangement
Light-chain VJ rearrangement

Antigen

Mature (naive) B cell
IgD

2. Mature B cell is decorated
with monomeric IgM and IgD.

Antigen

Circulation/
Spleen

IgM

Encounter
antigen

3. Some B cells encounter
antigen and differentiate
into plasma cells without
T-cell help. There is no
isotype switch, so these
plasma cells secrete IgM
(primary response). Memory
cells are also produced.

4. Other B cells encountering
antigen require T-cell help. Helper T
cells are produced after encountering
an antigen-presenting cell in a lymph
node.

Activated

Encounter antigen
and helper T cell
MHC ΙΙ

Antigen

Capping
B cell

TFH

Heavy-chain
isotype switch

IgM secretion

T H0

5. T-cell helps initiate heavy-chain
class switching. Resulting plasma
cells or memory B cells make different
antibody isotypes (one per cell), all with
the same antigen-binding site.

Plasma cell
May make IgG, IgA, IgE, etc.
All have same antigen-binding site.

Plasma cell

Antigen-presenting
cell

Lymph Node

6. Memory cells encountering antigen in
presence of IL-4 undergo hypermutation of
the antigen-binding site (V region). Plasma
cells and memory cells produce higher-affinity
antibodies (secondary response).
Memory B cell (circulates and accumulates
in bone marrow and lymph nodes)
Bind Ag + IL-4

+ IL-6

Produce higher-affinity antibodies
Plasma cell
Replication and
hypermutation
Memory cell

T cells help foster B-cell activation will be discussed in Section 24.3. During B-cell activation, antibody heavy-chain
isotype switching (or class switching) can occur at the gene
level. Class, or isotype, switching changes the class of antibodies produced. For example, some B cells will switch
from making the IgM isotype to making the IgA isotype.
Figure 24.17 summarizes the basic steps of antibody
formation leading to the production of plasma cells and
memory cells. More detailed descriptions of these events
follow in the next section.

Genetics of Antibody Production

Before we discuss how T cells influence antibody production, let’s jump ahead and look at the process leading to antibody diversity. It is estimated that each human
can synthesize 1011 different antibodies. Given that each
B cell displays antibodies to only one antigenic determinant, it follows that there are 1011 different B cells in the
body. We have learned, however, that each person possesses only about a thousand genes or gene segments
involved in antibody formation. How are 1011 different

CHAPTER 24

antibodies made from only 103 genes? Susumu Tonegawa
was awarded the 1987 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for discovering that antibody genes can move and
rearrange themselves within the genome of a differentiating cell. Three steps are involved: (1) the rearrangement
of antibody gene segments (or cassettes), (2) the random
introduction of somatic mutations, and (3) the generation of different codons during antibody gene splicing.
In humans, antibody diversity is generated continually
over a lifetime.
Making the antigen-binding site. The fi rst step in making
a specific antibody occurs during the formation of a B cell
from a progenitor stem cell (progenitor B cell) in bone marrow, before a foreign antigen is encountered. This process
happens throughout a person’s life. Immunoglobulin genes
in a bone marrow progenitor B cell have many gene segments that can rearrange in many possible combinations.
During differentiation into a mature B cell, DNA segments
are deleted in a process called gene switching, which
decreases the number of gene segments in the mature
B-cell DNA. The process starts at the 5´ end of an immunoglobulin gene cluster corresponding to the ultimate antigen-binding site (Fig. 24.18).
In both the heavy- and light-chain genes are a number of
tandem gene cassettes encoding potential variable regions
(antigen-binding sites) separated by recombination signal
sequences (RSSs). RSSs allow recombination to bring
two widely separated gene segments together. There
are approximately 170 variable region (V-region) gene
segments for the heavy and light chains. The light-chain
V-region gene cluster lies upstream of a cluster of J-region
(“J” for “joint” or “joining”) genes that will eventually
join a variable region to a light-chain constant region (C).
Genes for the constant region reside farther downstream
in the DNA. The arrangement of the heavy-chain genes
is slightly more complex. In this case, the heavy-chain
V cluster is followed by a D (diversity) cluster and then the
J region.

Note:

Do not confuse the J-region gene segments used to
make heavy- and light-chain proteins with the J-chain protein that
holds together IgM and IgA multimers. They are completely different and unrelated. The J-region gene segments do not encode the
J chain.

A summary of the genetic processes leading to antibody
formation is shown in Figure 24.18. Antibody formation
begins with a recombination event between RSS sites at
one D and one J segment, which deletes all the intervening
D and J segments (Fig. 24.18, step 1). Next, the new DJ
region joins to one of the V segments, deleting all of the
intervening V and D segments (step 2). The result is a

■

THE ADAPTIVE IMMUNE RESPONSE

■

959

joined VDJ DNA sequence, which can then be transcribed
(step 3). Each V segment has its own promoter. However, if
extra V segments remain upstream of the rearranged VDJ
sequence on the DNA, then the only promoter that will
fire is the one immediately upstream of the rearranged VDJ
segment. The primary RNA transcript will then undergo
RNA splicing to remove any J-segment RNA sequences
that remain downstream of the VDJ RNA sequence
(step 3). The result is a mature B cell that can synthesize a
specific antibody (steps 4–6). Remember, all of the DNA
recombination and RNA splicing happens before the B cell
ever “sees” the antigen. Consequently, the mature B cell
is called naive because it has not yet been stimulated by
antigen.
A similar sequence of events occurs for the light chains,
except that the product is VJ. Table 24.3 illustrates the
amount of antibody diversity that can be achieved in
humans simply by this combinatorial re-joining (a total of
about 5 × 106 antigens can be recognized).
Where does the rest of antigen-binding-site diversity
arise? After recombination, the V regions of the germ lines
are susceptible to high levels of somatic mutation (called
hypermutation), resulting in the hypervariable regions.
Hypermutation happens every time a memory B cell is
exposed to the antigen; the memory B cells divide and the
hypervariable regions mutate. Additional diversity comes
from the junctions of VJ and VDJ, where recombinational
joining can occur between different nucleotides. Each gene
recombination event can generate additional codons, so the
resulting peptides will differ by one or more amino acids.
The interactions between the light- and heavy-chain hypervariable regions in an antibody form the antigen-binding
sites.
In sum, a combination of gene recombination and
random mutations gives us the remarkable level of antigenbinding-site diversity that we each possess. As noted earlier,
the human body is capable of responding to 1011 antigens,
yet there are only 108 antigens in nature. This apparent
overkill suggests that the immune system is well prepared
to cope with any possible antigen it could encounter.
Unfortunately for humans, enterprising microbes, such
as the trypanosomes that cause sleeping sickness, can stay
one step ahead of the immune system by changing the
structure of key surface antigens. Changing the antigenic
structure of a protein renders useless those antibodies
made to the previous structure.
It isn’t hard to understand why multicellular organisms,
like humans, need the capacity to make any one of billions
of different antibodies quickly. Pathogens can undergo
many generations of growth within the single life span of
a human host. So, humans have to generate recombinant
clones of cells quickly to overcome rapidly dividing
pathogens.

960

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

Heavy-chain
variable-region genes

Germ-line
DNA

V1

5′

Joining
genes

Diversity
genes

V2

V3

V4

P

P

P

D1 D2 D3 D4

J1

J2

J3

Heavy-chain
constant-region genes
J4

µ

γ1–4

δ

RSS region
P

V1

5′

V2

1. Recombination in germ-line
DNA joins D and J segments.

Recombination

V3

D1 D2 D3

V4

J3

J4

δ

µ

γ1–4

2. Recombination joins V
segment to DJ segment.

Recombination
B-cell DNA
V1

5′

V2

P
5′
RNA

V2

D3

J3

J4

P
D3

γ1–4
3. Transcription and RNA splicing
remove J segments beyond VDJ
joined segment and sometimes
the µ constant region.

Transcription and
RNA splicing
µ

J3

V2

5′
or

RNA

4. Heavy-chain peptide is made with
either the µ or δ constant region.

D3

J3

δ

Translation

V
5. Light-chain peptide is formed by
separate recombination events.

δ

µ

D
J

+

V

C (µ or δ)

J
C

V

Assembly of heavy
and light chains

J
C

V
J

S

S

D

C

C terminus

S S
S S

6. Antibody is formed.

S

C terminus
S

Heavy chain

Light chain
Variable region

FIGURE 24.18

■

Constant region

Formation of the VDJ regions of heavy chains. Note that only a small subset of the V, D, and J genes listed in

Table 24.3 is shown in this model. RSS = recombination signal sequence.

CHAPTER 24

■

THE ADAPTIVE IMMUNE RESPONSE

■

961

TABLE 24.3+Antibody Diversity Attributed to Combinatorial Joining in the Human Germ Line
Number of:

Chain type
λ Light chains

V regions

D regions

J regions

30

0

4

Number of combinations
30 × 4 = 120

κ Light chains

40

0

5

40 × 5 = 200

Heavy chains

100

27

6

100 × 27 × 6 = 16,200

Number of possible antibodies

16,200 heavy-chain combinations × 120 λ-chain combinations = 1.94 × 106
16,200 heavy-chain combinations × 200 κ -chain combinations = 3.24 × 106
(1.94 × 106) + (3.24 × 106) = 5.18 × 106 combinations

The isotype class switch. We just described how a progen-

Cµ Cδ

ε Cε
SR

itor B cell becomes a mature (naive) B cell (see Fig. 24.17,
bone marrow). The mature B cell (a B cell that has not yet
“seen” the antigen but has already assemSwitch region
(SR) µ
bled its immunoglobulin VDJ binding site)
VariableImmunoglobulin
produces both IgM and IgD B-cell recepConstant-region genes
region
germ-line genes
tors (so the naive B cell is referred to as
genes
for heavy chain
SRγ
SRε
SRα
IgM+ IgD+). The primary immune response
begins when a mature (naive) B-cell receptor
Cµ
Cε
Cα1–2
Cγ1–4
Cδ
VDJ
fi nds its matched antigen (see Fig. 24.17,
(lgM) (lgD)
(lgE)
(lgA)
(lgG)
spleen). In the early stages of the response,
plasma cells produced from these B cells
secrete only IgM, but they eventually
secrete IgM and IgD. If the activated B cell
Deleted
reaches a lymph node and receives approγ Cγ
SR
priate signals from a certain type of T cell
known as a helper T cell (T H cell), then
further immunoglobulin isotype switching
Looping out;
will occur (Fig. 24.17, lymph node); the
SRµ
SRα
deletion of
switched B cell may then make IgG, IgA,
intervening DNA
VDJ
Cα
or IgE, each with the same antigen recognition domain (variable region) but different
constant regions. The type of switch is influenced by small peptides called cytokines
that are secreted by helper T cells.
Assembled IgA
Cα
VDJ
What “flips” the switch? Notice
heavy-chain gene
in Figures 24.18 and 24.19 that the
SRµ SRα
constant-region gene segments defining
Transcription
different antibody heavy-chain classes are
mRNA for α (IgA)
VDJ Cα heavy chain
arranged in tandem after a VDJ region.
The mechanism by which a B cell switches
to make IgG (C regions gamma 1–4), IgE
Translation
(C-epsilon), or IgA (C-alpha 1 and 2) is very
IgA heavy chain
similar to VDJ formation. Each constant
segment, except delta, contains a repeating
FIGURE 24.19 ■ Heavy-chain class switching. As a B cell becomes activated,
DNA base sequence called a switch
a switch in antibody isotype will occur. The switch involves recombination between
region. Recombination between these
isotype cassettes that brings one heavy-chain constant region (Cα in the example, for
switch regions will delete the intervening
IgA) in tandem with a VDJ sequence.

962

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

DNA between the VDJ region and one of the constant
regions. The primary RNA transcript produced after
this recombination event has all of its introns spliced out
before translation. Because the VDJ region is the same
regardless of which CH gene is selected, the antibody
produced will have the same antigenic specificity as the
original IgM. However, the heavy-chain switch selection
process is not random. The type of cytokine present at
the time of the switch will influence which C H gene is
selected.
Note that any heavy-chain peptide (alpha, gamma, delta,
and so on) can combine with any light chain (lambda or
kappa). However, a single, mature B cell can make only one
type of heavy chain and one type of light chain.

To Summarize
■

■

■

Thought Questions

24.7 B cells in early stages have both IgM and IgD surface
antibodies, but the delta region has no switch region. Why
does the delta region have no switch region?

■

24.8 Why do individuals with type A blood have anti-B and
not anti-A antibodies?
■

Making memory B cells. Having encountered an antigen,

the antigen-activated B cell will divide to make memory
B cells, as well as plasma cells (see Figs. 24.14 and 24.17).
Memory B cells are B cells that have already undergone
class switching (committed to making IgG, for instance)
but are very long-lived. Their long lives provide immunological memory. But why do they survive longer than regular B cells? Part of the reason is the production of what one
might call an “anti-suicide” protein called Mcl-1. B cells
that do not encounter their matched antigen eventually
undergo a process of programmed cell death (apoptosis).
However, if the B-cell receptor binds to its matched (cognate) antigen, then a signal is sent to the nucleus to make
the Mcl-1 anti-apoptosis protein. The memory-B-cell line
can now propagate for many years, guarding the person
against microbial assault.
During their lifetimes, memory B cells, like other
B cells, hypermutate the antigen-binding regions of
antibody genes (the VDJ and VJ regions). These mutations
increase the affinity of the antibody produced during
the secondary response; that is, the hypermutation helps
sharpen the antigen-binding site, making it even more
specific toward a given microbe or antigen. Note, too, that
as an immune response clears an infection, the antigen
becomes scarce. This means that only B cells with the
highest-affinity antibodies as part of their B-cell receptors
will remain activated. This process is known as affinity
maturation.

■

■

■

■

Antibodies, or immunoglobulins, are Y-shaped molecules that contain two heavy chains and two light
chains. There are five classes (isotypes) of antibodies.
Each antibody isotype is defined by the structure of the
heavy chain. Antibodies are members of the immunoglobulin superfamily.
Each antibody molecule contains two antigen-binding sites. Each binding site is formed by the hypervariable ends of a heavy- and light-chain pair. The Fc portion
(“tail”) of an antibody can bind to specific receptors on
host cells. This binding is antigen independent.
Antibody diversity (idiotype) occurs via a complex
series of splicing events between adjacent DNA cassettes,
as well as mutational events in DNA sequences encoding
the hypervariable regions of heavy and light chains.
Mature (naive) B cells have completed VDJ rearrangements in their DNA to make the specific antigen-binding site for antibodies. The naive B cell places IgM and
IgD antibodies on its surface (part of B-cell receptors).
A B-cell receptor consists of a membrane-embedded
antibody in association with the Igα and Igβ proteins.
Binding of antigen to the B-cell receptor triggers B-cell
proliferation and differentiation.
Clonal selection is the rapid proliferation of a subset of
B cells during the primary or secondary antibody response.
The primary antibody response to an antigen begins
when B cells differentiate into antibody-producing plasma
cells and memory B cells. IgM antibodies are generally the
first class of antibodies made during the primary response.
The secondary antibody response occurs during subsequent exposures to an antigen. Memory B cells are
activated, hypermutate the VDJ region, and then rapidly proliferate and differentiate into antibody-secreting
plasma cells. IgG is the predominant antibody made.
Isotype switching (or class switching) from IgM production to other antibody isotypes occurs after naive
B cells bind their target antigen. The B-cell receptors on
a single B cell are made of a single antibody isotype that
specifically binds one epitope.

24.3

T cells Link Antibody and
Cellular Immune Systems

Do the two arms of the adaptive immune system (antibodybased and cell-mediated) know each other exist? Because
different types of infections tilt the immune response one

CHAPTER 24

way or the other, the systems must communicate with each
other to provide balance. T-cell lymphocytes, with integral roles in both antibody production and cell-mediated
immunity, manage the balance.
Although derived from the same progenitor stem cell
as B cells (see Fig. 23.17), T cells develop in the thymus
(rather than in the bone marrow, where B cells develop),
and they contain surface protein antigens different from
those of B cells. T cells come in several varieties marked
by the presence of different cell differentiation (CD), or
cluster of differentiation, surface proteins and by the types
of cytokines they produce. Two critically important groups
are helper T cells (already mentioned) and cytotoxic T cells
(TC cells). Helper T cells display the surface antigen CD4,
while cytotoxic T cells display CD8. Cytotoxic T cells are
the “enforcers” of the cell-mediated immune response.
They destroy the membranes of host cells infected with
viruses or bacteria.
Our understanding of helper T cells has evolved over the
last few years. Helper T cells come in several models, the
first of which is the T H0 cell. T H0 cells are precursors to
the other types, including:
■

T FH (follicular helper T cells), a heterogeneous set
of CD4 T cells that drive B-cell differentiation into
antibody-secreting plasma cells. Different T FH cell subsets secrete different combinations of cytokines that
trigger antibody isotype class switching.

A. Major histocompatibility proteins
Class I MHC

Peptidebinding area
α1

S S

α1

T H 2 cells recruit eosinophils to combat parasitic infections and can inhibit T H1 proliferation.

■

T H17 cells stimulate inflammation by secreting IL-17, a
pro-inflammatory cytokine. IL-17 helps trigger recruitment of neutrophils and macrophages to an infection.

■

Treg (regulatory T cells) dampen the inflammatory
response and secrete the anti-inflammatory cytokine
IL-10.

The ratios of these cells and the cytokines they produce tilt
the immune system toward either more humoral or more
cell-mediated responses. To be of any use, however, T cells
first must be activated by antigen.

T-Cell Activation Requires
Antigen Presentation

Unlike B cells, T cells never bind free-floating antigen.
T cells are activated only by antigen bound to another cell’s
surface. These other cells are collectively called antigenpresenting cells (APCs) because they present antigens to
T cells. The APC surface proteins that hold and present
the antigen are known as major histocompatibility complex (MHC) proteins (Fig. 24.20A). MHC proteins differ
between species and between individuals within a species.
They help determine whether a given antigen is recognized

MHC

β1
+

S S

Cell
membrane

FIGURE 24.20

■

C. MHC-antigen binding

Antigen

NH2

NH3

S S

S S

S S

■

β2
–

Cytoplasmic
tail

963

T H1 cells assist in the activation of cytotoxic T cells.

+

α2

β2

■

■

α Chain

Microglobulin
α3

THE ADAPTIVE IMMUNE RESPONSE

B. MHC binding to antigen
Class II MHC

S S

α2

■

Cytoplasmic
tails

Major histocompatibility proteins.

OOC

β Chain
Extracellular space
Plasma
membrane

A. MHC class I molecules are composed of a 45-kDa chain and
Cytosol
–
OOC
a small peptide called β2-microglobulin (12 kDa). MHC class II
molecules contain an alpha chain (30–34 kDa) and a beta chain
(26–29 kDa). The peptide-binding regions of both classes show variability
ty in
in amino
amin
mino
i o acid
acid
id se
seque
sequence
quence
que
nce th
that
hatt yie
yiel
yields
i ld
ld
ds d
different shapes and grooves.
Peptide antigens nestle in the grooves and are held there awaiting interaction with T-cell receptors. CD8 T cells recognize antigen peptides
associated with class I molecules, while CD4 T cells recognize peptides bound to class II molecules. B. Antigen binding to an MHC molecule.
C. Top view of antigen (red) nestled in the MHC peptide-binding site. (PDB code: 1BII)

964

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

as coming from the host (a self antigen) or from another
source (a foreign antigen), in a phenomenon called histocompatibility (hence the name “major histocompatibility
complex”). The salient feature of all MHC molecules is
that they bind antigen that has entered the host cell, and
then present the antigen back on the cell surface. MHC
molecules are critical to the immune system because the

T cell, to be activated, must first recognize a foreign antigen attached to an MHC molecule on an APC.
Two classes of MHC molecules are found on cell surfaces. Both classes belong to the immunoglobulin family of
proteins, but they are not immunoglobulins (antibodies).
Class I MHC molecules are found on all nucleated cells,
whereas class II MHC molecules have a more limited

MHC I (intracellular antigens)

MHC II (extracellular antigens)

1. Foreign proteins made in the
cytoplasm (e.g., viruses) are
degraded by the proteasome
(LMP) to peptides.

1. MHC II assembly starts in ER with alpha and beta
chains associating with the invariant chain used for all
MHC II molecules. This chain resides in the groove that
will bind antigen.

Nucleus
TAP
LMP
Virus protein

MHC I

MHC II
Rough endoplasmic
reticulum

Peptides

2. Peptides (microbial antigens)
are translocated into the ER by
TAP protein.
3. Peptides are loaded
onto MHC I.

Invariant
chain
2. MHC II moves through the Golgi and
into late endosomal compartments.
Golgi complex

3. The invariant chain is degraded
to open the peptide-binding site.

4. Secretory vesicles with
peptide–MHC I complexes
fuse with membrane.

Digested
invariant chain
Endocytic
compartments

Enzyme

Peptide antigens
Exogenous
antigen

FIGURE 24.21

■

4. The microbe is phagocytosed into the
endosome and degraded by proteases. The
peptide antigens are placed on MHC II.
The complex is exported to the cell surface.

Processing and presentation of antigens by antigen-presenting cells on class I and class II MHC proteins.

Left: Microbial proteins made in the host cytoplasm are degraded and peptides are placed on MHC class I molecules in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Right: Microbial proteins made outside the cell are endocytosed (bottom), degraded in the endosome, and placed on MHC class II
molecules. LMP = low-molecular-mass polypeptide component of the proteasome; TAP = transporter of antigen peptides.

CHAPTER 24

T-cell receptors (TCRs) are the antigen-binding molecules present on the surfaces of T cells (Fig. 24.22).
Unlike BCRs, TCRs are not antibodies. A TCR on
helper T cells will bind only to antigens attached to
MHC surface proteins on antigen-presenting cells, as
noted earlier. However, the TCRs of cytotoxic T cells
can bind viral antigens present on any virus-infected
cell, whether or not that cell is normally considered
an APC.
The T-cell receptor is composed of several
transmembrane proteins. Two molecules—alpha and
beta—make up the part that recognizes antigen. Much
like antibodies, the alpha and beta proteins of the
TCR are formed from gene clusters that undergo gene
rearrangements analogous to, but different from, the
immunoglobulin genes.
The TCR alpha and beta proteins are found in a
complex with four other peptides, which together form
the CD3 complex (see Fig. 24.22). When stimulated
by binding antigen, these ancillary CD3 complex
proteins recruit and activate intracellular protein kinases
and launch a phosphorylation cascade that triggers
proliferation of the T cell and key immunological events
that we describe later in the chapter.

Recognition

α

CD3

ε

β
S S

The antigen-binding clefts of different MHC molecules
differ markedly and have distinct binding affinities for
different antigenic peptides (Fig. 24.20B and C).

TCR

N

δ

CD3

γ

ε

S S

–

–

+

+ –

+

ζ
FIGURE 24.22

■

–

Cell
membrane

C

C

Note:

Pathogens are not the only items processed by APCs.
Large proteins, carbohydrates, and other sizable molecules are
engulfed, processed, and presented on surface MHC molecules.

965

T-Cell Receptors

S S

How are foreign antigens placed, or presented, on host
cell surfaces? In the initial stages of an immune response,
antigen-presenting cells internalize the pathogen, such as
a virus or a bacterium. Inside the APCs, pathogen proteins are degraded into smaller peptides (epitopes). These
epitopes are placed within the MHC-binding clefts of
MHC I or II molecules and transported back to the cell
surface.
Whether an antigen peptide binds to class I or class II
MHC molecules generally depends on how the antigen
initially entered the cell (Fig. 24.21). Endogenous antigens,
which are synthesized by viruses and intracellular bacteria
as they grow within the cytoplasm of an APC, will attach
to class I MHC molecules on the endoplasmic reticulum
and are moved to the cell surface (Fig. 24.21 left). In
contrast, exogenous antigens, which are produced outside
of the APC (as are most bacterial antigens), will enter the
cell via phagocytosis and attach to class II MHC molecules
moved to the acidic phagosome or lysosome (Fig. 24.21
right). The MHC class II–peptide complex is then carried
to the cell surface. Once the antigen is presented on the
APC cell surface, T cells can interact with the antigenMHC complex via the T-cell receptors (discussed next).
Interactions between antigen-presenting cells and naive
T cells occur within the lymph nodes, the spleen, or Peyer’s
patches in the gut. So APCs must make their way to those
locations to generate an immune response.

■

S S

APCs Receive, Process, and
Present Antigens by Two Paths

THE ADAPTIVE IMMUNE RESPONSE

S S

distribution on professional APCs such as dendritic cells,
B cells, and macrophages.
The surface CD proteins CD8 and CD4 mentioned
earlier help T cells distinguish between MHC class I and
class II molecules on antigen-presenting cells. The CD8
molecules on TC cells selectively bind MHC class I, while
CD4 molecules on T H cells selectively bind MHC class II.
Antigens presented on class I MHC molecules generally
arise from intracellular pathogens, such as viruses and some
bacteria that require cell-mediated immunity for resolution.
In contrast, antigen peptides presented on class II MHC
molecules originate from extracellular infections, which
are resolved by antibody and are recognized only by CD4
T H cells.

■

Signal triggers
T-cell proliferation

The T-cell receptor (TCR) and CD3 complex.

T-cell receptor proteins are associated with CD3 proteins at the cell
surface. Antigen binds to the alpha and beta subunits. The positive
and negative charges holding the complex together come from amino
acids in the peptide sequences. Once bound to antigen, the complex
transduces a signal into the cell. This signal triggers T-cell proliferation.

966

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

Why don’t your T cells see your body’s antigens? Are
they tolerant somehow? Actually, T cells that strongly bind
self antigens are not made tolerant; they are killed in a
process called T-cell education.

T-Cell Education and Deletion

Greek mythology tells of Narcissus, a young man punished
by the gods for scorning the women who fell in love with
him. One day Narcissus saw a beautiful face in a pool of
water. Not knowing it was his own reflection, he fell in
love, tumbled into the pool, and drowned. His inability to
recognize himself is analogous to the danger posed by an
immune system. Immune systems must be able to distinguish what is self (meaning antigens present in our own
tissues) from what is not self. Otherwise our immune system would constantly attack our own cells. Innate immunity accomplishes this important task, in part, through
the use of pattern recognition proteins such as the Tolllike and NOD-like receptors (see Section 23.5). How adaptive immune mechanisms avoid recognizing self is equally
important. At the outset of development, the immune system is fully capable of reacting against self.
One mechanism the body uses to avoid attacking
itself is to delete any T cells that strongly react against
self antigens. T cells undergo a two-stage selection or
“education” process in the thymus to recognize self versus
nonself. T cells bearing T-cell receptors (TCRs) that
weakly recognize self MHC proteins displayed on thymus
epithelial cells are allowed to survive (positive selection)
and leave the thymus to seed secondary lymphoid organs
such as the spleen. T cells in the thymus that recognize self
MHC peptides too strongly, however, are killed, or deleted
from the population (negative selection). Almost 95% of
T cells entering the thymus die during these positive and
negative selection processes.
This weeding out is important because if our T-cell
repertoire included cells that bound self MHC too tightly,
then our T cells would constantly react to our own MHC
molecules, regardless of which antigen peptides were
attached. Note, however, that some self-reactive T cells
are allowed to survive and are converted into regulatory
T cells (Tregs). Regulatory T cells can block the activation
of harmful, self-reactive (autoimmune) lymphocytes that
escape deletion and enter the circulation. Note that this is
the first way that Tregs can be made. The second involves
APC activation of T H0 cells, discussed later.
Why is positive selection that promotes weak binding to
MHC molecules important? The positive selection process
is needed because T cells must be able to recognize self
MHC proteins before the T-cell receptor can bind the
MHC-associated antigen. Consequently, T cells from
one individual normally do not recognize peptides placed

on antigen-presenting cells from another individual—a
property known as MHC restriction. CD4 T H cells are
class II MHC restricted, while CD8 TC cells are class I
restricted.
Rolf Zinkernagel (University of Zurich) and Peter
Doherty (St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis)
discovered the MHC restriction phenomenon in 1976
with a simple experiment. They demonstrated that mouse
cytotoxic T cells would efficiently kill virus-infected
target cells having an MHC I surface protein identical to
that of the T cell, but failed to kill infected cells containing
a different MHC I protein from a different strain of mouse.
Thus, T-cell recognition has two components: self (the
MHC molecule) and nonself (the antigen). This discovery
won Zinkernagel and Doherty the 1996 Nobel Prize in
Physiology or Medicine.
Why transplanted organs with one MHC type are
prone to rejection by a recipient of a different MHC type is
explained in eTopic 24.3.
Where are T cells “educated”? In contrast to negative
selection for B cells, which occurs in bone marrow, T-cell
education is limited to the thymus. But if the thymus
expresses only thymus antigens, how can T cells that
respond to antigens expressed on other host cells (for
example, heart cells) be removed? The answer is a special
gene activator called AIRE in thymus cells that stimulates
the synthesis of all human proteins in small amounts. This
expression is necessary to complete T-cell education within
the thymus.
You might ask how someone whose thymus has been
removed (done as a treatment for myasthenia gravis) can
live if the organ is critical for T-cell maturation and for
deleting self-reactive T cells. Actually, the thymus begins
losing function shortly after birth, such that very little
function remains in adults. Fortunately, a large amount of
T-cell education occurs during fetal development. Once
a T cell is educated, reserve pools of these T cells are
maintained throughout life outside of the thymus. Some
T cells, apparently, can also mature in secondary lymphoid
tissues. Thus, adults without a thymus can live relatively
normal lives. Babies born without a thymus, however, have
a severe, life-threatening T-cell deficit.

APCs Activate TH0 Helper T cells

Figure 24.23
summarizes the steps that lead to T-cell
activation in the lymph node and highlights how activated T cells influence the two types of adaptive immunity:
humoral (antibody) and cellular. The different classes of
T cells, T H and TC, require different but interrelated activation programs. First we consider TH cell activation. T H
cells require two molecular signals to become active. T-cell
receptors on precursor T H0 cells first recognize and link to

CHAPTER 24

■

THE ADAPTIVE IMMUNE RESPONSE

■

967

Cell-mediated immunity favored
Intracellular
pathogens

Humoral immunity favored
Extracellular
pathogens
1a. TH0 CD4 protein binds MHC II
on APC. TCR binds antigen on
MHC II of APC (signal 1). CD28 on
T cell binds B7 on APC (signal 2).

2a. Cytokines present after
infection guide TH0 into becoming
different helper T cells.

Signal 1
MHC ΙΙ
TCR

TH0

TC

CD28
Signal 1
B7

CD8

1b. TC CD8 protein
binds MHC I–antigen
complex on APC
(signal 1). CD28 on Tc
binds CD28 on APC
(signal 2).

TCR
Antigen
MHC Ι

CD28

CD4
2b. TH1 cells secrete
cytokine IL-2, which
stimulates proliferation of
TC cells. Activated TC cells
secrete molecules such as
perforin and granzymes that
destroy infected target cells.

APC

B7
Signal 2

TH
Activated TH

IL-2

TH1
TFH cell
TH1 cell

TFH

IFN-γ

Activates macrophages
containing intracellular
bacteria

CD154
Processed
antigen
Signal 2
B cell

CD40

3. The TCR on activated T
cells binds to matching
antigen presented on B-cell
MHC II molecules. CD40 on
the B cell binds CD154 on the
T cell, which triggers B-cell
activation (in lymph node).

TH2

TH17

Treg

Plasma cell
Signal 1

Cross-link
B-cell receptor

FIGURE 24.23

■ Summary of the activation of humoral and cell-mediated pathways. Left: Extracellular pathogens tend to
activate humoral immunity (B cells). Right: Intracellular pathogens generally activate cell-mediated immunity by stimulating cytotoxic T cells
(CD8 marker). The balance between cell-mediated and humoral immune responses to a given infection is regulated by the balance between
the production of TH1 (cell-mediated) versus other TH (antibody) helper T cells. This balance is influenced by whether the foreign antigen was
made by intracellular pathogens (TH1-favored) or extracellular pathogens. TH1 cells will encourage activation of cytotoxic T cells (cell-mediated
immunity; best for killing intracellular pathogens), while TFH cells will promote antibody production (humoral immunity; best for attacking
extracellular pathogens). See text for more details.

antigen-MHC proteins on antigen-presenting cells (APCs)
(Fig. 24.23, step 1a). In the case of T H0 cells, the MHC
molecules are class II. The second signal needed to activate
a T H0 cell is the binding of a CD28 molecule present on
the T H0 cell surface to a B7 protein on the APC cell surface
(also step 1a). Different cytokines produced by mast cells,
macrophages, epithelial cells, and so on, during infection
then convert activated T H0 cells to T FH, T H1, T H 2, T H17,
or Treg cells (step 2a). The activation of cytotoxic T cells
(TC cells) will be examined later.

TFH Cells Activate B Cells

During the early phase of a primary response, one type of
B cell in the lymph node can become activated after binding antigen if the B cell also binds to complement C3 on
a bacterium (see Section 23.6), or if a microbe-associated
molecular pattern (MAMP) binds to a Toll-like or NODlike receptor on or in the B cell (see Section 23.5). This activation does not result in heavy-chain class switching; only
IgM is secreted by the resulting plasma cell. This is partly
why the primary response starts with IgM (see Fig. 24.13).

968

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

During the later stages of a primary response, however,
a helper T cell is required to activate most B cells after the
B-cell receptor binds antigen (Fig. 24.23, step 3). This
assistance is called T-cell help. Interactions between B cells
and T cells primarily take place in areas of lymph nodes
called follicles (see the Current Research Highlight). The
follicular helper T cell (T FH) is the primary T cell involved
in driving B-cell activation. (Actually, any T H cell other
than T H0 and Treg can activate a B cell to make antibody,
but to a lesser extent.)
T-cell help is specific to the antigen and triggers heavychain class switching. But how does a B cell gain specific
T-cell help? The specific T FH cell must have a TCR able
to bind the same antigen that the B cell binds. This way
the T FH cell “knows” which B cell to help. As part of the
B-cell receptor capping mechanism (antigen cross-linking
of BCR), some antigen bound by B-cell receptors becomes
internalized and processed to be presented back on the
B cell’s surface MHC receptor (Fig. 24.23, step 3). For
instance, a T FH cell that was activated by dendritic cells
presenting antigen A (step 1a) can also use its T-cell receptor
to bind antigen A presented on a B-cell MHC II molecule
(step 3). This contact allows CD40 on the B cell to bind
CD154 on the T cell—an interaction that completes the
activation of the B cell. The B cell will now differentiate
into a plasma cell (Fig. 24.23, step 3).
The isotype class switch from IgM to another antibody
type is directed by cytokines secreted by the T FH cell. For
instance, IL-4 and IFN-gamma trigger the switch from
IgM to IgE and IgG, respectively.
During the secondary immune response, memory
B cells also need T-cell help to become plasma cells, but
direct contact with helper T cells is not required. Memory
B cells that have antigen bound to their B-cell receptors can
respond to the soluble IL-4 and IL-6 cytokines secreted by
activated helper T cells without having direct contact with
the T H cell. IL-4 stimulates B-cell proliferation, while IL-6
directs differentiation into antibody-secreting plasma cells.

signal is the binding of T-cell receptors (TCRs) to antigen–MHC class I complexes on an antigen-presenting cell
(Fig. 24.23, step 1b). CD8 on the TC cell recognizes an
MHC I–antigen complex on the APC. Because class I MHC
molecules are found on all nucleated cells, any infected cell
can potentially activate TC cells, converting them to cells
that ultimately kill the infected cell. Figure 24.24A takes a
closer look at signal 1 interaction.
A.

Infected cell
Nucleus
Viral
mRNA

Viral
DNA
1. Virus produces
peptides that are
processed to the
surface with MHC I.

Viral peptides

2. CD8 on the T cell
recognizes MHC I
proteins and facilitates
CD8
docking of the T-cell
receptor.
Peptide
3. This T cell is turned
into a killer T cell that will
destroy the virus-infected
target cell.

B.

MHC I
T-cell receptor

Cytotoxic T cell
(CD8+)

Viral
peptide

Infected
cell

Activated
TC cell

Thought Question

24.9 What would happen to someone lacking CD154 on TH2
cells because of a genetic mutation?

Perforin and
granzymes

FIGURE 24.24

TH1 Cells Activate Cytotoxic T Cells

Because they directly attack host cells, CD8 TC cells are
the major “enforcers” of the cellular immune system, along
with macrophages and natural killer (NK) cells. TC cells,
however, are not actually cytotoxic until they are activated.
As with helper T cells, activation of cytotoxic T cells takes
place in the lymph node and requires two signals. The first

■ Presentation of a viral antigen to a T cell
and cytotoxic T-cell action. A. CD8 protein on a T cell directs

the interaction between a T-cell receptor and a viral antigen bound
to a class I MHC protein on an antigen-presenting cell. Signal 2
for activation of cytotoxic T cells is an interaction between B7 (on
an APC) and CD28 on a TC cell, described in the text (not shown).
B. The activated TC cell then leaves the lymph node and migrates
to the site of infection, where it can recognize the viral peptide
presented on the MHC class I receptor on an infected cell. This
interaction authorizes the cytotoxic T cell to kill the infected cell.

CHAPTER 24

The second signal needed to activate TC cells is a
B7-to-CD28 interaction that further links the APC to the
TC cell. This is the same second signal described earlier for
helper T cells. Once activated, the TC cell gains cytotoxic
activity and places receptors for the cytokine IL-2 on its
surface. IL-2 secreted by the T H1 class of helper T cells
(activated earlier) binds to the IL-2 receptors and stimulates
proliferation of the cytotoxic T cell (Fig. 24.23, step 2b).
The resulting “platoon” of activated cytotoxic T cells moves
from the lymph node to the site of infection, killing any
cell bearing the same peptide–MHC class I complex (for
example, cells infected with the same virus that triggered
TC production) (Fig. 24.24B).
Activated cytotoxic T cells kill infected target cells by
releasing the contents of their granules, which contain the
proteins granzyme and perforin. Perforin produces a pore
in the target cell membrane through which granzymes
can enter. In the cytoplasm, granzymes cleave and activate
caspase proteins in the infected cell. The activated caspases
then trigger apoptosis and cell death. The infected host cell
is sacrificed for the good of the whole animal, human or
otherwise.
Why are cytotoxic T cells more effective than B cells
and antibodies at clearing viral infections? A major reason
is that intracellular pathogens (for example, viruses) hide
inside host cells, where they are protected from antibody.
Consequently, these pathogens are best killed when the
harboring host cell is also sacrificed (via cellular immunity).
Because all nucleated cells have class I MHC molecules, any
infected cell can be recognized and killed by an appropriate
TC cell for the good of the host.

TH17 Cells Promote, and Treg
Cells Limit, Inflammation

The immune system is full of checks and balances. Two
sets of T cells critical to regulating the immune response
are TH17 cells that amplify inflammation, and regulatory T cells (Tregs) that dampen inflammation. T H17
cells are derived from T H0 cells and are characterized
by their secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-17.
T H17 cells are the first subset of T cells generated during
an infection. Receptors for IL-17 are expressed on fibroblasts, epithelial cells, and keratinocytes. Contact with
IL-17 causes the production of IL-6 to initiate fever,
chemokines like CXCL8 (IL-8) to recruit neutrophils
and macrophages, and granulocyte-macrophage colonystimulating factors (GM-CSFs) to enhance synthesis of
these phagocytes in bone marrow. IL-22, also produced
by T H17 cells, cooperates with IL-17 to induce synthesis of antimicrobial peptides, such as beta-defensins, in
epidermal keratinocytes. Altogether, T H17 cells enhance
the innate acute inflammatory response to infection.

■

THE ADAPTIVE IMMUNE RESPONSE

■

969

However, the problem with inflammation is that it also
causes damage to local tissues. This is where Treg cells
become crucial.
Treg cells either form during T-cell selection in the
thymus (mentioned earlier), or differentiate from T H0
cells in a lymph node. Treg cells are involved in shutting
down immune responses after an invading organism
has successfully been eliminated, and can prevent
autoimmunity. Once activated by an antigen presented to
its TCR receptor, Treg cells secrete the anti-inflammatory
cytokine IL-10. IL-10 inhibits inflammatory cytokine
secretion by macrophages (TNF, IL-1, and IL-12), reduces
MHC II expression in macrophages, blocks macrophage
activation by IFN-gamma, and blocks cytokine IL-2
production from T H1 cells, thereby limiting production of
cytotoxic T cells (see Fig. 24.23).
Ratios of T H17 to Treg cells vary depending on the
severity of an infection, either exacerbating or quelling
inflammation. The cytokines produced by APCs and other
cells during an infection can tilt the balance one way or the
other. In addition, Treg cells themselves can inhibit T H17
cell functions.

CD4 Helper T Cells and Cytokines
Balance the Immune Response

Antigens presented on class I MHC molecules elicit only
cell-mediated immunity (via CD8 T cells). Antigens presented on class II molecules can stimulate both arms of
the immune system by activating CD4 helper T cells. CD4
T H cells do not kill host cells directly, but instead release
various cytokines that incite other cells to do the killing.
IL-8, for instance, attracts additional white blood cells to
the area. Activated T H1 cells secrete cytokines that stimulate cytotoxic TC cells (see Fig. 24.23, step 2b), as well
as macrophages and natural killer cells. However, sets of
activated T FH cells secrete different combinations of cytokines to trigger B cells to switch immunoglobulin classes
and differentiate into plasma cells that secrete antibody (see
Fig. 24.23, step 3). Table 24.4 lists a fraction of the many
different cytokines produced by various cell types and
describes their influence over the immune system.
But what determines which class of T H cell predominates
during an infection? Part of the answer is found in the
blend of cytokines generated by macrophages or mast cells
during different types of infection. Infections by viruses
and intracellular bacteria, for instance, generate cytokines,
such as IFN-gamma, that favor the production of T H1 cells.
T H1 cells promote cell-mediated immunity. Infections
by extracellular bacteria and parasites, however, generate
IL-4, which inhibits T H0 differentiation into T H1 cells, so
antibody-mediated immunity is favored (see Fig. 24.23,
step 2a).

970

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

TABLE 24.4+Select Cytokines That Modulate the Immune Response*
Cytokine

Sample sources

General functions

IL-1

Many cell types, including endothelial cells, fibroblasts,
neuronal cells, epithelial cells, macrophages

Pro-inflammatory; affects differentiation and activity of cells
in inflammatory response; acts as endogenous pyrogen in the
central nervous system

IL-2

TH1 cells

Stimulates T-cell and B-cell proliferation

IL-3

T cells, mast cells, keratinocytes

Stimulates production of macrophages, neutrophils, mast
cells, others

IL-4

TH2 cells, mast cells

Promotes differentiation of CD4 and T cells into TH2 helper
T cells; promotes proliferation of B cells, class switch to IgE

IL-5

TH2 cells

Chemoattracts eosinophils; activates B cells and eosinophils

IL-6

TH2 cells, macrophages, fibroblasts, endothelial cells,
hepatocytes, neuronal cells

Stimulates T-cell and B-cell growth; stimulates production of
acute-phase proteins

IL-8 (CXCL8)

Monocytes, endothelial cells, T cells, keratinocytes,
neutrophils

Chemoattracts PMNs; promotes migration of PMNs through
endothelium

IL-10

TH2 cells, B cells, macrophages, keratinocytes

Inhibits production of IFN-γ, IL-1, TNF-α, and IL-6 by
macrophages

IL-17

TH17 cells (helper T cells unique from TH1 and TH2)

Recruits macrophages and neutrophils to sites of
inflammation

IFN-α/β

T cells, B cells, macrophages, fibroblasts

Promotes antiviral activity

IFN-γ

TH1 cells, cytotoxic T cells, NK cells

Activates T cells, NK cells, macrophages, B-cell class
switch to IgG

TNF-α

T cells, macrophages, NK cells

Exerts wide variety of immunomodulatory effects

TNF-β

T cells, B cells

Exerts wide variety of immunomodulatory effects

*IFN = interferon; IL = interleukin; NK = natural killer; PMN = polymorphonuclear leukocyte; TNF = tumor necrosis factor.

As a result, once the immune system starts to go down one
pathway, the other pathway is held back. But this is not an
all-or-none response. For instance, a viral infection will also
result in TFH cells that stimulate antibody production. The tilt
toward TH1 or TFH predominance occurs because the body
realizes which pathway—cell-mediated (TH1) or humoral
(TFH)—will more effectively clear a particular infection.
The importance of CD4 T cells in immunity is tragically
illustrated by acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
(AIDS; Chapter 11). The human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV) binds to CD4 molecules to infect CD4 T cells. As
the disease progresses, the number of CD4 T cells declines
below its normal level of about 1,000 per microliter. When
the number of CD4 T cells drops below 400 per microliter,
the ability of the patient to mount an immune response is
jeopardized. The patient not only becomes hypersusceptible
to infections by pathogens, but also becomes susceptible to
infections by commensal organisms. Most AIDS patients
actually die from these opportunistic infections.

Superantigens Do Not Require
Processing to Activate T Cells

To stimulate T-cell responses, normal antigens require processing by antigen-presenting cells. Each peptide produced

by antigen processing must be placed on an MHC molecule and presented to a cognate T cell. However, when an
antigen is introduced into a host, only a few T cells have
the proper TCR needed to recognize that antigen—in the
range of 1–100 cells per million. Proliferation of the T cells
through antigen-dependent activation increases their number and increases the immune response to that antigen.
Some proteins, called superantigens, indiscriminately
stimulate T cells by bypassing the normal route of
antigen processing. In fact, recognition as an antigen
is not even involved. Certain microbial toxins, such as
staphylococcal toxic shock syndrome toxin (TSST), are
actually superantigens. As illustrated in Figure 24.25,
these proteins simultaneously bind to the outside of T-cell
receptors on T cells and to the MHC molecules on APCs
(for example, macrophages). This joining of the T cell and
macrophage activates more T cells than a typical immune
reaction does, stimulating the release of massive amounts
of inflammatory cytokines from both cell types.
The effect of superantigens can be devastating because
cytokines like tumor necrosis factor (TNF) will
overwhelm the host immune system’s regulatory network
and cause severe damage to tissues and organs. The result
is disease and sometimes death. Jim Henson, the creator
of Kermit the Frog and other Muppet characters, died in

CHAPTER 24

■

THE ADAPTIVE IMMUNE RESPONSE

■

971

A.

Cytoplasm

Antigen-presenting cell

After processing, antigens
bind within MHC and TCR
molecules.
Antigen
CHO

α2

β2

α1

β1

αV
αC

βV
βC

MHC II

T-cell
receptor

α2

β2

α1

β1

αV
αC

βV
βC

Exterior
Superantigen
Superantigens bind
immediately to outside of
MHC and TCR molecules.

T lymphocyte

B.

FIGURE 24.25
MHC
binding

TCR binding

1990 from complications of pneumonia caused by a potent
superantigen produced by Streptococcus pyogenes. This
example is but one of many ways that overreaction by the
immune system causes morbidity (disease) and mortality
(death)—effects more pronounced than the direct effects
of the pathogen involved.

Microbial Evasion of Adaptive Immunity

As efficient as our immune system is, numerous viral and
bacterial pathogens have developed effective means for
avoiding the adaptive immune response. Many viruses
produce proteins that down-regulate production of class I
MHC molecules on infected cell surfaces. Down-regulation
of MHC I will limit antigen presentation, since MHC I is
needed for that process. On the other hand, losing MHC I
should expose the infected host cell to natural killer cells
because NK cells attack peers that lack MHC I (discussed
in Section 23.5). To surmount this obstacle, for example,
human cytomegalovirus places a decoy MHC I–like molecule on the surface of infected cells. These decoys are
thought to bind inhibitory receptors on NK surfaces that
block NK cell cytotoxicity.

■ Superantigens. A. The
difference between the presentation of antigen
and superantigen. Antigen presentation requires
the antigen to bind within the binding pockets
of MHC and TCR molecules. Superantigens do
not require processing. They can bind directly to
the outer aspects of the TCR and MHC proteins, linking and activating the two cell types.
B. Staphylococcal toxic shock syndrome toxin
is one example of a potent superantigen. Alpha
helices are shown as red ribbons, while sections
of the beta sheet are shown as blue ribbons.
(PDB code: 2QIL)

Like viruses, bacteria are masters of illusion when it
comes to the immune system. A major cause of gastric
ulcers, Helicobacter pylori, expresses proteins from a
cluster of pathogenicity genes that trigger apoptosis
(programmed cell death) of T cells. Other bacteria have
evolved mechanisms that interfere with signal transduction
pathways controlling the expression of cytokines. For
example, YopP from Yersinia enterocolitica, one cause
of gastroenteritis, inhibits a specific signal transduction
pathway needed to produce TNF, IL-1, and IL-8. Thus,
Yersinia avoids the detrimental effects of those proinflammatory cytokines.
Another method of immune avoidance is employed by
various mycobacteria, some of which cause tuberculosis and
leprosy (Fig. 24.26). These bacteria induce the production
of anti-inflammatory cytokines, which dampen the immune
response. Mycobacterium-infected macrophages produce
IL-6, which inhibits T-cell activation, and IL-10, which
down-regulates the production of MHC II molecules
needed for specific activation of T cells. Fortunately for
humans, in most cases the immune system catches on to
these tricks and, through redundant humoral and cellular
mechanisms, manages to resolve these infections.

A.

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY
COURTESY OF E. HOFFMAN AND S. KUZNETSOV, U. OF ROSTOCK

COURTESY OF E. HOFFMAN AND S. KUZNETSOV, U. OF ROSTOCK

972

B.

proteases. Thus, effective killing of microbial
pathogens comes at the expense of host tissue
damage.

M. bovis

To Summarize
■

Macrophage
10 µm

FIGURE 24.26 ■ Mycobacterium bovis growing within cultured
macrophages (cell line J774). A. Differential interference contrast image of

an infected macrophage. B. The same cell viewed by fluorescence microscopy.
M. bovis is carrying green fluorescent protein. The macrophage was stained for
F-actin (red) and the nucleus (blue).

Activated TH1 Cells Also Activate
Macrophages

Macrophages, too, must be activated to become highly
effective killers of microbes. Activation of macrophages
also requires two signals. One activation pathway involves
interferon-gamma (IFN-γ) produced by nearby infected or
damaged cells, followed by binding of the macrophage to
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or other microbial components
via Toll-like or NOD-like receptors (TLRs or NLRs). Once
activated, the macrophage becomes aggressive in terms of
phagocytosis and increases production of numerous antimicrobial reactive oxygen intermediates.
As noted earlier, some bacterial pathogens, such as
mycobacteria, the causative agents of tuberculosis and
leprosy, grow primarily in the phagolysosomes of macrophages. There they are shielded from antibodies and cytotoxic T cells. Intracellular pathogens live in the usually
hostile environment of the phagocyte either by inhibiting the fusion of lysosomes to the phagosomes in which
they grow or by preventing the acidification of the vesicles needed to activate lysosomal proteases. However, a
macrophage activated by a T H1 cell can rid itself of such
pathogens. Even unactivated macrophages are able to process some of the intracellular bacteria and place antigen
from them on their class II MHC molecules. T H1 cells
then activate these macrophages through binding of their
TCR molecules to the macrophage MHC II–antigen complex and through secretion of IFN-gamma. The activated
macrophages can then kill any bacteria that may be growing within them.
Given that activated macrophages are such effective
assassins of microbial pathogens, why are macrophages
not always kept in an active state? A major reason is that
once activated, macrophages also damage nearby host tissue through the release of reactive oxygen radicals and

■

■

■

■

■

■

The major histocompatibility complex
(MHC) consists of membrane proteins
with variable regions that can bind antigens. Class I MHC molecules are on all
nucleated cells, while antigen-presenting
cells contain both class I and class II MHC
molecules.
Antigen-presenting cells (APCs) such as
dendritic cells present antigens synthesized
during an intracellular infection on their
surface class I MHC molecules, but place
antigens from engulfed microbes or allergens on their class II MHC molecules.

Activation of a TH0 cell requires two signals: TCRCD4 binding to an MHC II–antigen complex on an
antigen-presenting cell, and B7-CD28 interaction.
TH0 cell differentiation to T FH, T H1, T H 2, T H17, or
Treg cells is influenced by different cytokine “cocktails”
secreted by macrophages and NK cells during an
infection.
Activation of a B cell into an antibody-producing
plasma cell usually requires two signals: antigen binding
to a B-cell receptor and binding to a T FH cell activated
by the same antigen.
Activation of cytotoxic T cells requires two signals:
TCR-CD8 molecules that recognize MHC I–antigen
complexes on APCs, and B7-CD28 interactions. IL-2
secreted from activated T H1 cells stimulates cytotoxicT-cell proliferation. The activated cytotoxic T cells, in
turn, destroy infected host cells.
Superantigens abnormally stimulate T cells by
directly linking TCR on a T cell with MHC on an
APC without undergoing APC processing and surface
presentation.

Thought Questions

24.10 Transplant rejection is a major consideration when

transplanting most tissues, because host TC cells can recognize allotypic MHC on donor cells. Why, then, are corneas easily transplanted from a donor to just about any other person?

24.11 Why does attaching a hapten to a carrier protein allow
antihapten antibodies to be produced?

CHAPTER 24

24.4

■

THE ADAPTIVE IMMUNE RESPONSE

973

Antigen

Complement as Part of
Adaptive Immunity

Chapter 23 describes how complement, in what is called
the alternative pathway, can attack invading microbes
before an adaptive immune response is launched (see
Section 23.6). Factor C3b binds to LPS and sets off a
reaction cascade ending with a membrane attack complex (MAC) pore composed of C5b, C6, C7, C8, and C9
proteins (see Fig. 23.36). However, antibody made during
the adaptive response to a pathogen offers another route
to activate complement called the classical complement
pathway. Dubbed “classical” because it was the first
complement pathway to be discovered, it requires a few
additional proteins before reaching C3, the linchpin factor
connecting the two pathways.
The classical cascade begins when a complement C1
protein complex binds to the Fc region of an antibody
bound to a bacterial or viral pathogen (Fig. 24.27). The
bound C1 complex then cleaves two other complement
factors, C2 and C4, not used in the alternative pathway.
Two fragments, one each from C2 and C4, combine to
form another protease, called C3 convertase, that cleaves
C3 into C3a and C3b. C3b in the alternative pathway is
stabilized by interacting with LPS. In the classical pathway,
however, C3b combines with C3 convertase to make a C5
convertase (note that this C5 convertase is different from
the C5 convertase formed in the alternative pathway; see
Fig. 23.36). The subsequent steps leading to formation
of a membrane attack complex (MAC) are the same as in
the alternative pathway. As before, C5b binds to a target
membrane and is joined by C6, C7, and C8. Multiple C9
proteins then assemble around the MAC and form a pore
that compromises the integrity of the target cell.
In Section 23.6 we noted the existence of another
complement activation pathway that does not require
antigen-antibody complexes. The lectin activation pathway
is initiated by lectins (produced by the liver), which recognize
and coat the sugar structures that decorate the surfaces of
infectious organisms. The lectin-coated polysaccharides
trigger cleavage of factor C4 to C4a and C4b. C4b can
cleave C2 and combine with one of the fragments to form
C3 convertase. C3 convertase then continues through the
classical activation pathway just described.
With all the other immune responses at our disposal,
why do we need complement? The need becomes evident
in individuals with complement deficiencies. These patients
are extremely susceptible to recurrent septicemic (blood)
infections by organisms such as Neisseria gonorrhoeae (the
cause of gonorrhea) that normally do not survive forays into
the bloodstream, because they are killed by complement.
Why does reinfecting Neisseria not quickly succumb to

■

lgG

1. C1 complex binds Fc region.

C1

2. C1 complex cleaves C4 and
C2, whose fragments re-join to
make C3 convertase.

Lectin-coated
bacteria can also
cleave C4.

C4

C2

C3 convertase

Enzyme
3. C3 convertase cleaves
C3 to C3a + C3b. C3b
joins with C3 convertase to
make C5 convertase.

C3

C3 is shared by the
alternative pathway.

C3a

C3b

C5 convertase

The classical
and alternative
pathways are
identical from
here.

C5

4. C5 convertase cleaves C5 to
C5a + C5b.

C5a

C5b

5. C5b leads to formation of the
membrane attack complex.

C7

C8

C5b
C6

FIGURE 24.27

■

C9

Classical complement cascade.

all the other defenses, such as antibodies and cytotoxic
T cells? It turns out that key antigens on the bacterial
surface change shape over generations in a process called
phase variation (see Section 10.1). The new antigens are
“invisible” to antibodies made against earlier versions.

Regulating Complement Activation

How do normal body cells prevent self-destruction following complement activation? The sequential assembly
of the membrane attack complex provides several places
where regulatory factors can intervene. One such factor is

974

■

PART 5

■

MEDICINE AND IMMUNOLOGY

the host cell-surface protein CD59. CD59 will bind any
C5b-C8 complex trying to form in the membrane and
prevent C9 from polymerizing. Thus, no pore is formed
and the host cell is spared. (Complement will not normally
attack uninfected or infected host cells, since both contain
CD59.)
Another regulatory mechanism hinges on a normal
serum protein called factor H. Factor H prevents the inadvertent activation of complement in the absence of infection. If factor H is unavailable, then the uncontrolled
activation of complement can damage host cells despite
the presence of CD59. To short-circuit the cascade, factor H binds to C3bBb, displaces Bb from the complex, and
acts as a cofactor for factor I protease, which then cleaves
C3b. Without C3b, the complement cascade stops. Some
bacteria, such as certain strains of Neisseria gonorrhoeae,
have learned to protect themselves from complement by
binding factor H. Factor H bound to the microbe provides a protective “force field” against local complement
activation.
Microbiota can also assist host cells in resisting complement. The intestinal microbe Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron
protects host cells from complement-mediated cytotoxicity by up-regulating a decay-accelerating factor present in
host cell membranes. Decay-accelerating factor stimulates
decay of complement factors and prevents their deposition
at the cell surface.

Other Roles for Complement
Fragments

The C3a, C4a, and C5a cleavage fragments generated
by the complement cascade do not participate in MAC
formation but are important for amplifying the immune
reaction. These peptides act as chemoattractants to lure
more inflammatory cells into the area. C3b, which does
participate in MAC formation, also can act as an opsonin when it is bound to a bacterial cell. An opsonin is
a protein factor that can facilitate phagocytosis. Because
phagocytes contain C3b receptors on their surfaces, it is
easier for them to grab and engulf cells coated with C3b.
Additional roles for complement fragments were discussed
in Section 23.6.

Thought Questions

24.12 Do bone marrow transplants in a patient with severe

combined immunodeficiency (SCID) require immunosuppressive chemotherapy?

24.13 How can a stem cell be differentiated from a B cell at
the level of DNA?

To Summarize
■

■

■

■

The classical pathway for complement activation
begins with an interaction between the Fc portion of an
antibody bound to an antigen and C1 factor in blood.
(The alternative pathway does not need antibody but
begins when C3b binds to LPS on a bacterium.)
The Fc-C1 complex reacts with C2 and C4, leading to
production of C3b and a novel C5 convertase specific to
the classical pathway.
After C5 convertase cleaves C5, the classical pathway
is the same as the alternative pathway, resulting in the
formation of a membrane attack complex (MAC).
CD59 and/or factor H prevents inappropriate MAC
formation in host cells.

24.5

Gut Mucosal Immunity
and the Microbiome

The mucosal surface of the gastrointestinal tract is exposed
to a vast number of food, chemical, and other ingested antigens. The gut also harbors an expansive microbiome whose
members must be controlled and nurtured. Monitoring
this large antigen load requires localized and highly integrated innate and adaptive immune systems, and a system
of gut-associated lymphoid tissues called GALT (see Section 23.4). The innate immune mechanisms that keep our
gut microbes at bay were described in Chapter 23, but the
intestine also has a dedicated adaptive immune system that
monitors and shapes our microbiota, usually without causing excessive inflammation. In this section we describe how
the innate and adaptive immune systems in the gut shape
the microbiome while protecting the host.

The Gut Immune System

We discussed in Chapter 21 how the gut microbial community helps digest our food and outcompetes pathogens
(see Fig. 21.21). Chapter 23 described how we acquire gut
microbiota and how dysbiosis can lead to intestinal inflammatory diseases and obesity. Now in Chapter 24 we see
how the microbiome trains the immune system and, in
turn, how the immune system shapes our microbiome. But
first we must discuss the gut immune system, where the
training and shaping take place.
As described in Chapter 23, the intestinal epithelial
barrier is one cell thick and composed mainly of columnar
epithelial cells [Fig. 24.28, step 1, intestinal epithelial
cells (IECs)] and goblet cells (step 2). Goblet cells secrete

