
_TT1
CHAPTER 1

An Introduction to Geology

buoyant masses of molten rock that rose toward the
surface and solidified to produce a primitive crust.
These rocky materials were enriched in oxygen and
“oxygen-seeking” elements, particularly silicon and
aluminum, along with lesser amounts of calcium,
sodium, potassium, iron, and magnesium. In addition,
some heavy metals such as gold, lead, and uranium,
which have low melting points or were highly soluble
in the ascending molten masses, were scavenged from
Earth’s interior and concentrated in the developing crust. This early period of chemical differentiation established the three basic divisions of Earth’s
interior: the iron-rich core; the thin primitive crust;
and Earth’s largest layer, called the mantle, which is
located between the core and crust.

A remnant planetesimal This image of Asteroid
21 Lutetia was obtained by
special cameras aboard
the Rosetta spacecraft on
July 10, 2010. Spacecraft
instruments showed that
Lutetia is a primitive body
(planetesimal) left over
from when the solar system
formed. (NASA)

An Atmosphere Develops An important consequence of the early period of chemical differentiation is that large quantities of gaseous materials were
allowed to escape from Earth’s interior, as happens
today during volcanic eruptions. By this process, a
primitive atmosphere gradually evolved. It is on this
planet, with this atmosphere, that life as we know it
came into existence.
extensive satellite systems, were also developing. Because
of low temperatures far from the Sun, the material from
which these planets formed contained a high percentage of ices—frozen water, carbon dioxide, ammonia,
and methane—as well as rocky and metallic debris. The
accumulation of ices partly accounts for the large size
and low density of the outer planets. The two most massive planets, Jupiter and Saturn, had a surface gravity
sufficient to attract and hold large quantities of even the
lightest elements—hydrogen and helium.

Formation of Earth’s Layered
Structure
As material accumulated to form Earth (and for a short
period afterward), the high-velocity impact of nebular
debris and the decay of radioactive elements caused the
temperature of our planet to steadily increase. During
this time of intense heating, Earth became hot enough
that iron and nickel began to melt. Melting produced
liquid blobs of dense metal that sank toward the center
of the planet. This process occurred rapidly on the
scale of geologic time and produced Earth’s dense,
iron-rich core.

Chemical Differentiation and Earth’s Layers The
early period of heating resulted in another process
of chemical differentiation, whereby melting formed

Continents and Ocean Basins Evolve Following
the events that established Earth’s basic structure, the
primitive crust was lost to erosion and other geologic
processes, so we have no direct record of its makeup.
When and exactly how the continental crust—and
thus Earth’s first landmasses—came into existence is
a matter of ongoing research. Nevertheless, there is
general agreement that the continental crust formed
gradually over the past 4 billion years. (The oldest
rocks yet discovered are isolated fragments found
in the Northwest Territories of Canada that have
radiometric dates of about 4 billion years.) In addition,
as you will see in subsequent chapters, Earth is an
evolving planet whose continents and ocean basins
have continually changed shape and even location
during much of this period.


Concept Checks

1. Name and briefly outline the theory that describes
the formation of our solar system.
2. List the inner planets and outer planets. Describe
basic differences in size and composition.
3. Explain why density and buoyancy were
important in the development of Earth’s layered
structure.

1.6 Earth’s Internal Structure


Earth’s Internal Structure
Sketch Earth’s internal structure and label and describe the main subdivisions.

The preceding section outlined how differentiation of material early in Earth’s history resulted in
the formation of three major layers defined by their chemical composition: the crust, mantle, and
core. In addition to these compositionally distinct layers, Earth is divided into layers based on physical properties. The physical properties used to define such zones include whether the layer is solid
or liquid and how weak or strong it is. Important examples include the lithosphere, asthenosphere,
outer core, and inner core. Knowledge of both chemical and physical layers is important to our
understanding of many geologic processes, including volcanism, earthquakes, and mountain building. Figure 1.19 shows different views of Earth’s layered structure.
How did we learn about the composition and structure
of Earth’s interior? The nature of Earth’s interior is
primarily determined by analyzing seismic waves from
earthquakes. As these waves of energy penetrate the
planet, they change speed and are bent and reflected as
they move through zones that have different properties.
Monitoring stations around the world detect and record
this energy. With the aid of computers, these data are
analyzed and used to build a detailed picture of Earth’s
interior. There is more about this in Chapter 12.

Layering by
Physical Properties
Hydrosphere
(liquid)

Atmosphere
(gas)
Oceanic
crust
Continental
crust

Lithosphere
(solid and rigid
100 km thick)

Crust
(low-density rock
7–70 km thick)
)

Up
pe
rm
an

tle

id
ol
(s

Lower mantle
(solid)

2 89
0k

m

Mantle
(high density rock)

660 km

0k

515

6 60 km

Transition
zone

Outer core
(liquid)
m
Inner
core
(solid)

km
00
29

410 km

(https://goo.gl/70au1N)

The right side of this cross section shows
that there are three different layers based
on differences in composition.

Lithosphere

Upper
mantle

Earth’s layers Structure
of Earth’s interior based
on chemical composition
(right side of diagram)
and physical properties
(left side of diagram).

Layering by
Chemical Composition

Layers on the left side are based on
factors such as whether the layer is
liquid or solid, weak or strong.

Asthenosphere
(solid, but mobile)

SmartFigure 1.19

Core
(iron + nickel)

63

71

km

24

CHAPTER 1

An Introduction to Geology

Earth’s Crust
The crust, Earth’s relatively thin, rocky outer skin, is
of two different types—continental crust and oceanic
crust. Both share the word crust, but the similarity
ends there. The oceanic crust is roughly 7 kilometers
(4.5 miles) thick and composed of the dark igneous rock
basalt. By contrast, the continental crust averages about
35 kilometers (22 miles) thick but may exceed about 70
kilometers (45 miles) in some mountainous regions such
as the Rockies and Himalayas. Unlike the oceanic crust,
which has a relatively homogeneous chemical composition, the continental crust consists of many rock types.
Although the upper crust has an average composition of
a granitic rock called granodiorite, it varies considerably from place to place.
Continental rocks have an average density of about
2.7 g/cm3, and some have been discovered that are more
than 4 billion years old. The rocks of the oceanic crust
are younger (180 million years or less) and denser (about
3.0 g/cm3) than continental rocks. For comparison, liquid water has a density of 1 g/cm3; therefore, the density
of basalt, the primary rock composing oceanic crust, is
three times that of water.

Earth’s Mantle
More than 82 percent of Earth’s volume is contained in
the mantle, a solid, rocky shell that extends to a depth
of about 2900 kilometers (1800 miles). The boundary
between the crust and mantle represents a marked change
in chemical composition. The dominant rock type in the
uppermost mantle is peridotite, which contains minerals
richer in the metals magnesium and iron compared to the
minerals found in either the continental or oceanic crust.

The Upper Mantle The upper mantle extends from
the crust–mantle boundary down to a depth of about 660
kilometers (410 miles). The upper mantle can be divided
into three different parts. The top portion of the upper
mantle is part of the stronger lithosphere, and beneath
that is the weaker asthenosphere. The bottom part of the
upper mantle is called the transition zone.
The lithosphere (“rock sphere”) consists of the
entire crust plus the uppermost mantle and forms Earth’s
relatively cool, rigid outer shell (see Figure 1.19). Averaging about 100 kilometers (60 miles) thick, the lithosphere
is more than 250 kilometers (155 miles) thick below the
oldest portions of the continents. Beneath this stiff layer
to a depth of about 410 kilometers (255 miles) lies a soft,
comparatively weak layer known as the asthenosphere
(“weak sphere”). The top portion of the asthenosphere
has a temperature/pressure regime that results in a small
amount of melting. Within this very weak zone, the lithosphere is mechanically detached from the layer below.
The lithosphere thus is able to move independently of the
asthenosphere, a fact we will consider in the next chapter.
It is important to emphasize here that the strength
of various Earth materials is a function of both their

composition and the temperature and pressure of their
environment. You should not get the idea that the entire
lithosphere behaves like a rigid or brittle solid similar
to rocks found on the surface. Rather, the rocks of the
lithosphere get progressively hotter and weaker (more
easily deformed) with increasing depth. At the depth of
the uppermost asthenosphere, the rocks are close enough
to their melting temperature (some melting may actually occur) that they are very easily deformed. Thus, the
uppermost asthenosphere is weak because it is near its
melting point, just as hot wax is weaker than cold wax.
From about 410 kilometers (255 miles) to about 660
kilometers (410 miles) in depth is the part of the upper
mantle called the transition zone (Figure 1.19). The top
of the transition zone is identified by a sudden increase
in density from about 3.5 to 3.7 g/cm3. This change
occurs because minerals in the rock peridotite respond
to the increase in pressure by forming new minerals with
closely packed atomic structures.

The Lower Mantle From a depth of 660 kilometers (410
miles) to the top of the core, at a depth of 2900 kilometers
(1800 miles), is the lower mantle. Because of an increase
in pressure (caused by the weight of the rock above), the
mantle gradually strengthens with depth. Despite their
strength, however, the rocks in the lower mantle are very
hot and capable of extremely gradual flow.
In the bottom few hundred kilometers of the mantle
is a highly variable and unusual layer called the D˝ layer
(pronounced “dee double-prime”). The nature of this
boundary layer between the rocky mantle and the hot
liquid iron outer core will be examined in Chapter 12.

Earth’s Core
The core is composed of an iron–nickel alloy with minor
amounts of oxygen, silicon, and sulfur—elements that
readily form compounds with iron. At the extreme pressure found in the core, this iron-rich material has an
average density of nearly 11 g/cm3 and approaches 14
times the density of water at Earth’s center.
The core is divided into two regions that exhibit very
different mechanical strengths. The outer core is a liquid layer 2250 kilometers (1395 miles) thick. The movement of metallic iron within this zone generates Earth’s
magnetic field. The inner core is a sphere that has a
radius of 1221 kilometers (757 miles). Despite its higher
temperature, the iron in the inner core is solid due to the
immense pressures that exist in the center of the planet.

1.6

Concept Checks

1. Name and describe the three major layers defined
by their chemical composition.
2. Contrast the characteristics of the lithosphere
and the asthenosphere.
3. Why is the inner core solid?

25

1.7 Rocks and the Rock Cycle

1.7

Rocks and the Rock Cycle
Sketch, label, and explain the rock cycle.

Rock is the most common and abundant material on Earth. To a curious traveler, the variety seems
nearly endless. When a rock is examined closely, we find that it usually consists of smaller crystals
called minerals. Minerals are chemical compounds (or sometimes single elements), each with its
own composition and physical properties. The grains or crystals may be microscopically small or
easily seen with the unaided eye.
The minerals that compose a rock strongly influA. The large crystals of light-colored
ence its nature and appearance. In addition,
minerals in granite result from the
a rock’s texture—the size, shape, and/or
slow cooling of molten rock deep
arrangement of its constituent minerals—
beneath the surface. Granite is
also has a significant effect on its appearabundant in the continental crust.
ance. A rock’s mineral composition
and texture, in turn, reflect the geologic processes that created it
(Figure 1.20). Such analyses are
critical to understanding our planet.
This understanding also has many
practical applications, including finding energy and mineral
resources and solving environmental problems.
Geologists divide rocks into
B. Basalt is rich in dark minerals. Rapid
three major groups: igneous, sedicooling of molten rock at Earth’s
mentary, and metamorphic. Figure
surface is responsible for the rock’s
1.21 provides some examples. As
microscopically small crystals.
you will learn, each group is linked Oceanic crust is composed mainly of basalt.
to the others by the processes that
act upon and within the planet.
Earlier in this chapter, you learned that Earth is
biosphere slowly disintegrate and decompose rocks.
a system. This means that our planet consists of many
The materials that result are often moved downslope by
interacting parts that form a complex whole. Nowhere
gravity before being picked up and transported by any
is this idea better illustrated than when we examine the
of a number of erosional agents, such as running water,
rock cycle (Figure 1.22). The rock cycle allows us to view glaciers, wind, or waves. Eventually these particles and
many of the interrelationships among different parts of
dissolved substances, called sediment, are deposited.
the Earth system. It helps us understand the origin of
Although most sediment ultimately comes to rest in the
igneous, sedimentary, and metamorphic rocks and to
ocean, other sites of deposition include river floodplains,
see that each type is linked to the others by processes
desert basins, swamps, and sand dunes.
that act upon and within the planet. Consider the rock
Next, the sediments undergo lithification, a term
cycle to be a simplified but useful overview of physical
meaning “conversion into rock.” Sediment is usually
geology. Learn the rock cycle well; you will be examinlithified into sedimentary rock when compacted by
ing its interrelationships in greater detail throughout
the weight of overlying layers or when cemented as
this book.
percolating groundwater fills the pores with mineral
matter.
If the resulting sedimentary rock is buried deep
The Basic Cycle
within Earth and involved in the dynamics of mountain
Magma is molten rock that forms deep beneath Earth’s sur- building or intruded by a mass of magma, it is subjected
face. Over time, magma cools and solidifies. This process,
to great pressures and/or intense heat. The sedimentary
called crystallization, may occur either beneath the surface
rock reacts to the changing environment and turns into
or, following a volcanic eruption, at the surface. In either
the third rock type, metamorphic rock. When metasituation, the resulting rocks are called igneous rocks.
morphic rock is subjected to additional pressure changes
If igneous rocks are exposed at the surface, they
or to still higher temperatures, it melts, creating magma,
undergo weathering, in which the day-in and daywhich eventually crystallizes into igneous rock, starting
out influences of the atmosphere, hydrosphere, and
the cycle all over again.

Figure 1.20
Two basic rock characteristics Texture and mineral
composition are basic rock
features. These two
samples are the common
igneous rocks granite (A)
and basalt (B). (Photo A by
geoz/alamy Images; photo B by
Tyler Boyes/Shutterstock)

26

CHAPTER 1

An Introduction to Geology

Figure 1.21
Three rock groups Geologists divide rocks into three
groups: igneous, sedimentary, and metamorphic.

Igneous rocks form when
molten rock solidifies at the
surface (extrusive) or
beneath the surface
(intrusive). The lava flow in
the foreground is the
fine-grained rock basalt and
came from SP Crater in
northern Arizona.
Michael Collier

Sedimentary rocks consist of
particles derived from the
weathering of other rocks.
This layer consists of durable
sand-size grains of the glassy
mineral quartz that are
cemented into a solid rock.
The grains were once a part
of extensive dunes. This rock
layer, called the Navajo
Sandstone, is prominent in
southern Utah.
Dennis Tasa

Dennis Tasa

Where does the energy that drives Earth’s rock cycle
come from? Processes driven by heat from Earth’s interior are responsible for creating igneous and metamorphic rocks. Weathering and erosion, external processes
powered by energy from the Sun, produce the sediment
from which sedimentary rocks form.

Alternative Paths
The paths shown in the basic cycle are not the only ones
possible. To the contrary, other paths are just as likely to
be followed as those described in the preceding section.
These alternatives are indicated by the light blue arrows
in Figure 1.22.

The metamorphic rock
pictured here, known as the
Vishnu Schist, is exposed in
the inner gorge of the Grand
Canyon. Its formation is
associated with environments
deep below Earth's surface
where temperatures and
pressures are high and with
the forces associated with
ancient mountain-building
processes that occurred in
Precambrian time.

Rather than being exposed to weathering and
erosion at Earth’s surface, igneous rocks may remain
deeply buried. Eventually these masses may be subjected to the strong compressional forces and high
temperatures associated with mountain building.
When this occurs, they are transformed directly into
metamorphic rocks.
Metamorphic and sedimentary rocks, as well as sediment, do not always remain buried. Rather, overlying layers may be stripped away, exposing the once-buried rock.
This exposed material is attacked by weathering processes
and turned into new raw materials for sedimentary rocks.
Although rocks may seem to be unchanging masses,
the rock cycle shows that they are not. The changes,

27

1.7 Rocks and the Rock Cycle

ROCK CYCLE
Viewed over long time spans,
rocks are constantly forming,
changing, and re-forming.

Extrusive
Igneous Rock

When magma or lava
cools and solidifies,
igneous rock forms.

Lava
USGS

lin
Coo

USGS

stallization
g, cry

Intrusive
Igneous
Rock

ism
rph
o
m
Meta

en

or

se

ta

a
fic , ce
i
h
i t on

ph

pr ism
e

s

Dennis Tasa

Sediment

t

a

m
ta t
Me t, in

(he

Me

Upl
ift,
we
ath
eri
ng
,t
r
_TT2


mo

rphi

sm

Heat

sition
depo
d
n
a
on,
ati
t
r
o
sp
an

Weathering breaks
down rock that is
transported and
deposited as
sediment.

)

li
Up

tion, and deposition
nsporta
g, tra
n
i
r
e
eath
ft, w

ion

Metamorphic
Rock

E. J. Tarbuck

i
m on
en
ta
t

Melti

ng

M e l ti n g

ring,

Magma forms when
rock melts deep
beneath Earth’s
surface.

athe sition
We rt, depo
o
nsp
tra

Magma

su
When
re)
sedimentary
rock is buried deep
in the crust, heat and
pressure (stress) change it
to metamorphic rock.

(co

L cti
a

mp

Sediment is
compacted and cemented
to form sedimentary rock.

E. J. Tarbuck

SmartFigure 1.22

Sedimentary
Rock

Dennis Tasa

The rock cycle The rock cycle helps us
understand the origin of the three basic rock
groups. Arrows represent processes that link
each group to the others. (https://goo.gl/dYWRsL)

28

CHAPTER 1

An Introduction to Geology

however, take time—vast amounts of time. We can
observe different parts of the cycle operating all over the
world. Today new magma is forming beneath the island
of Hawaii. When it erupts at the surface, the lava flows
add to the size of the island. Meanwhile, the Colorado
Rockies are gradually being worn down by weathering
and erosion. Some of this weathered debris will eventually be carried to the Gulf of Mexico, where it will add to
the already substantial mass of sediment that has accumulated there.

1.8

1.7

Concept Checks

1. List two rock characteristics that are used to
determine the processes that created a rock.
2. Sketch and label a basic rock cycle. Make sure to
include alternate paths.

The Face of Earth
List and describe the major features of the continents and ocean basins.

The two principal divisions of Earth’s surface are the ocean basins and the continents (Figure 1.23).
A significant difference between these two areas is their relative levels. The elevation difference
between the ocean basins and the continents is primarily due to differences in their respective
densities and thicknesses:
r Ocean basins. The average depth of the ocean floor
is about 3.8 kilometers (2.4 miles) below sea level, or
about 4.5 kilometers (2.8 miles) lower than the average elevation of the continents. The basaltic rocks
that comprise the oceanic crust average only 7 kilometers (about 4.5 miles) thick and have an average
density of about 3.0 g/cm3.
r Continents. The continents are remarkably flat features that have the appearance of plateaus protruding
above sea level. With an average elevation of about 0.8
kilometer (0.5 mile), continental blocks lie close to sea
level, except for limited areas of mountainous terrain.
Recall that the continents average about 35 kilometers
(22 miles) thick and are composed of granitic rocks
that have a density of about 2.7 g/cm3.
The thicker, less dense continental crust is more
buoyant than the oceanic crust. As a result, continental
crust floats on top of the deformable rocks of the mantle
at a higher level than oceanic crust for the same reason
that a large, empty (less dense) cargo ship rides higher
than a small, loaded (denser) one.

Major Features of the Ocean Floor
If all water were drained from the ocean basins, a
great variety of features would be seen, including
chains of volcanoes, deep canyons, plateaus, and large
expanses of monotonously flat plains. In fact, the
scenery would be nearly as diverse as that on the
continents (see Figure 1.23). These features and the
processes that form them are covered in detail in
Chapter 13.
During the past 65 years, oceanographers have used
modern depth-sounding equipment and satellite technology to map significant portions of the ocean floor. These

studies have led them to identify three major regions:
continental margins, deep-ocean basins, and oceanic
(mid-ocean) ridges.

Continental Margins The continental margin is the
portion of the seafloor adjacent to major landmasses. It
may include the continental shelf, the continental slope,
and the continental rise.
Although land and sea meet at the shoreline, this
is not the boundary between the continents and the
ocean basins. Rather, along most coasts, a gently sloping platform of material, called the continental shelf,
extends seaward from the shore. Because it is underlain
by continental crust, it is clearly a flooded extension of
the continents. A glance at Figure 1.23 shows that the
width of the continental shelf varies. For example, it
is broad along the east and Gulf coasts of the United
States but relatively narrow along the Pacific margin of
the continent.
The boundary between the continents and the
deep-ocean basins lies along the continental slope,
a relatively steep dropoff that extends from the outer
edge of the continental shelf to the floor of the deep
ocean (see Figure 1.23). Using this as the dividing line,
we find that about 60 percent of Earth’s surface is represented by ocean basins and the remaining 40 percent
by continents.
In regions where trenches do not exist, the steep
continental slope merges into a more gradual incline
known as the continental rise, a thick wedge of sediment that moved downslope from the continental shelf
and accumulated on the deep-ocean floor.

Deep-Ocean Basins Situated between the continental margins and oceanic ridges are deep-ocean basins.
Parts of these regions consist of incredibly flat features

1.8 The Face of Earth

E Y E ON E A R T H

1.3

T

his is a shoreline scene along the east coast of the
United States. The Atlantic Ocean is on the right.

QUESTION 1 Does the shoreline, the line where the
water meets the land, mark the outer edge of the North
American continent?

Michael Collier

QUESTION 2 Explain your answer to Question 1.

called abyssal plains. The ocean floor also contains
extremely deep depressions, some more than 11,000
meters (36,000 feet) deep. Although these deep-ocean
trenches are relatively narrow and represent only a
small fraction of the ocean floor, they are nevertheless
very significant features. Some trenches are located
adjacent to young mountains that flank the continents.
For example, in Figure 1.23 the Peru–Chile trench off
the west coast of South America parallels the Andes
Mountains. Other trenches parallel island chains called
volcanic island arcs.
Dotting the ocean floor are submerged volcanic
structures called seamounts, which sometimes form
long, narrow chains. Volcanic activity has also produced
several large lava plateaus, such as the Ontong Java Plateau located northeast of New Guinea. In addition, some
submerged plateaus are composed of continental-type
crust. Examples include the Campbell Plateau southeast
of New Zealand and the Seychelles Bank northeast of
Madagascar.

Oceanic Ridges The most prominent feature on
the ocean floor is the oceanic ridge, or mid-ocean
ridge. As shown in Figure 1.23, the Mid-Atlantic
Ridge and the East Pacific Rise are parts of this system. This broad elevated feature forms a continuous
belt winding more than 70,000 kilometers (43,500
miles) around the globe, in a manner similar to the
seam of a baseball. Unlike most continental mountains
that consist of highly deformed rock, the oceanic ridge
system consists of layer upon layer of igneous rock that
has been fractured and uplifted.

Major Features of the Continents
The major features of the continents can be grouped
into two distinct categories: uplifted regions of

deformed rocks that make up present-day mountain
belts and extensive flat, stable areas that have been
eroded nearly to sea level. Notice in Figure 1.24 that the
young mountain belts tend to be long, narrow features
at the margins of continents and that the flat, stable
areas are typically located in the interiors of the continents. Mountain building is discussed in more detail in
Chapter 14.

Mountain Belts The most prominent continental features are mountains. Although their distribution appears
to be random, this is not the case. The youngest mountains (those less than 100 million years old) are located
principally in two major zones. The circum-Pacific belt
(the region surrounding the Pacific Ocean) includes the
mountains of the western Americas and continues into
the western Pacific in the form of volcanic island arcs
(see Figure 1.23). Island arcs are active mountainous
regions composed largely of volcanic rocks and deformed
sedimentary rocks. Examples include the Aleutian
Islands, Japan, the Philippines, and New Guinea.
The other major mountain belt extends eastward
from the Alps through Iran and the Himalayas and then
dips southward into Indonesia. Careful examination
of mountainous terrains reveals that most are places
where thick sequences of rocks have been squeezed and
highly deformed, as if placed in a gigantic vise. Older
mountains are also found on the continents. Examples
include the Appalachians in the eastern United States
and the Urals in Russia. Their once lofty peaks are now
worn low, the result of millions of years of weathering
and erosion.
The Stable Interior Unlike the young mountain belts that
have formed within the past 100 million years, the interiors
of the continents, called cratons, have been relatively stable
(undisturbed) for the past 600 million years or even longer.

29

32

An Introduction to Geology

CHAPTER 1

The Appalachians are old mountains. Mountain
building began about 480 million years ago
and continued for more than 200 million years.
Erosion has lowered these once lofty peaks.

The Canadian Shield is an expansive region of
ancient Precambrian rocks, some more than
4 billion years old. It was recently scoured by
Ice Age glaciers.

The rugged Himalayas are the highest
mountains on Earth and are geologically young.
They began forming about 50 million years ago
and uplift continues today.

Superstock

Alamy Images

Canadian
shield

N.A
.
Co
il
rd

a
ler
Stable platforms (shields
covered by sedimentary rock)

SmartFigure 1.24
The continents Distribution of mountain belts,
stable platforms, and
shields. (https://goo.gl/z2Sbxd)

Himalaya Mou
ntai
ns
Indian
shield

Brazilian
shield

Australian
shield

ountains

Shields

African
shield

Angara
shield

Being familiar with the topographic features that
comprise the face of Earth is essential to understanding
the mechanisms that have shaped our planet. What is the
significance of the enormous ridge system that extends
through all the world’s oceans? What is the connection,
if any, between young, active mountain belts and oceanic
trenches? What forces crumple rocks to produce majestic
mountain ranges? These are a few of the questions that
will be addressed beginning in the next chapter, as we
investigate the dynamic processes that shaped our planet
in the geologic past and will continue to shape it in the
future.

1.8

Great
ing Rang
e
vid
Di

Old mountain belts

Orinoco
shield

sM
de
An

Key
Young mountain belts (less
than 100 million years old)

A

ns
hia
c
ala
pp

an Belt
oni
ed
Baltic
shield
Alps

Ca
l

Greenland
shield

Urals

Michael Collier

Concept Checks

1. Compare and contrast ocean basins and
continents.
2. Name the three major regions of the ocean floor.
What are some features associated with each?
3. Describe the general distribution of Earth’s
youngest mountains.
4. What is the difference between shields and stable
platforms?

2
Plate
Tectonics:
A Scientific
Revolution
Unfolds

Hikers crossing a crevasse in Khumbu glacier, Mount
Everest, Nepal. (Photo by Christian Kober/Robert Harding)

P

late tectonics

is the first theory to provide a comprehensive view of the processes that produced Earth’s major surface features, including the continents and
ocean basins. Within the framework of this theory, geologists have found explanations
for the basic causes and distribution of earthquakes, volcanoes, and mountain belts.
Further, we are now better able to explain the distribution of plants and animals in the
geologic past, as well as the distribution of economically significant mineral deposits.

2.1

Figure 2.1
The Himalayan mountains
where created when the
subcontinent of India
collided with southeastern
Asia. (Photo by Hartmut Postges/
Robert Harding)

From Continental Drift to Plate Tectonics
Summarize the view that most geologists held prior to the 1960s regarding the
geographic positions of the ocean basins and continents.

Prior to the late 1960s most geologists held the view that the ocean basins and continents had fixed
geographic positions and were of great antiquity. Scientists came to realize that Earth’s continents
are not static; instead, they gradually migrate across the globe. These movements cause blocks
of continental material to collide, deforming the intervening crust and thereby creating Earth’s
great mountain chains (Figure 2.1). Furthermore, landmasses occasionally split apart. As continental
blocks separate, a new ocean basin emerges between them. Meanwhile, other portions of the seafloor plunge into the mantle. In short, a dramatically different model of Earth’s tectonic processes
emerged. Tectonic processes deform Earth’s crust to create major structural features, such as
mountains, continents, and ocean basins.
This profound reversal in scientific thought has been
appropriately called a scientific revolution. The revolution began early in the twentieth century as a relatively

straightforward proposal termed continental drift. For
more than 50 years, the scientific community categorically rejected the idea that continents are capable of

39

2.2 Continental Drift: An Idea Before Its Time

movement. North American geologists in particular
had difficulty accepting continental drift, perhaps
because much of the supporting evidence had been
gathered from Africa, South America, and Australia,
continents with which most North American geologists
were unfamiliar.
After World War II, modern instruments replaced
rock hammers as the tools of choice for many researchers. Armed with more advanced tools, geologists and a
new breed of researchers, including geophysicists and
geochemists, made several surprising discoveries that
rekindled interest in the drift hypothesis. By 1968 these
developments had led to the unfolding of a far more
encompassing explanation known as the theory of plate
tectonics.

2.2

In this chapter, we will examine the events that led
to this dramatic reversal of scientific opinion. We will
also briefly trace the development of the continental drift
hypothesis, examine why it was initially rejected, and
consider the evidence that finally led to the acceptance
of its direct descendant—the theory of plate tectonics.

2.1

Concept Checks

1. Briefly describe the view held by most geologists
regarding the ocean basins and continents prior
to the 1960s.
2. What group of geologists were the least receptive
to the continental drift hypothesis? Why?

Continental Drift: An Idea Before Its Time
List and explain the evidence Wegener presented to support his continental drift
hypothesis.

The idea that continents, particularly South America and Africa, fit together like pieces of a
jigsaw puzzle came about during the 1600s, as better world maps became available. However,
little significance was given to this notion until 1915, when Alfred Wegener (1880–1930), a
German meteorologist and geophysicist, wrote The Origin of Continents and Oceans. This
book outlined Wegener’s hypothesis called continental drift, which dared to challenge the
long-held assumption that the continents and ocean basins had fixed geographic positions.

N
P A

Wegener suggested that a single supercontinent
Evidence: The Continental
consisting of all Earth’s landmasses once existed.*
Jigsaw Puzzle
He named this giant landmass Pangaea (pronounced
“Pan-jee-ah,” meaning “all lands”) (Figure 2.2). Wegener
Like a few others before him, Wegener suspected that
further hypothesized that about 200 million years ago,
the continents might once have been joined when he
during the early part of the
Modern reconstruction of Pangaea
Mesozoic era, this supercontinent began to fragment into
Asia
smaller landmasses. These continental blocks then “drifted” to their
S.E. Asia
present positions over a span of milTethys Sea
North
lions of years.
America
Wegener and others who
advocated the continental drift
Africa
hypothesis collected substantial
South
evidence to support their point of
America
India
view. The fit of South America and
Africa and the geographic distribuA Australia
tion of fossils and ancient climates all
Antarctica
seemed to buttress the idea that these now
separate landmasses were once joined. Let us
examine some of this evidence.

G

A

E

*Wegener was not the first to conceive of a long-vanished
supercontinent. Edward Suess (1831–1914), a distinguished
nineteenth-century geologist, pieced together evidence for a giant
landmass comprising South America, Africa, India, and Australia.

Wegener’s Pangaea,
redrawn from his book
published in 1915.

SmartFigure 2.2
Reconstructions of
Pangaea The supercontinent of Pangaea, as it is
thought to have formed
in the late Paleozoic and
early Mesozoic eras, more
than 200 million years ago.
(https://goo.gl/eOttu9)

40

CHAPTER 2

Plate Tectonics: A Scientific Revolution Unfolds

Figure 2.3
Two of the puzzle pieces
The best fit of South
America and Africa along
the continental slope at
a depth of 500 fathoms
(about 900 meters
[3000 feet]). (Based on
A. G. Smith, “Continental Drift,” in
Understanding the Earth, edited
by I. G. Gass, Artemis Press.)

(scientists who study the fossilized remains of ancient
organisms) agreed that some type of land connection was
needed to explain the existence of similar Mesozoic age
life-forms on widely separated landmasses. Just as modern life-forms native to North America are not the same
as those of Africa and Australia, during the Mesozoic era,
organisms on widely separated continents should have
been distinctly different.

Continental
shelf

Modern

r

Equato

AFRICA
Mo

SOUTH AMERICA

der

nE

Mesosaurus To add credibility to his argument,

qua

tor

noticed the remarkable similarity between the coastlines
on opposite sides of the Atlantic Ocean. However, other
Earth scientists challenged Wegener’s use of present-day
shorelines to “fit” these continents together. These opponents correctly argued that wave erosion and depositional
processes continually modify shorelines. Even if continental displacement had taken place, a good fit today
would be unlikely. Because Wegener’s original jigsaw fit
of the continents was crude, it is assumed that he was
aware of this problem (see Figure 2.2).
Scientists later determined that a much better
approximation of the outer boundary of a continent
is the seaward edge of its continental shelf, which lies
submerged a few hundred meters below sea level. In
the early 1960s, Sir Edward Bullard and two associates
constructed a map that pieced together the edges of the
continental shelves of South America and Africa at a
depth of about 900 meters (3000
feet) (Figure 2.3). The remarkable
fit obtained was more precise than
even these researchers had expected.

Wegener documented cases of several fossil organisms
found on different landmasses, even though their living forms were unlikely to have crossed the vast ocean
presently separating them (Figure 2.4). A classic example
is Mesosaurus, a small aquatic freshwater reptile whose
fossil remains are limited to black shales of the Permian
period (about 260 million years ago) in eastern South
America and southwestern Africa. If Mesosaurus had
been able to make the long journey across the South
Atlantic, its remains should be more widely distributed.
As this is not the case, Wegener asserted that South
America and Africa must have been joined during that
period of Earth history.
How did opponents of continental drift explain the
existence of identical fossil organisms in places separated
by thousands of kilometers of open ocean? Rafting, transoceanic land bridges (isthmian links), and island stepping stones were the most widely invoked explanations
for these migrations (Figure 2.5). We know, for example,
that during the Ice Age that ended about 8000 years ago,
the lowering of sea level allowed mammals (including
humans) to cross the narrow Bering Strait that separates
Russia and Alaska. Was it possible that land bridges once

Africa

C. Lystrosaurus
India
Australia

Evidence: Fossils
Matching Across
the Seas

Mesosaurus

Lystrosaurus

South
America

Although the seed for Wegener’s hypothAntarctica
Glossopteris
esis came from the striking similarities
of the continental margins on opposite
sides of the Atlantic, it was when he
B. Glossopteris
A. Mesosaurus
learned that identical fossil organisms
had been discovered in rocks from Figure 2.4
both South America and Africa
Fossil evidence supporting continental drift Fossils of identical organisms have been
that his pursuit of continental drift discovered in rocks of similar age in Australia, Africa, South America, Antarctica, and
became more focused. Wegener
India— continents that are currently widely separated by ocean barriers. Wegener
learned that most paleontologists accounted for these occurrences by placing these continents in their pre-drift locations.

41

2.2 Continental Drift: An Idea Before Its Time

connected Africa and South America but later subsided below sea
level? Modern maps of the seafloor
substantiate Wegener’s contention
that if land bridges of this magnitude existed, their remnants would
still lie below sea level.

Figure 2.5
How do land animals
cross vast oceans? These
sketches illustrate various proposals to explain
the occurrence of similar
species on landmasses
now separated by vast
oceans. (Used by permission of

Glossopteris Wegener also

John C. Holden)

cited the distribution of the fossil
“seed fern” Glossopteris as evidence for Pangaea’s existence (see
Figure 2.4). With tongue-shaped
leaves and seeds too large to be
carried by the wind, this plant
was known to be widely dispersed
among Africa, Australia, India,
and South America. Later, fossil
remains of Glossopteris were also
discovered in Antarctica.* Wegener
also learned that these seed ferns
and associated flora grew only in
cool climates—similar to central Alaska. Therefore, he
concluded that when these landmasses were joined, they
were located much closer to the South Pole.

Evidence: Rock Types
and Geologic Features
You know that successfully completing a jigsaw puzzle
requires fitting the pieces together while maintaining the
continuity of the picture. The “picture” that must match
* In 1912 Captain Robert Scott and two companions froze to death lying beside
35 pounds (16 kilograms) of rock on their return from a failed attempt to be the
first to reach the South Pole. These samples, collected on Beardmore Glacier,
contained fossil remains of Glossopteris.

Caledonian
Mountains

in the “continental drift puzzle” is one of rock types and
geologic features such as mountain belts. If the continents were once together, the rocks found in a particular
region on one continent should closely match in age and
type those found in adjacent positions on the adjoining
continent. Wegener found evidence of highly deformed
igneous rocks in Brazil that closely resembled similar
rocks in Africa.
Similar evidence can be found in mountain belts that
terminate at one coastline and reappear on landmasses
across the ocean. For instance, the mountain belt that
includes the Appalachians trends northeastward through
the eastern United States and disappears off the coast of
Newfoundland (Figure 2.6A). Mountains of comparable age
and structure are found in the British Isles and Scandinavia. When these landmasses are positioned
as they were about 200 million years ago, as
shown in Figure 2.6B, the mountain chains form
a nearly continuous belt.

Scandinavia
British
Isles

North
America

Figure 2.6
Matching mountain ranges across
the North Atlantic

Appalachian
Mountains

Greenland

Europe

Africa

North
America

South
America

Africa

A.

South
America
B.

42

CHAPTER 2

Figure 2.7
Paleoclimatic evidence for
continental drift
A. About 300 million years
ago, ice sheets covered
extensive areas of the
Southern Hemisphere
and India. Arrows show
the direction of ice movement that can be inferred
from the pattern of glacial
scratches and grooves
found in the bedrock.
B. The continents restored
to their pre-drift positions
account for tropical coal
swamps that existed in
areas presently located in
temperate climates.

Plate Tectonics: A Scientific Revolution Unfolds

How could extensive ice sheets form near the equator? One proposal suggested that our planet expeNorth
Europe
rienced a period of extreme global cooling.
Asia
America
Wegener rejected this explanation because
during the same span of geologic time, large
tropical swamps existed in several locations in
Africa
the Northern Hemisphere. The lush vegetaEquator
tion in these swamps was eventually buried
South
and converted to coal (Figure 2.7B). Today these
America
deposits
comprise major coal fields in the
Australia
eastern United States and Northern Europe.
Many of the fossils found in these coalbearing rocks were produced by tree ferns
A.
with large fronds—a fact consistent with warm,
Antarctica
Coal swamps
moist climates.** The existence of these large tropical
swamps,
Wegener argued, was inconsistent with the proGlacial ice
posal that extreme global cooling caused glaciers to
form in areas that are currently tropical.
Northern
Wegener suggested a more plausible
Asia
explanation for the late Paleozoic glaciation:
Europe
the supercontinent of Pangaea. The southNorth
ern continents being joined together and
America
Equator
located near the South Pole would account
Southern
Asia
for the polar conditions necessary to generate
extensive expanses of glacial ice over much of
South
Africa
these landmasses (Figure 2.7B). At the same
America
India
time, this geography places today’s northern
Australia
B.
continents nearer the equator and accounts for
the tropical swamps that generated the vast coal
Antarctica
deposits.
How does a glacier develop in hot, arid central
Australia? How do land animals migrate across wide
Wegener described how the similarities in geologic
expanses of the ocean? As compelling as this evidence
features on both sides of the Atlantic linked these landmay have been, 50 years passed before most of the scienmasses: “It is just as if we were to refit the torn pieces
tific community accepted the concept of continental drift
of a newspaper by matching their edges and then check
whether the lines of print run smoothly across. If they do, and the logical conclusions to which it led.
there is nothing left but to conclude that the pieces were
** It is important to note that coal can form in a variety of climates, provided
that large quantities of plant life are buried.
in fact joined in this way.”†
_TT3


Evidence: Ancient Climates
Because Alfred Wegener was a student of world climates, he suspected that paleoclimatic (paleo = ancient,
climatic = climate) data might also support the idea of
mobile continents. His assertion was bolstered by evidence that a glacial period dating to the late Paleozoic
had been discovered in southern Africa, South America,
Australia, and India. This meant that about 300 million
years ago, vast ice sheets covered extensive portions of
the Southern Hemisphere as well as India (Figure 2.7A).
Much of the land area that contains evidence of this
Paleozoic glaciation presently lies within 30 degrees of
the equator in subtropical or tropical climates.
†Alfred Wegener, The Origin of Continents and Oceans, translated from the 4th
revised German ed. of 1929 by J. Birman (London: Methuen, 1966).

2.2

Concept Checks

1. What was the first line of evidence that led early
investigators to suspect that the continents were
once connected?
2. Explain why the discovery of the fossil remains
of Mesosaurus in both South America and Africa,
but nowhere else, supports the continental drift
hypothesis.
3. Early in the twentieth century, what was the
prevailing view of how land animals migrated
across vast expanses of open ocean?
4. How did Wegener account for evidence of
glaciers in the southern landmasses at a time
when areas in North America, Europe, and Asia
supported lush tropical swamps?

43

2.3 The Great Debate

2.3

The Great Debate
Summarize the two main objections to the continental drift hypothesis.

From 1924, when Wegener’s book was translated into English, French, Spanish, and Russian, until
his death in 1930, his proposed drift hypothesis encountered a great deal of hostile criticism. The
respected American geologist R. T. Chamberlain stated, “Wegener’s hypothesis in general is of the
foot-loose type, in that it takes considerable liberty with our globe, and is less bound by restrictions
or tied down by awkward, ugly facts than most of its rival theories.”

Rejection of the Drift Hypothesis
One of the main objections to Wegener’s hypothesis
stemmed from his inability to identify a credible mechanism for continental drift. Wegener proposed that
gravitational forces of the Moon and Sun that produce
Earth’s tides were also capable of gradually moving the
continents across the globe. However, the prominent
physicist Harold Jeffreys correctly argued that tidal
forces strong enough to move Earth’s continents would
have resulted in halting our planet’s rotation, which, of
course, has not happened.
Wegener also incorrectly suggested that the larger
and sturdier continents broke through thinner oceanic
crust, much as icebreakers cut through ice. However,
no evidence existed to suggest that the ocean floor
was weak enough to permit passage of the continents
without the continents being appreciably deformed in
the process.
In 1930, Wegener made his fourth and final trip
to the Greenland ice sheet (Figure 2.8). Although the
primary focus of this expedition was to study this
great ice cap and its climate,
Wegener continued to test his continental drift hypothesis. While
returning from Eismitte, an experimental station located in the center
of Greenland, Wegener perished
along with his Greenland companion. His intriguing idea, however, did
not die.
Why was Wegener unable to overturn the established scientific views of
his day? Foremost was the fact that,
although the central theme of Wegener’s drift hypothesis was correct, some
details were incorrect. For example,
continents do not break through the
ocean floor, and tidal energy is much
too weak to move continents. Moreover,
for any comprehensive scientific theory
to gain wide acceptance, it must withstand critical testing from all areas of
science. Despite Wegener’s great contribution to our understanding of Earth,

not all of the evidence supported the continental drift
hypothesis as he had proposed it.
Although many of Wegener’s contemporaries
opposed and even ridiculed his views, some considered
his ideas plausible. For those geologists who continued
the search, the exciting concept of continents adrift held
their interest. Others viewed continental drift as a solution to previously unexplainable observations such as the
cause of earthquakes. Nevertheless, most of the scientific community, particularly in North America, either
categorically rejected continental drift or treated it with
considerable skepticism.

2.3

Concept Checks

1. Describe two aspects of Wegener’s continental
drift hypothesis that were objectionable to most
Earth scientists.
2. What analogy did Wegener use to describe how
the continents move through the ocean floor?

Figure 2.8
Alfred Wegener, during an
expedition to Greenland
(Photo courtesy of Archive of Alfred
Wegener Institute)

Alfred Wegener shown waiting out the
1912–1913 Arctic winter during an
expedition to Greenland, where he
made a 1200-kilometer traverse across
the widest part of the island’s ice sheet.

44

CHAPTER 2

Plate Tectonics: A Scientific Revolution Unfolds

2.4

The Theory of Plate Tectonics
List the major differences between Earth’s lithosphere and asthenosphere and
explain the importance of each in the plate tectonics theory.

Following World War II, oceanographers equipped with new marine tools and ample funding from
the U.S. Office of Naval Research embarked on an unprecedented period of oceanographic exploration. Over the next two decades, a much better picture of large expanses of the seafloor slowly and
painstakingly began to emerge. From this work came the discovery of a global oceanic ridge system
that winds through all the major oceans.
In other parts of the ocean, more new discoveries were
being made. Studies conducted in the western Pacific
demonstrated that earthquakes were occurring at great
depths beneath deep-ocean trenches. Of equal importance was the fact that dredging of the seafloor did not
bring up any oceanic crust that was older than 180 million years. Further, sediment accumulations in the deepocean basins were found to be thin, not the thousands of
meters that were predicted. By 1968 these developments,
among others, had led to the unfolding of a far more
encompassing theory than continental drift, known as the
theory of plate tectonics (tekto = to build).

Rigid Lithosphere Overlies Weak
Asthenosphere
According to the plate tectonics model, the crust and the
uppermost, and therefore coolest, part of the mantle constitute Earth’s strong outer layer, the lithosphere (lithos =
stone). The lithosphere varies in both thickness and density, depending on whether it is oceanic or continental
lithosphere (Figure 2.9). Oceanic lithosphere is about 100
kilometers (60 miles) thick in the deep-ocean basins but
is considerably thinner along the crest of the oceanic
ridge system—a topic we will consider later. By contrast,
continental lithosphere averages about 150 kilometers
(90 miles) thick but may extend to depths of 200 kilometers
SmartFigure 2.9
Rigid lithosphere overlies
the weak asthenosphere

Oceanic
crust

(https://goo.gl/KH1iAR)

Lithosphere
(Strong,
rigid layer)

Continental
crust
Lithosphere
(Strong,
rigid layer)

100
km

200
km

300
km

Asthenosphere
(Weak layer,
rocks near their
melting temperatures)

(125 miles) or more beneath the stable interiors of the
continents. Further, the composition of both the oceanic
and continental crusts affects their respective densities.
Oceanic crust is composed of basalt, rich in dense iron
and magnesium, whereas continental crust is composed
largely of less dense granitic rocks. Because of these differences, the overall density of oceanic lithosphere (crust
and upper mantle) is greater than the overall density of
continental lithosphere. This important difference will be
considered in greater detail later in this chapter.
The asthenosphere (asthenos = weak) is a hotter,
weaker region in the mantle that lies below the lithosphere (see Figure 2.9). The temperatures and pressures
in the upper asthenosphere (100 to 200 kilometers [60
to 125 miles] in depth) are such that rocks at this depth
are very near their melting temperatures and, hence,
respond to forces by flowing, similar to the way a thick
liquid would flow. By contrast, the relatively cool and
rigid lithosphere tends to respond to forces acting on
it by bending or breaking but not flowing. Because of
these differences, Earth’s rigid outer shell is effectively
detached from the asthenosphere, which allows these layers to move independently.

Earth’s Major Plates
The lithosphere is broken into about two dozen segments
of irregular size and shape called lithospheric plates, or
simply plates, that are in constant motion with respect to
one another (Figure 2.10). Seven major lithospheric plates
are recognized and account for 94 percent of Earth’s surface area: the North American, South American, Pacific,
African, Eurasian, Australian-Indian, and Antarctic
plates. The largest is the Pacific plate, which encompasses a significant portion of the Pacific basin. Each of
the six other large plates consists of an entire continent,
as well as a significant amount of oceanic crust. Notice
in Figure 2.11 that the South American plate encompasses
almost all of South America and about one-half of the
floor of the South Atlantic. Note also that none of the
plates are defined entirely by the margins of a single
continent. This is a major departure from Wegener’s continental drift hypothesis, which proposed that the continents move through the ocean floor, not with it.
Intermediate-sized plates include the Caribbean,
Nazca, Philippine, Arabian, Cocos, Scotia, and Juan
de Fuca plates. These plates, with the exception of the

Cocos
plate

Figure 2.10
Earth’s major lithospheric plates

Arabian
plate
African
plate

Caribbean
plate

Nazca
plate

45

2.4 The Theory of Plate Tectonics

Eurasian
plate

North
American
plate

Arabian plate, are composed mostly of oceanic lithosphere. In addition, several smaller plates (microplates)
have been identified but are not shown in FigNorth
ure 2.11.

American plate

South
American
plate

Plate Movement

Eurasian
plate

One of the main tenets of
the plate tectonics theory is
that plates move as somewhat rigid units relative to
Pacific
plate
all other plates. As plates
move, the distance between
two locations on different
plates, such as New York and
London, gradually changes,
whereas the distance between
sites on the same plate—New
York and Denver, for example—
remains relatively constant. However,
parts of some plates are comparatively

Philippine
plate

Scotia plate
Antarctic plate

Australian-Indian
plate

Antarctic
plate

Juan de Fuca
plate

Caribbean
plate

Nazca
plate

South
American
plate

Chile Ridge

So
Spreading
center

Subduction zone

Subduc
ting
l
Melting

ia n
Ind
st
e
hw
ut

Continental
volcanic arc

tI
nd

Oceanic
Oceanic
Transform
ridge plate boundary ridge

Trench

Continental
lithosphere
ith
os
ph
ere

Oceanic
lithosphere

Asthenosphere

A. Divergent plate boundary

e
dg
Ri

AustralianIndian
plate

Scotia plate

Antarctic
plate

Oceanic
crust

Oceanic
lithosphere

M
id

as
he
ut
So

East Pacific Rise

Galapagos
Ridge

African plate
Ridg
e

dian Ridge
-In

Australian-Indian plate

-A
tla
ntic

Cocos
plate

Pacific plate

(Based on W. B. Hamilton, U.S.
Geological Survey)

Arabian
plate

d
Mi

Philippine
plate

Divergent, convergent, and
transform plate boundaries

Eurasian plate

North American
plate

Eurasian
plate

Figure 2.11

B. Convergent plate boundary

C. Transform plate boundary

ian

Rid
g

e

46

CHAPTER 2

Plate Tectonics: A Scientific Revolution Unfolds

“weak and can become fragmented” such as southern
China, which is literally being squeezed as the Indian
subcontinent rams into Asia.
Because plates are in constant motion relative to each
other, most major interactions among them (and, therefore,
most deformation) occur along their boundaries. In fact,
plate boundaries were first established by plotting the locations of earthquakes and volcanoes. Plates are bounded by
three distinct types of boundaries, which are differentiated
by the type of movement they exhibit. These boundaries
are depicted in Figure 2.11 and are briefly described here:
r Divergent plate boundaries—where two plates move
apart, resulting in upwelling and partial melting of
hot material from the mantle to create new seafloor
(see Figure 2.11A)
r Convergent plate boundaries—where two plates
move together, resulting either in oceanic lithosphere
descending beneath an overriding plate, eventually to
be reabsorbed into the mantle, or possibly in the collision of two continental blocks to create a mountain
belt (see Figure 2.11B)

2.5

r Transform plate boundaries—where two plates grind
past each other without the production or destruction
of lithosphere (see Figure 2.11C)
Divergent and convergent plate boundaries each
account for about 40 percent of all plate boundaries.
Transform boundaries, or faults account for the remaining 20 percent. In the following sections we will summarize the nature of the three types of plate boundaries.

2.4

Concept Checks

1. What new findings about the ocean floor did
oceanographers discover after World War II?
2. Compare and contrast Earth’s lithosphere and
asthenosphere.
3. List the seven largest lithospheric plates.
4. List the three types of plate boundaries and
describe the relative motion along each.

Divergent Plate Boundaries and Seafloor Spreading
Sketch and describe the movement along a divergent plate boundary that results in
the formation of new oceanic lithosphere.

Most divergent plate boundaries (di = apart, vergere = to move) are located along the crests
of oceanic ridges and can be thought of as constructive plate margins because this is where new
ocean floor is generated (Figure 2.12). Here, two adjacent plates move away from each other, producing long, narrow fractures in the ocean crust. As a result, hot molten rock from the mantle
below migrates upward to fill the voids left as the crust is being ripped apart. This molten material
gradually cools to produce new slivers of seafloor. In a slow yet unending manner, adjacent plates
spread apart, and new oceanic lithosphere forms between them. For this reason, divergent plate
boundaries are also called spreading centers.

Oceanic Ridges and
Seafloor Spreading
The majority of, but not all, divergent plate boundaries
are associated with oceanic ridges: elevated areas of the
seafloor characterized by high heat flow and volcanism.
The global oceanic ridge system is the longest topographic feature on Earth’s surface, exceeding 70,000
kilometers (43,000 miles) in length. As shown in Figure
2.11, various segments of the global ridge system have
been named, including the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, East
Pacific Rise, and Mid-Indian Ridge.
Representing 20 percent of Earth’s surface, the
oceanic ridge system winds through all major ocean
basins, like the seams on a baseball. Although the crest

of the oceanic ridge is commonly 2 to 3 kilometers (1 to
2 miles) higher than the adjacent ocean basins, the term
ridge may be misleading because it implies “narrow”
when, in fact, ridges vary in width from 1000 kilometers
(600 miles) to more than 4000 (2500 miles) kilometers.
Further, along the crest of some ridge segments is a
deep canyonlike structure called a rift valley (Figure
2.13). This structure is evidence that tensional (opposing) forces are actively pulling the ocean crust apart at
the ridge crest.
The mechanism that operates along the oceanic
ridge system to create new seafloor is appropriately
called seafloor spreading. Spreading typically averages around 5 centimeters (2 inches) per year, roughly
the same rate at which human fingernails grow.

47

2.5 Divergent Plate Boundaries and Seafloor Spreading

Figure 2.12

increasing in density. This thermal contraction accounts for the
increase in ocean depths away from
the ridge crest. It takes about 80
million years for the temperature
of oceanic lithosphere to stabilize
Oceanic crust
and contraction to cease. By this
time, rock that was once part of
the elevated oceanic ridge system
Partial
is located in the deep-ocean basin,
melting
where it may be buried by substanAsthenosphere
tial accumulations of sediment.
In addition, as the plate
Europe
e
g
moves
away from the ridge, coolid
ing of the underlying asthenosphere causes it to become
Spreading
increasingly more rigid.
center
Thus, oceanic lithosphere
Africa
is generated by cooling of
the asthenosphere from
Lith
osp
the top down. Stated
here
Asth
Upwelling
eno
another way, the thickness
(ma spher
ntle
e
of
oceanic lithosphere is
)
Rift valley

Seafloor spreading Most divergent plate boundaries are situated along the crests of oceanic
ridges—the sites of seafloor
spreading.
Divergent
plate boundaries
are sites of
seafloor spreading.

Mi
d-A
tla
nti

c

R

North
America

SmartFigure 2.13

Greenland

ICELAND

ICELAND
ft
Ri
Reykjavik

Mid-Atlantic
Ridge

al
ley

Comparatively slow spreading rates of 2 centimeters
per year are found along the Mid-Atlantic Ridge,
whereas spreading rates exceeding 15 centimeters (6
inches) per year have been measured along sections
of the East Pacific Rise. Although these rates of seafloor production are slow on a human time scale, they
are nevertheless rapid enough to have generated all
of Earth’s ocean basins within the past 200 million
years.
The primary reason for the elevated position of the
oceanic ridge is that newly created oceanic lithosphere
is hot and, therefore, less dense than cooler rocks found
away from the ridge axis. (Geologists use the term axis
to refer to a line that follows the general trend of the
ridge crest.) As soon as new lithosphere forms, it is
slowly yet continually displaced away from the zone of
upwelling. Thus, it begins to cool and contract, thereby

v

Thingvellir N.P.
0
0

100 km
50 mi

Rift valley

Uplifted
block

Rift valley Thingvellir National Park, Iceland, is located on the
western margin of a rift valley roughly 30 kilometers (20 miles)
wide. This rift valley is connected to a similar feature that extends
along the crest of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. The cliff in the left half of
the image approximates the eastern edge of the North American
plate. (Photo by Ragnar Sigurdsson/Arctic/Alamy) (http://goo.gl/RsbHWM)

Subsiding
block

Eastern margin
of the North
American plate.

48

CHAPTER 2

Plate Tectonics: A Scientific Revolution Unfolds

SmartFigure 2.14

Upwarping

Continental rifting:
Formation of new ocean
basins (https://goo.gl/s4RWua)
Continenta

l crust

Lithosphere

Continental rifting occurs where plate
motions produce opposing tensional
forces that thin the lithosphere and
promote upwelling in the mantle.

Upwelling
Asthenosphere
A.

T
I
M
E

Continental rift

Lithosphere

Stretching causes the brittle crust to
break into large blocks that sink,
generating a rift valley.

Upwelling
Asthenosphere
B.
Linear sea

Lithosphere

Continued spreading generates a
long narrow sea similar to the
present-day Red Sea.

Upwelling
Asthenosphere

C.
Mid-ocean ridge
Rift valley

Oceanic lithosphere
Continental lithosphere

Upwelling

Asthenosphere

Eventually, an expansive
deep-ocean basin
containing a
centrally
located
oceanic
ridge is
formed by
continued
seafloor
spreading.

D.

age dependent. The older (cooler) it is, the greater its
thickness. Oceanic lithosphere that exceeds 80 million
years in age is about 100 kilometers (60 miles) thick—
approximately its maximum thickness.

Continental Rifting
Divergent boundaries can develop within a continent,
in which case the landmass may split into two or more
smaller segments separated by an ocean basin. Continental rifting begins when plate motions produce
tensional forces that pull and stretch the lithosphere.
This stretching, in turn, promotes mantle upwelling and
broad upwarping of the overlying lithosphere (Figure
2.14A). During this process, the lithosphere is thinned,
while the brittle crustal rocks break into large blocks. As

the tectonic forces continue to pull apart the crust, the
broken crustal fragments sink, generating an elongated
depression called a continental rift, which can widen
to form a narrow sea (Figure 2.14B,C) and eventually a new
ocean basin (Figure 2.14D).
An example of an active continental rift is the East
African Rift (Figure 2.15). Whether this rift will eventually result in the breakup of Africa is a topic of ongoing research. Nevertheless, the East African Rift is an
excellent model of the initial stage in the breakup of
a continent. Here, tensional forces have stretched and
thinned the lithosphere, allowing molten rock to ascend
from the mantle. Evidence for this upwelling includes
several large volcanic mountains, including Mount
Kilimanjaro and Mount Kenya, the tallest peaks in
Africa. Research suggests that if rifting continues, the

49

2.5 Divergent Plate Boundaries and Seafloor Spreading

2.5

Afar Gulf of
Lowlands

EAST
AFRICAN
RIFT

Concept Checks
Western
Branch

1. Sketch or describe how two plates move in
relation to each other along divergent plate
boundaries.
2. What is the average rate of seafloor spreading in
modern oceans?

SmartFigure 2.15

ea
dS
Re

rift valley will lengthen and deepen (see Figure 2.14C).
At some point, the rift valley will become a narrow sea
with an outlet to the ocean. The Red Sea, formed when
the Arabian Peninsula split from Africa, is a modern
example of such a feature and provides us with a view of
how the Atlantic Ocean may have looked in its infancy
(see Figure 2.14D).

Eastern
Branch
Lake
Victoria

Aden

Indian Ocean

Mt. Kenya

East African Rift
valley The East
African Rift valley
represents the early
stage in the breakup
of a continent. Areas
shown in red consist
of lithosphere that
has been stretched
and thinned, allowing magma to well
up from the mantle.
(https://goo.gl/Gp4pje)

Mt. Kilimanjaro
Lake
Tanganyika

3. List four features that characterize the oceanic
ridge system.

Africa

4. Briefly describe the process of continental rifting.
Where is it occurring today?

?

E Y E ON E A R T H

2.1
Red Sea

I

n December 2011 a new volcanic island formed near
the southern end of the Red Sea. Less than 2 years
later, in late October 2013, another volcanic island
emerged in the same area. These volcanic islands are
part of several small islands in the Zubair Group located
off the west coast of Yemen, along the Red Sea Rift.

QUESTION 1 What type of plate boundary produced
these new volcanic islands?

Haycock

QUESTION 2 What two plates border the Red Sea Rift?
QUESTION 3 Are these two plates moving toward or away
from each other?

New volcanic
island, 2013
Arabian
plate

Red Sea
Eritrea

Rugged

New island
Yemen

African
plate

Djibouti
Ethioia
NASA
Somalia
NASA

50

Plate Tectonics: A Scientific Revolution Unfolds

CHAPTER 2

Convergent Plate Boundaries and Subduction

2.6

Compare and contrast the three types of convergent plate boundaries and name a
location where each type can be found.

New lithosphere is constantly being produced at the oceanic ridges. However, our planet is not growing larger; its total surface area remains constant. A balance is maintained because older, denser
portions of oceanic lithosphere descend into the mantle at a rate equal to seafloor production. This
activity occurs along convergent plate boundaries, where two plates move toward each other and
the leading edge of one is bent downward as it slides beneath the other.

SmartFigure 2.16
Three types of convergent
plate boundaries
(https://goo.gl/ZlyIbf)

Convergent boundaries are also called subduction
zones because they are sites where lithosphere is
descending (being subducted) into the mantle. Subduction occurs because the density of the descending
lithospheric plate is greater than the density of the
underlying asthenosphere. Recall that oceanic crust is
more dense than continental crust. In general, old oceanic lithosphere is about 2 percent more dense than the
underlying asthenosphere, which causes it to subduct.
Continental lithosphere, in contrast, is less dense than
the underlying asthenosphere and resists subduction. As
a consequence, only oceanic lithosphere will subduct to
great depths.
Deep-ocean trenches are the surface manifestations produced as oceanic lithosphere descends into the
mantle (see Figure 1.23, page 30). These large linear
depressions are remarkably long and deep. The Peru–
Chile trench along the west coast of South America is
more than 4500 kilometers (2800 miles) long, and its
floor is as much as 8 kilometers (5 miles) below sea level.
Western Pacific trenches, including the Mariana and
Tonga trenches, tend to be even deeper than those of the
eastern Pacific.
Slabs of oceanic lithosphere descend into the
mantle at angles that vary from a few degrees to nearly
vertical (90 degrees). The angle at which oceanic lithosphere subducts depends largely on its age and, therefore, its density. For example, when seafloor spreading
occurs near a subduction zone, as is the case along the
coast of Chile, the subducting lithosphere is young and
Continental
volcanic arc

Trench

Volcanic
island arc

Subducting oce
a
100 km
200 km

nic

lith

Asthenosphere
(mantle)

osp

he

Continental
lithosphere

Continental
crust
100 km

re
Melting

A. Convergent plate boundary where oceanic
lithosphere is subducting beneath continental
lithosphere.

200 km

Oceanic–Continental Convergence
When the leading edge of a plate capped with continental crust converges with a slab of oceanic lithosphere,
the buoyant continental block remains “floating,” while
the denser oceanic slab sinks into the mantle (see Figure
Trench

Mountain range

Oceanic
crust

Oceanic crust
Continental
crust

buoyant, which results in a low angle of descent. As the
two plates converge, the overriding plate scrapes over
the top of the subducting plate below—a type of forced
subduction. Consequently, the region around the Peru–
Chile trench experiences great earthquakes, including
the 2010 Chilean earthquake—one of the 10 largest on
record.
As oceanic lithosphere ages (gets farther from the
spreading center), it gradually cools, which causes it to
thicken and increase in density. In parts of the western
Pacific, some oceanic lithosphere is 180 million years
old—the thickest and densest in today’s oceans. The very
dense slabs in this region typically plunge into the mantle
at angles approaching 90 degrees. This largely explains
why most trenches in the western Pacific are deeper than
trenches in the eastern Pacific.
Although all convergent zones have the same basic
characteristics, they vary considerably depending on
the type of crustal material involved and the tectonic
setting. Convergent boundaries can form between
one oceanic plate and one continental plate, between
two oceanic plates, or between two continental plates
(Figure 2.16).

Oceanic lithosphere
Melting

Asthenosphere
(mantle)

bd
Su

tin
uc

a
ce
go

os
lith
nic

phere

B. Convergent plate boundary involving two slabs
of oceanic lithosphere.

Suture
Continental
lithosphere

Ophiolite
(fragment of
oceanic crust)

Continental
lithosphere

C. Continental collisions occur along convergent
plate boundaries when both plates are capped with
continental crust.

51

2.6 Convergent Plate Boundaries and Subduction

Oceanic–Oceanic Convergence
An oceanic–oceanic convergent boundary has many
features in common with oceanic–continental plate
margins (see Figure 2.16A,B). Where two oceanic slabs
converge, one descends beneath the other, initiating
volcanic activity by the same mechanism that operates
at all subduction zones (see Figure 2.11). Water driven
from the subducting slab of oceanic lithosphere triggers melting in the hot wedge of mantle rock above. In
this setting, volcanoes grow up from the ocean floor
rather than on a continental platform. When subduction
is sustained, it will eventually build a chain of volcanic
structures large enough to emerge as islands. The newly

Figure 2.17
Oceanic–continental
convergent plate boundary
Mount Hood, Oregon, is
one of more than a dozen
large composite volcanoes
in the Cascade Range, a
continental volcanic arc.

Mt. Hood, Oregon

Oceanic
crust

Subdu

Continental
volcanic arc

North
American
plate

ca d i

Juan
de Fuca
plate

a subduction zone

Wallace Garrison/Getty Images

cti

Asthenosphere
(mantle)

Seattle
Mt. Rainier

Mt. St. Helens

Cas

2.16A). When a descending oceanic slab reaches a depth
of about 100 kilometers (60 miles), melting is triggered
within the wedge of hot asthenosphere that lies above
it. But how does the subduction of a cool slab of oceanic
lithosphere cause mantle rock to melt? The answer lies
in the fact that water contained in the descending plates
acts the way salt does to melt ice. That is, “wet” rock
in a high-pressure environment melts at substantially
lower temperatures than does “dry” rock of the same
composition.
Sediments and oceanic crust contain large amounts
of water, which is carried to great depths by a subducting plate. As the plate plunges downward, heat and
pressure drive water from the hydrated (water-rich)
minerals in the subducting slab. At a depth of roughly
100 kilometers (60 miles), the wedge of mantle rock is
sufficiently hot that the introduction of water from the
slab below leads to some melting. This process, called
partial melting, is thought to generate some molten
material, which is mixed with unmelted mantle rock.
Being less dense than the surrounding mantle, this
hot mobile material gradually rises toward the surface.
Depending on the environment, these mantle-derived
masses of molten rock may ascend through the crust
and give rise to a volcanic eruption. However, much of
this material never reaches the surface but solidifies at
depth—a process that thickens the crust.
The volcanoes of the towering Andes are the product of molten rock generated by the subduction of the
Nazca plate beneath the South American continent (see
Figure 2.11). Mountain systems like the Andes, which
are produced in part by volcanic activity associated
with the subduction of oceanic lithosphere, are called
continental volcanic arcs. The Cascade Range in
Washington, Oregon, and California is another mountain system consisting of several well-known volcanoes,
including Mount Rainier, Mount Shasta, Mount St. Helens, and Mount Hood (Figure 2.17). This active volcanic
arc also extends into Canada, where it includes Mount
Garibaldi and Mount Silverthrone.

Mt.
Adams

Portland
Mt. Hood

ng

oc

ea

Continental
crust

nic

lit

ho

sp

he

re

Water driven
from the
subducting
plate triggers
melting in
the mantle.

When an oceanic plate descends into
the asthenosphere, water driven from the subducting
slab lowers the melting temperature of mantle rock sufficiently to
generate magma. The Cascade Range is a continental volcanic arc formed
by the subduction of the Juan de Fuca plate under the North American plate.

formed land consisting of an arc-shaped chain of volcanic islands is called a volcanic island arc, or simply an
island arc (Figure 2.18).
The Aleutian, Mariana, and Tonga Islands are examples of relatively young volcanic island arcs. Island arcs
are generally located 120 to 360 kilometers (75 to 225
miles) from a deep-ocean trench. Located adjacent to the
island arcs just mentioned are the Aleutian trench, the
Mariana trench, and the Tonga trench.
Most volcanic island arcs are located in the western Pacific. Only two are located in the Atlantic—the
Lesser Antilles arc, on the eastern margin of the
Caribbean Sea, and the Sandwich Islands, located
off the tip of South America. The Lesser Antilles are
a product of the subduction of the Atlantic seafloor
beneath the Caribbean plate. Located within this volcanic arc are the Virgin Islands of the United States
and Britain as well as the island of Martinique, where
Mount Pelée erupted in 1902, destroying the town of

52

Plate Tectonics: A Scientific Revolution Unfolds

CHAPTER 2

Figure 2.18
Volcanoes of the Aleutian
Islands The Aleutian
Islands are a volcanic
island arc produced by the
subduction of the Pacific
plate beneath the North
American plate.

Gareloi

Kanaga

Great Sitkin

Cleveland

SmartFigure 2.19
The collision of India
and Eurasia formed the
Himalayas

Volcanoes of the
Active volcanoes
Aleution chain,
Chain, Alaska
Aleutian

(https://goo.gl/9lDLvo)

St. Pierre and killing an estimated 28,000 people. This chain of islands also includes Montserrat, where volcanic activity has occurred as
recently as 2010.
Alaska
Island arcs are typically
USGS
simple structures made of
numerous volcanic cones
underlain by oceanic crust
that is generally less than
Redoubt
20 kilometers (12 miles)
Augustine
thick. By contrast, some
Katmai
island arcs are more comAniakchak
plex and are underlain by
Pavlof
highly deformed crust that
Shishaldin
may reach 35 kilometers (22
miles) in thickness. Examples
include Japan, Indonesia,
and the Alaskan Peninsula.
These island arcs are built on
material generated by earlier
episodes of subduction or on
small slivers of continental
crust that have rafted away
from the mainland.

Continental–Continental
Convergence

Continental volcanic arc

The ongoing collision of the
subcontinent of India with Eurasia
began about 50 million years ago
and produced the majestic
Himalayas.

Ocean
basin

Continental
shelf
deposits

The third type of convergent boundary results when
one landmass moves toward the margin of another
because of subduction of the intervening seafloor
(Figure 2.19A). Whereas oceanic lithosphere tends to
be dense and sinks into the mantle, the buoyancy of
continental material inhibits it from being subducted.
Consequently, a collision between two converging continental fragments ensues (Figure 2.19B). This event folds
and deforms the accumulation of sediments and sedimentary rocks along the continental margins as if they

Eurasia

Melting
India
N

d
Sub

ti n
uc

g

ic lithosphere
an
e
oc

India
today

A.

re

phe

os
hen

Ast

Ganges
Plain

Him

ala

ya

s

Tibetan
Plateau

10 million
years ago
38 million
years ago

India
N

Indian plate
55 million
years ago

B.

re

phe

os
Lith

ph

nos

he
Ast

71 million
years ago

ere
_TT4


N
C.

D.

(Photo by Peter Giovannini/Robert Harding)

53

2.7 Transform Plate Boundaries

had been placed in a gigantic vise. The result is the formation of a new mountain belt composed of deformed
sedimentary and metamorphic rocks that often contain
slivers of oceanic lithosphere.
Such a collision began about 50 million years
ago, when the subcontinent of India rammed into
Asia, producing the Himalayas—the most spectacular
mountain range on Earth (Figure 2.19C). During this
collision, the continental crust buckled and fractured
and was generally shortened horizontally and thickened vertically. In addition to the Himalayas, several
other major mountain systems, including the Alps,
Appalachians, and Urals, formed as continental fragments collided. This topic will be considered further
in Chapter 14.

2.7

2.6

Concept Checks

1. Explain why the rate of lithosphere production
is roughly equal to the rate of lithosphere
destruction.
2. Why does oceanic lithosphere subduct, while
continental lithosphere does not?
3. What characteristic of a slab of oceanic
lithosphere leads to the formation of deep-ocean
trenches instead of shallow trenches?
4. What distinguishes a continental volcanic arc
from a volcanic island arc?
5. Briefly describe how mountain belts such as the
Himalayas form.

Transform Plate Boundaries
Describe the relative motion along a transform fault boundary and be able to locate
several examples on a plate boundary map.

Along a transform plate boundary, also called a transform fault, plates slide horizontally past
one another, without the production or destruction of lithosphere. The nature of transform faults
was discovered in 1965 by Canadian geologist J. Tuzo Wilson, who proposed that these large faults
connected two spreading centers (divergent boundaries) or, less commonly, two trenches (convergent boundaries). Most transform faults are found on the ocean floor, where they offset segments
of the oceanic ridge system, producing a steplike plate margin (Figure 2.20A). Notice that the zigzag
shape of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge in Figure 2.11 roughly reflects the shape of the original rifting that
caused the breakup of the supercontinent of Pangaea. (Compare the shapes of the continental margins of the landmasses on both sides of the Atlantic with the shape of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge.)
Most transform faults offset
segments of a spreading
center, producing a
zigzag-appearing plate
margin.

(https://goo.gl/SaoJ2o)

Fracture zone

M

-At

Transform plate
boundaries

B. Fracture zones are long, narrow scar-like features in the seafloor
that are roughly perpendicular to the offset ridge segments. They
include both the active transform fault and its “fossilized” trace.

Inactive
zone

id

SmartFigure 2.20

Africa

lant

ic R
id

g
e

South
America

Oceanic
crust
KEY
Spreading centers
Fracture zones
Transform faults

A. The Mid-Atlantic Ridge, with its zigzag pattern, roughly reflects the shape of the rifting
zone that resulted in the breakup of Pangaea.

Transform fault
(active)

Inactive
zone

Plate Tectonics: A Scientific Revolution Unfolds

Figure 2.21

Pacific
plate

Juan
de Fuca
plate

ucti

Juan
de Fuca
Ridge

on z
one

Transform
fault

sub
d

Transform faults facilitate plate motion Seafloor
generated along the Juan de Fuca Ridge moves
southeastward, past the Pacific plate. Eventually
it subducts beneath the North American plate.
Thus, this transform fault connects a spreading
center (divergent boundary) to a subduction zone
(convergent boundary). Also shown is the San
Andreas Fault, a transform fault that connects a
spreading center located in the Gulf of California
and the Mendocino Fault.

Mendocino
Fault

adia

CHAPTER 2

Cas
c

54

Oregon
California

Juan
de Fuca
plate

Cascadia
subduction
zone

North
American
plate

North
American
plate

San Francisco

San

Mendocino
Fault

An

ea

dr

Typically, transform faults are part of prominent linear
breaks in the seafloor known as fracture zones, which
include both active transform faults and their inactive
extensions into the plate interior (Figure 2.20B). Active

SmartFigure 2.22
Movement along the San
Andreas Fault This aerial view
shows the offset in the dry
channel of Wallace Creek near
Taft, California. (Photo by Michael
Collier) (http://goo.gl/tKTXky)

Pacific
plate

s Fa
Los
u
Angeles

lt

The Mendocino transform fault facilitates
the movement of seafloor generated at the
Juan de Fuca Ridge by allowing it to slip
southeastward past the Pacific plate to its
site of destruction beneath the North
American plate.

Gulf of
California

transform faults lie only between the two offset ridge
segments and are generally defined by weak, shallow
earthquakes. Here seafloor produced at one ridge axis
moves in the opposite direction of seafloor produced
at an opposing ridge segment. Thus, between the ridge
segments, these adjacent slabs of oceanic crust are grinding past each other along a transform fault. Beyond the
ridge crests are inactive zones, where the fractures are

55

2.7 Transform Plate Boundaries

preserved as linear topographic depressions. The trend
of these fracture zones roughly parallels the direction of
plate motion at the time of their formation. Thus, these
structures help geologists map the direction of plate
motion in the geologic past.
Transform faults also provide the means by which
the oceanic crust created at ridge crests can be transported to a site of destruction—the deep-ocean trenches.
Figure 2.21 illustrates this situation. Notice that the Juan
de Fuca plate moves in a southeasterly direction, eventually being subducted under the west coast of the United
States and Canada. The southern end of this plate is
bounded by a transform fault called the Mendocino
Fault. This transform boundary connects the Juan de
Fuca Ridge to the Cascadia subduction zone. Therefore,
it facilitates the movement of the crustal material created
at the Juan de Fuca Ridge to its destination beneath the
North American continent.
Like the Mendocino Fault, most other transform
fault boundaries are located within the ocean basins;
however, a few cut through continental crust. Two
examples are the earthquake-prone San Andreas Fault

E Y E ON E A R T H

of California and New Zealand’s Alpine Fault. Notice
in Figure 2.21 that the San Andreas Fault connects
a spreading center located in the Gulf of California
to the Cascadia subduction zone and the Mendocino
Fault. Along the San Andreas Fault, the Pacific plate is
moving toward the northwest, past the North American plate (Figure 2.22). If this movement continues,
the part of California west of the fault zone, including
Mexico’s Baja Peninsula, will become an island off the
west coast of the United States and Canada. However,
a more immediate concern is the earthquake activity
triggered by movements along this fault system.

2.7

Concept Checks

1. Sketch or describe how two plates move in
relation to each other along a transform plate
boundary.
2. List two characteristics that differentiate
transform faults from the two other types of plate
boundaries.

2.2

B

aja California is separated from mainland Mexico
by a long narrow sea called the Gulf of California
(also known to local residents as the Sea of
Cortez). The Gulf of California contains many islands that
were created by volcanic activity. (Photo courtesy of NASA)

QUESTION 1 What type of plate boundary is responsible
for opening the Gulf of California?

United States

Inland Sea

QUESTION 2 What major U.S. river originates in the
Colorado Rockies and created a large delta at the
northern end of the Gulf of California?
QUESTION 3 If the material carried by the river in
Question 2 had not been deposited, the Gulf of
California would extend northward to include the inland
sea shown in this satellite image. What is the name of
this inland sea?

Mexico

Gu
Ba

ja

lf

Pe

of
ni

Ca

ns

lif

ul

or

ni

a

a

NASA

56

Plate Tectonics: A Scientific Revolution Unfolds

CHAPTER 2

2.8

How Do Plates and Plate Boundaries Change?
Explain why plates such as the African and Antarctic plates are increasing in size,
while the Pacific plate is decreasing in size.

Although Earth’s total surface area does not change, the size and shape of individual plates are constantly changing. For example, the African and Antarctic plates, which are mainly bounded by divergent
boundaries—sites of seafloor production—are continually growing in size as new lithosphere is added to
their margins. By contrast, the Pacific plate is being consumed into the mantle along much of its flanks
faster that it is growing along the East Pacific Rise and thus is diminishing in size.
Another result of plate motion is that boundaries also
migrate. For example, the position of the Peru–Chile
trench, which is the result of the Nazca plate being bent
downward as it descends beneath the South American
plate, has changed over time (see Figure 2.11). Because
of the westward drift of the South American plate
relative to the Nazca plate, the Peru–Chile trench has
Figure 2.23
migrated in a westerly direction as well.
The breakup of Pangaea
Plate boundaries can also be created or
destroyed in response to changes in the
200 Million Years Ago
forces acting on the lithosphere.
Figure 2.23
The breakup of Pangaea
Plates carrying continental crust

P

A

Tethys
Sea

N

150 Million Years Ago

are presently moving toward one another. For example,
in the South Pacific, Australia is moving northward
toward southern Asia. If Australia continues its northward migration, the boundary separating it from Asia
will disappear as these plates become one. Other plates
are moving apart. Recall that the Red Sea is the site of a
relatively new spreading center that came into existence
less than 20 million years ago, when the Arabian Peninsula began to break apart from Africa. The breakup
of Pangaea is a classic example of how plate boundaries
change through geologic time.

The Breakup of Pangaea

Wegener used evidence from fossils, rock types, and
ancient climates to create a jigsaw-puzzle fit of the
E
Southern
A
A
continents, thereby creating his supercontinent of
China and
Pangaea. By employing modern tools not available
Asia
to
Wegener, geologists have re-created
South Africa
Tibet
Pangaea as it appeared 200 million
America
the steps in the breakup
Y
e
n
a
o
i
r
l
s
l
i
Ag o
B
years ago, in the late Triassic period.
90 M
of this supercontiIndia
North
nent, an event that
Eurasia
The first major event during the breakup of Pangaea
Australia
America
Antarctica
began about 180
was the separation of North America and Africa,
Southern
which marked the opening of the North Atlantic.
million years
China and
Asia
ago. From this
Africa
Tibet
By 90 million years ago, the South Atlantic had opened.
South
work, the dates
C
Continued breakup in the Southern Hemisphere led to
America
India
when individual
the separation of Africa, India, and Antarctica.
crustal fragments
Australia
During the past 20
Antarctica
separated from one
About 50 million years ago, Southeast
By 20 million years ago
million years Arabia
another
and their relative
Y
e
n
a
o
i
r
s Ag o
Asia docked with Eurasia, while India
India had begun its
rifted from Africa
50 Mill
motions have been
continued its northward journey.
ongoing collision with
creating the Red Sea,
North
Eurasia
Eurasia to create the
while Baja California,
well established
America
Himalayas and the
separated from Mexico
(Figure 2.23).
D
Tibetan Highlands.
to form the Gulf of
Million Years Ago
An impor0
2
California.
Africa
tant conseIndia
South
North
Eurasia
Present
quence of PanAmerica
E America
Southern
gaea’s breakup
Eurasia
China
North
Australia
India
was the creation of
America
Africa
Arabia
F
Antarctica
a
“new”
ocean basin: the
South
India
Africa
America
Atlantic. As you can see in FigAustralia
Red
South
ure 2.23, splitting of the supercontinent did not occur
Sea
Gulf of America
simultaneously along the margins of the Atlantic. The
Australia
California
Antarctica
first split developed between North America and Africa.
Here, the continental crust was highly fractured, providAntarctica
ing pathways for huge quantities of fluid lavas to reach

G

A

North
America

Eurasia

57

2.8 How Do Plates and Plate Boundaries Change?

the surface. Today, these lavas are represented
by weathered igneous rocks found along
Eurasia
the eastern seaboard of the United
North
States—primarily buried beneath
America
the sedimentary rocks that
form the continental shelf.
Africa
Radiometric dating of these
solidified lavas indicates that
Australia
South
rifting began between 200
America
million and 190 million years
ago. This time span represents
the “birth date” for this section
of the North Atlantic.
By 130 million years ago, the South
Atlantic began to open near the tip of what
Antarctica
is now South Africa. As this zone of rifting migrated
northward, it gradually opened the South Atlantic (Figures Mediterranean, the last remnant of a once-vast ocean
2.23B,C). Continued breakup of the southern landmass
called the Tethys Ocean, and the initiation of another
led to the separation of Africa and Antarctica and sent
major mountain-building episode (see Figure 2.24). AusIndia on a northward journey. By the early Cenozoic,
tralia will be astride the equator and, along with New
about 50 million years ago, Australia had separated from
Guinea, will be on a collision course with Asia. MeanAntarctica, and the South Atlantic had emerged as a full- while, North and South America will begin to separate,
fledged ocean (Figure 2.23D).
while the Atlantic and Indian Oceans will continue to
India eventually collided with Asia (Figure 2.23E), an
grow, at the expense of the Pacific Ocean.
event that began about 50 million years ago and created
A few geologists have even speculated on the
the Himalayas and the Tibetan Highlands. About the
nature of the globe 250 million years in the future.
same time, the separation of Greenland from Eurasia
In this scenario the Atlantic seafloor will eventucompleted the breakup of the northern landmass. During ally become old and dense enough to form subducthe past 20 million years or so of Earth’s history, Arabia
tion zones around much of its margins, not unlike the
has rifted from Africa to form the Red Sea, and Baja
present-day Pacific basin. Continued subduction of the
California has separated from Mexico to form the Gulf
floor of the Atlantic Ocean will result in the closing
of California (Figure 2.23F). Meanwhile, the Panama Arc
of the Atlantic basin and the collision of the Amerijoined North America and South America to produce our cas with the Eurasian–African landmass to form the
globe’s familiar modern appearance.
next supercontinent, shown in Figure 2.25. Support

Plate Tectonics in the Future
Geologists have extrapolated present-day plate movements into the future. Figure 2.24 illustrates where Earth’s
landmasses may be 50 million years from now if present
plate movements persist during this time span.
In North America we see that the Baja Peninsula and the portion of southern California that lies west of the San Andreas
Fault will have slid past the North
American plate. If this northward migration takes place, Los
Angeles and San Francisco
will pass each other in about
10 million years, and in about
60 million years the Baja Peninsula will begin to collide with
the Aleutian Islands.
If Africa continues on a northward path, it will continue to collide with
Eurasia. The result will be the closing of the

Figure 2.24
The world as it may look
50 million years from
now This reconstruction is
highly idealized and based
on the assumption that
the processes that caused
the breakup of Pangaea
will continue to operate.
(Based on Robert S. Dietz, John C.
Holden, C. Scotese, and others)

for the possible closing of the Atlantic comes from a
similar event, when an ocean predating the Atlantic
closed during Pangaea’s formation. Australia is also
projected to collide with Southeast Asia by that time.
If this scenario is accurate, the dispersal of Pangaea
Figure 2.25
Earth as it may appear
250 million years from
now

Eurasia
North
America

Africa
Australia

South
America

Antarctica

58

CHAPTER 2

Plate Tectonics: A Scientific Revolution Unfolds

will end when the continents reorganize into the next
supercontinent.
Such projections, although interesting, must be
viewed with considerable skepticism because many
assumptions must be correct for these events to unfold
as just described. Nevertheless, changes in the shapes
and positions of continents that are equally profound
will undoubtedly occur for many hundreds of millions
of years to come. Only after much more of Earth’s
internal heat has been lost will the engine that drives
plate motions cease.

2.9

2.8

Concept Checks

1. Name two plates that are growing in size. Which
plate is shrinking in size?
2. What new ocean basin was created by the
breakup of Pangaea?
3. Briefly describe changes in the positions of the
continents if we assume that the plate motions
we see today continue 50 million years into the
future.

Testing the Plate Tectonics Model
List and explain the evidence used to support the plate tectonics theory.

Some of the evidence supporting continental drift was presented in Section 2.3. With the development of plate tectonics theory, researchers began testing this new model of how Earth works.
Although new supporting data were obtained, it has often been new interpretations of already existing data that have swayed the tide of opinion.

Evidence: Ocean Drilling

Figure 2.26
Deep-sea drilling A. Data
collected through deep-sea
drilling have shown that
the ocean floor is indeed
youngest at the ridge axis.
B. The Japanese deep-sea
drilling ship Chikyu became
operational in 2007. (Photo
by Katsumi Kasahara/Getty)

Glomar Challenger, a drilling ship capable of working in
water thousands of meters deep, was built. Hundreds of
Some of the most convincing evidence for seafloor
holes were drilled through the layers of sediments that
spreading came from the Deep Sea Drilling Project,
blanket the ocean crust, as well as into the basaltic rocks
which operated from 1966 until 1983. One of the early
below. Rather than use radiometric dating, which can be
goals of the project was to gather samples of the ocean
unreliable on oceanic rocks because of the alteration of
floor in order to establish its age. To accomplish this, the
basalt by seawater, researchers used the fossil remains of
microorganisms found in the sediments resting directly
on the crust to date the seafloor at each site.
Core samples show that the thickness of sediments
increases with increasing distance from the ridge crest.
When the oldest sediment from each
drill site was plotted against its distance
from the ridge crest, the plot showed
that the sediments increased in age
with increasing distance from the
Age of seafloor
ridge (Figure 2.26A). This finding
Older
Younger
Older
supported the seafloor-spreading
hypothesis, which predicted that
Drilling ship collects core
the youngest oceanic crust would be
samples of seafloor sediments
and basaltic crust
found at the ridge crest, the site of
seafloor production, and the oldest
oceanic crust would be located adja)
cent to the continents.
t
l
a
s
a
b
Ocean crust (
The distribution and thickness
of ocean-floor sediments provided
additional verification of seafloor
spreading. Drill cores from
A.
the Glomar Challenger
Chikyu is a state-of-the-art
revealed that sediments
drilling ship designed to
are almost entirely absent
drill up to 7,000 meters
on the ridge crest and that
(more than 4 miles) below
sediment thickness increases
the seafloor.
with increasing distance
from the ridge (see Figure
2.26A). This pattern of
B.

Katsumi Kasahara/Getty

59

2.9 Testing the Plate Tectonics Model

sediment distribution should be expected if the seafloorspreading hypothesis is correct.
The data collected by the Deep Sea Drilling Project
also reinforced the idea that the ocean basins are geologically young because no seafloor older than 180 million
years was found. By comparison, most continental crust
exceeds several hundred million years in age, and some
has been located that exceeds 4 billion years in age.
In 1983, a new ocean-drilling program was launched
by the Joint Oceanographic Institutions for Deep Earth
Sampling (JOIDES). Now the International Ocean Discovery Program (IODP), this ongoing international effort
uses multiple vessels for exploration, including the massive
210-meter-long (nearly 690-foot-long) Chikyu (“planet
Earth” in Japanese), which began operations in 2007 (Figure 2.26B). One of the goals of the IODP is to recover a
complete section of the ocean crust, from top to bottom.

Evidence: Mantle Plumes and Hot
Spots
Mapping volcanic islands and seamounts (submarine
volcanoes) in the Pacific Ocean revealed several linear
chains of volcanic structures. One of the most-studied
chains consists of at least 129 volcanoes that extend from
the Hawaiian Islands to Midway Island and continue
northwestward toward the Aleutian trench (Figure 2.27).
Radiometric dating of this linear structure, called the
Hawaiian Island–Emperor Seamount chain, showed that

the volcanoes increase in age with increasing distance
from the Big Island of Hawaii. The youngest volcanic
island in the chain (Hawaii) rose from the ocean floor less
than 1 million years ago, whereas Midway Island is 27
million years old, and Detroit Seamount, near the Aleutian trench, is about 80 million years old (see Figure 2.27).
Most researchers agree that a cylindrically shaped
upwelling of hot rock, called a mantle plume, is located
beneath the island of Hawaii. As the hot, rocky plume
ascends through the mantle, the confining pressure
drops, which triggers partial melting. (This process, called
decompression melting, is discussed in Chapter 4.) The
surface manifestation of this activity is a hot spot, an area
of volcanism, high heat flow, and crustal uplifting that is a
few hundred kilometers across. As the Pacific plate moved
over a hot spot, a chain of volcanic structures known as
a hot-spot track was built. As shown in Figure 2.27, the
age of each volcano indicates how much time has elapsed
since it was situated over the mantle plume.
A closer look at the five largest Hawaiian Islands
reveals a similar pattern of ages, from the volcanically
active island of Hawaii to the inactive volcanoes that
make up the oldest island, Kauai (see Figure 2.27). Five
million years ago, when Kauai was positioned over the
Figure 2.27

Plate motion
Hot spot
volcanism

Extinct
volcano

Kauai
3.8—5.6
Rising
mantle
plume

Oahu
2.2–3.3
Molokai
1.3–1.8
Maui
less than 1.0

Detroit: 80 mya
Suiko: 60 mya

Hawaii
0.7 to present

Emperor
Seamount chain

Koko: 48 mya
Hawaiian chain
Midway
Island
27 mya

Hawaii
0.7 mya

Ages given
in millions of
years
NASA

Hot-spot volcanism
and the formation of
the Hawaiian chain
Radiometric dating of the
Hawaiian Islands shows
that volcanic activity
increases in age moving
away from the Big Island
of Hawaii.

60

CHAPTER 2

Figure 2.28
Hot spots and hot-spot
tracks Locations of some
well-documented hot spots
and hot-spot tracks thought
to be associated with
mantle plumes.

Plate Tectonics: A Scientific Revolution Unfolds

field is similar to that
produced by a simple
bar magnet. InvisIceland
ible lines of force pass
Bowie
Eifel
Yellowstone
through the planet
Azores
Cobb
Central Massif
and extend from one
Baja
Bermuda Great
magnetic pole to the
Hawaii California
Tibesti
Meteor
other (Figure 2.29). A
Hoggar
Cape Verde
compass
needle, itself
Darfur Afar
Galápagos
Caroline
a
small
magnet
free
Fernando
Marquesas
Samoa
to rotate on an axis,
Pitcairn
St.
becomes aligned with
Trindade
Réunion
Helena
Macdonald Easter
the magnetic lines of
Island Juan
Tristan
force and points to the
Kerguelen
Crozet
Fernández
da Cunha
magnetic poles.
Louisville
Bouvet
Earth’s magnetic
field is less obvious
than the pull of gravity because humans
cannot feel it. Movement of a compass needle, however,
hot spot, it was the only modern Hawaiian Island in
confirms its presence. In addition, some naturally occurexistence. Kauai’s age is evident by examining its extinct
volcanoes, which have been eroded into jagged peaks and ring minerals are magnetic and are influenced by Earth’s
magnetic field. One of the most common is the iron-rich
vast canyons. By contrast, the relatively young island of
mineral magnetite, which is abundant in lava flows of
Hawaii exhibits many fresh lava flows, and one of its five
basaltic composition.* Basaltic lavas erupt at the surface at
major volcanoes, Kilauea, remains active today.
temperatures greater than 1000°C (1800°F), exceeding a
Of approximately 40 hot spots that are thought to
threshold temperature for magnetism known as the Curie
have formed because of upwelling of hot mantle plumes,
point (about 585°C [1085°F]). Consequently, the magnemost, but not all have hot-spot tracks (Figure 2.28). Also
tite grains in molten lava are nonmagnetic. However, as
notice in Figure 2.28 that nearby hot spots have nearly
the lava cools, these iron-rich grains become magnetized
parallel tracks, confirming large-scale plate motion.
and align themselves in the direction of the existing magnetic lines of force. Once the minerals solidify, the magneEvidence: Paleomagnetism
tism they possess usually remains “frozen” in this position.
Thus, they act like a compass needle because they “point”
You are probably familiar with how a compass operates
toward the position of the magnetic poles at the time of
and know that Earth’s magnetic field has north and south
their formation. Rocks that formed thousands or millions
magnetic poles. Today these magnetic poles roughly align
of years ago and contain a “record” of the direction of the
with the geographic poles that are located where Earth’s
magnetic poles at the time of their formation are said to
rotational axis intersects the surface. Earth’s magnetic
possess paleomagnetism, or fossil magnetism.
Key
Hot spots
Hot-spot tracks

Figure 2.29
Earth’s magnetic
field Earth’s magnetic field
consists of lines of force
much like those a giant
bar magnet would produce
if placed at the center of
Earth.

Geographic
north

Magnetic
north

Apparent Polar Wandering A study of paleomagnetism in ancient lava flows throughout Europe led to an
interesting discovery. The magnetic alignment of iron-rich
minerals in lava flows of different ages indicated that the
position of the paleomagnetic poles had changed through
time. A plot of the location of the magnetic north pole, as
measured from Europe, revealed that during the past 500
million years, the pole had gradually “wandered” from a
location near Hawaii northeastward to its present location
over the Arctic Ocean (Figure 2.30). This was strong evidence that either the magnetic north pole had migrated,
an idea known as polar wandering, or that the poles had
remained in place and the continents had drifted beneath
them—in other words, Europe had drifted relative to the
magnetic north pole.
* Some sediments and sedimentary rocks also contain enough iron-bearing
mineral grains to acquire a measurable amount of magnetization.

61

2.9 Testing the Plate Tectonics Model

Although the magnetic poles are known to move
in a somewhat erratic path, studies of paleomagnetism
from numerous locations show that the positions of the
magnetic poles, averaged over thousands of years, correspond closely to the positions of the geographic poles.
Therefore, a more acceptable explanation for the apparent polar wander was provided by Wegener’s hypothesis:
If the magnetic poles remain stationary, their apparent
movement is produced by continental drift.
Further evidence for continental drift came a few
years later, when a polar-wandering path was constructed
for North America (see Figure 2.30A). For the first
300 million years or so, the paths for North America
and Europe were found to be similar in direction—but
separated by about 5000 kilometers (3000 miles). Then,
during the middle of the Mesozoic era (180 million years
ago), they began to converge on the present North Pole.
The explanation for these curves is that North America
and Europe were joined until the Mesozoic, when the
Atlantic began to open. From this time forward, these continents continuously moved apart. When North America
and Europe are moved back to their pre-drift positions, as
shown in Figure 2.30B, these paths of apparent polar wandering coincide. This is evidence that North America and
Europe were once joined and moved relative to the poles as
part of the same continent.
_TT5


Magnetic Reversals and Seafloor Spreading More
evidence emerged when geophysicists learned that over
periods of hundreds of thousands of years, Earth’s magnetic field periodically reverses polarity. During a magnetic reversal, the magnetic north pole becomes the

Magnetic Time Scale

Age
Millions
of years

400 Ma
500 Ma

400 Ma

300 Ma

300 Ma

200 Ma
North
America

Brunhes
normal chron

Eurasia

200 Ma

100 Ma

100 Ma
Eurasia

Modern Magnetic
N. Pole

North
America

B.

A.

Apparent polar-wandering paths A. The more westerly path determined from
North American data is thought to have been caused by the westward drift of North America
by about 24 degrees from Eurasia. B. The positions of the wandering paths when the landmasses are reassembled in their pre-drift locations.

magnetic south pole and vice versa. Lava solidifying during a period of reverse polarity will be magnetized with
the polarity opposite that of volcanic rocks being formed
today. When rocks exhibit the same magnetism as the
present magnetic field, they are said to possess normal
polarity, whereas rocks exhibiting the opposite magnetism are said to have reverse polarity.
Once the concept of magnetic reversals was confirmed, researchers set out to establish a time scale for
these occurrences. The task was to measure the magnetic
polarity of hundreds of lava flows and use radiometric
dating techniques to establish the age of each flow. Figure
2.31 shows the magnetic time scale established using
SmartFigure 2.31

Gauss
normal chron

Normal polarity
2.6 mya

2

3

Mammoth reversed
subchron

Gilbert
reversed chron
4
A.

B.

Africa

Figure 2.30

Matuyama
reversed chron
Olduvai normal
subchron

Modern Magnetic
N. Pole

Africa

Reversed polarity
1.2 mya

1

Apparent polar
wandering
path for Eurasia

500 Ma

Normal polarity
0.4 mya

0

Jaramillo normal
subchron

Apparent polar
wandering path
for North America

Apparent polar
wandering path for
North America

Apparent polar
wandering
path for Eurasia

Time scale of magnetic
reversals A. Time scale of
Earth’s magnetic reversals
for the past 4 million years.
B. This time scale was
developed by establishing
the magnetic polarity for
lava flows of known age.
(Data from Allen Cox and G. B.
Dalrymple) (https://goo.gl/e9Qwe2)

62

Plate Tectonics: A Scientific Revolution Unfolds

CHAPTER 2

Figure 2.32
Research vessel
towing magnetometer
across ridge
crest

Ridge
axis
Axis of
Juan
de Fuca
Ridge

NA

DA

Normal
polarity
Reverse
polarity
Magnetometer re

cord
Stronger
magnetism

Weaker
magnetism

A.

A. Normal polarity

SmartFigure 2.33
Magnetic reversals and
seafloor spreading When
new basaltic rocks form
at mid-ocean ridges, they
magnetize according to
Earth’s existing magnetic
field. Hence, oceanic crust
provides a permanent record
of each reversal of our
planet’s magnetic field over
the past 200 million years.

CA

Magma
B. Reverse polarity

(https://goo.gl/5gKsdz)

Magma
C. Normal polarity

Magma

Symmetrical
strips of low- and
high-intensity
magnetism
parallel the axis
of the Juan de
Fuca Ridge

U N I T E D S TAT E S

Ocean floor as a magnetic
recorder A. Magnetic
intensities are recorded
when a magnetometer is
towed across a segment of
the oceanic floor. B. Notice
the symmetrical stripes
of low- and high-intensity
magnetism that parallel the
axis of the Juan de Fuca
Ridge. The stripes of highintensity magnetism occur
where normally magnetized
oceanic rocks enhanced
the existing magnetic
field. Conversely, the lowintensity stripes are regions
where the crust is polarized
in the reverse direction,
which weakens the existing
magnetic field.

B.

this technique for the past few million years. The major
divisions of the magnetic time scale are called chrons
and last for roughly 1 million years. As more measurements became available, researchers realized
that several short-lived reversals (less than 200,000
years long) often occurred during a single chron.
Meanwhile, oceanographers had begun
magnetic surveys of the ocean floor in conjunction with their efforts to construct detailed
maps of seafloor topography. These magnetic
surveys were accomplished by towing very
T
sensitive instruments, called magnetomI
M eters, behind research vessels (Figure 2.32A).
E The goal of these geophysical surveys was
to map variations in the strength of Earth’s
magnetic field that arise from differences
in the magnetic properties of the underlying crustal rocks.
The first comprehensive study of this
type was carried out off the Pacific
coast of North America and had an
unexpected outcome. Researchers discovered alternating stripes of high- and
low-intensity magnetism, as shown in
Figure 2.32B. This relatively simple pattern of magnetic variation defied explanation until 1963, when Fred Vine and
D. H. Matthews demonstrated that the
high- and low-intensity stripes supported

2.10 How Is Plate Motion Measured?

the concept of seafloor spreading. Vine and Matthews
suggested that the stripes of high-intensity magnetism
are regions where the paleomagnetism of the ocean crust
exhibits normal polarity (see Figure 2.32). Consequently,
these rocks enhance (reinforce) Earth’s magnetic field.
Conversely, the low-intensity stripes are regions where
the ocean crust is polarized in the reverse direction and
therefore weaken the existing magnetic field. But how do
parallel stripes of normally and reversely magnetized rock
become distributed across the ocean floor?
Vine and Matthews reasoned that as magma solidifies along narrow rifts at the crest of an oceanic ridge, it is
magnetized with the polarity of the existing magnetic field
(Figure 2.33). Because of seafloor spreading, this strip of
magnetized crust would gradually increase in width. When
Earth’s magnetic field reverses polarity, any newly formed
seafloor having the opposite polarity would form in the
middle of the old strip. Gradually, the two halves of the old
strip would be carried in opposite directions, away from
the ridge crest. Subsequent reversals would build a pattern
of normal and reverse magnetic stripes, as shown in Figure 2.33. Because new rock is added in equal amounts to
both trailing edges of the spreading ocean floor, we should

expect the pattern of stripes (width and polarity) found on
one side of an oceanic ridge to be a mirror image of those
on the other side. In fact, a survey across the Mid-Atlantic
Ridge just south of Iceland reveals a pattern of magnetic
stripes exhibiting a remarkable degree of symmetry in
relation to the ridge axis.

2.9

Concept Checks

1. What is the age of the oldest sediments
recovered using deep-ocean drilling? How do the
ages of these sediments compare to the ages of
the oldest continental rocks?
2. How do sedimentary cores from the ocean floor
support the concept of seafloor spreading?
3. Assuming that hot spots remain fixed, in what
direction was the Pacific plate moving while the
Hawaiian Islands were forming?
4. Describe how Fred Vine and D. H. Matthews
related the seafloor-spreading hypothesis to
magnetic reversals.

Is Plate Motion Measured?
2.10 How
Describe two methods researchers use to measure relative plate motion.
A number of methods are used to establish the direction and rate of plate motion. Some of these
techniques not only confirm that lithospheric plates move but allow us to trace those movements
back in geologic time.

Geologic Measurement
of Plate Motion
Using ocean-drilling ships, researchers have obtained
dates for hundreds of locations on the ocean floor. By
knowing the age of a sample and its distance from the
ridge axis where it was generated, an average rate of plate
motion can be calculated.
Scientists used these data, combined with their
knowledge of paleomagnetism stored in hardened lavas
on the ocean floor and seafloor topography, to create
maps that show the age of the ocean floor. The reddishorange colored bands shown in Figure 2.34 range in age
from the present to about 30 million years ago. The width
of the bands indicates how much crust formed during
that time period. For example, the reddish-orange band
along the East Pacific Rise is more than three times
wider than the same-color band along the Mid-Atlantic
Ridge. Therefore, the rate of seafloor spreading has been
approximately three times faster in the Pacific basin than
in the Atlantic.
Maps of this type also provide clues to the current direction of plate movement. Notice the offsets
in the ridges; these are transform faults that connect
the spreading centers. Recall that transform faults are

aligned parallel to the direction of spreading. When measured carefully, transform faults reveal the direction of
plate movement.
To establish the direction of plate motion in the
past, geologists can examine the long fracture zones
that extend for hundreds or even thousands of kilometers from ridge crests. Fracture zones are inactive
extensions of transform faults and therefore preserve
a record of past directions of plate motion. Unfortunately, most of the ocean floor is less than 180 million
years old, so to look deeper into the past, researchers
must rely on paleomagnetic evidence provided by continental rocks.

Measuring Plate Motion from Space
You are likely familiar with the Global Positioning System
(GPS) used to locate one’s position in order to provide
directions to some other location. The Global Positioning
System employs satellites that send radio signals that are
intercepted by GPS receivers located at Earth’s surface.
The exact position of a site is determined by simultaneously establishing the distance from the receiver to four
or more satellites. Researchers use specially designed
equipment to locate a point on Earth to within a few

63

North American
plate

Eurasian
plate
Juan de Fuca
plate
Philippine
plate

Eurasian plate

Caribbean
plate

Pacific plate

Arabian
plate

Cocos
plate

African plate

Fracture
zones

South
American
plate

Nazca
plate

AustralianIndian
plate

Australian-Indian plate

Scotia plate

Antarctic plate
Millions of years
0

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

160

180

200

220

240

260

280

Figure 2.34

millimeters (about the diameter of a small pea). To establish plate motions, GPS data are collected at numerous
sites repeatedly over a number of years.
Data obtained from these and other techniques are
shown in Figure 2.35. Calculations show that Hawaii is
moving in a northwesterly direction and approaching
Japan at 8.3 centimeters per year. A location in Maryland
is retreating from a location in England at a speed of 1.7
centimeters per year—a value close to the 2.0-centimeters-per-year spreading rate established from paleomagnetic evidence obtained for the North Atlantic. Techniques involving GPS devices have also been useful in

Figure 2.35

confirming small-scale crustal movements such as those
that occur along faults in regions known to be tectonically active (for example, the San Andreas Fault).

2.10

Concept Checks

1. What do transform faults that connect spreading
centers indicate about plate motion?
2. Refer to Figure 2.35 and determine which three
plates appear to exhibit the highest rates of
motion.

Directions and rates of plate motions measured in centimeters per year

1.8

Caribbean
plate

cific Rise

Nazca
plate

3.5

South American
plate

4.4
3.5

dg
Ri

5.9
Chi
le

Rid

ge

Antarctic plate

ch

n

5.0

ian
Ind

Sandwich
plate

Scotia plate
5 centimeters
per year

Somalia
plate 3.0

re
aT

9.4

2.7
i d ge

Ja v

7.5

Southeast Indian R
idg
e

tlan
tic

Mid-Indian
Ridge

.
eF

in
Alp

7.0

Trench

Australian-Indian plate

-A

ile
Ch

15.6

Arabian
plate

African plate

2.5

uPer

13.4

F.Z.

R

Cocos
plate

zores

2.3

d

Trench

10.8

Pacific plate

and others; GPS data from Jet
Propulsion Laboratory)

Eurasian plate

2.3A

Juan de Fuca
plate

a
rian
Ma

Philippine
plate

h
Trenc

Mohns
Ridge

es
jan
yk e
Re idg
R

So

Aleutian

North American
plate

Mi

Rates of plate motion
The red arrows show plate
motion at selected locations based on GPS data.
Longer arrows represent
faster spreading rates.
The small black arrows
and labels show seafloor
spreading velocities based
mainly on paleomagnetic
data. (Seafloor data from DeMets

East Pa

Age of the ocean floor

1.4

t
es
hw
ut

1.5

e

1.4
7.2

65

2.11 What Drives Plate Motions?

2.11

What Drives Plate Motions?
Describe plate–mantle convection and explain two of the primary driving forces of
plate motion.

Researchers are in general agreement that some type of convection—where hot mantle rocks rise
and cold, dense oceanic lithosphere sinks—is the ultimate driver of plate tectonics. Many of the
details of this convective flow, however, remain topics of debate in the scientific community.
_TT6


water
sinks

Warm
water
rises

Figure 2.36

Convection is
a type of heat
transfer that
involves the
movement of
a substance.

Convection in a cooking pot As a stove
warms the water in the bottom of a cooking pot, the heated
water expands, becomes less dense (more buoyant), and
rises. Simultaneously, the cooler, denser water near the top
sinks.

Ridge push
is a gravity-driven force that
results from the elevated
position of the ridge.
Mid-oceanic
ridge

pu

ll

Trench

ab

Geophysical evidence confirms that although the mantle
consists almost entirely of solid rock, it is hot and weak
enough to exhibit a slow, fluid-like convective flow. The
simplest type of convection is analogous to heating a pot
of water on a stove (Figure 2.36). Heating the base of a pot
causes the water to become less dense (more buoyant), causing it to rise in relatively thin sheets or blobs that spread
out at the surface. As the surface layer cools, its density
increases, and the cooler water sinks back to the bottom of
the pot, where it is reheated until it achieves enough buoyancy to rise again. Mantle convection is similar to, but considerably more complex than, the model just described.
Geologists generally agree that subduction of cold,
dense slabs of oceanic lithosphere is a major driving force
of plate motion (Figure 2.37). This phenomenon, called
slab pull, occurs because cold slabs of oceanic lithosphere are more dense than the underlying warm asthenosphere and hence “sink like a rock”—meaning that
they are pulled down into the mantle by gravity.
Another important driving force is ridge push (see
Figure 2.37). This gravity-driven mechanism results
from the elevated position of the oceanic ridge, which
causes slabs of lithosphere to “slide” down the flanks of
the ridge. Ridge push appears to contribute far less to
plate motions than slab pull. The primary evidence for
this is that the fastest-moving plates—Pacific, Nazca, and
Cocos plates—have extensive subduction zones along
their margins. By contrast, the
spreading rate in the North
Atlantic basin, which is
nearly devoid of subduction
zones, is one of the lowest,
at about 2.5 centimeters
(1 inch) per year.
Cooler

Friction between the overriding
plate and the subducting plate
resists plate motion.

Sl

Forces That Drive Plate Motion

Mantle drag
resists plate
subduction.

Figure 2.37

Slab pull results from
the sinking of a cold,
dense slab of oceanic
lithosphere and is the
major driving force of
plate motion.

Forces that act on lithospheric plates

Although the subduction of cold, dense lithospheric
plates appears to be the dominant force acting on plates,
other factors are also at work. Flow in the mantle, perhaps
best described as “mantle drag,” is also thought to affect
plate motion (see Figure 2.37). When flow in the asthenosphere is moving at a velocity that exceeds that of the
plate, mantle drag enhances plate motion. However, if the
asthenosphere is moving more slowly than the plate, or
if it is moving in the opposite direction, this force tends
to resist plate motion. Another type of resistance to plate
motion occurs along some subduction zones, where friction between the overriding plate and the descending slab
generates significant earthquake activity.

Models of Plate–Mantle Convection
Although convection in the mantle has yet to be fully
understood, researchers generally agree on the following:
r Convective flow in the rocky 2900-kilometer- (1800
mile-) thick mantle—in which warm, buoyant rock
rises and cooler, denser material sinks—is the underlying driving force for plate movement.

Convection in the
mantle enhances plate
motion when the velocity
of the asthenosphere
exceeds that of the
overlying plate.

Hot
spot

Subducting
oceanic
lithosphere

Spreading center

Spreading center
Subduction of
dense oceanic
lithosphere

Upper mantle

Models of mantle
convection

ducted int
t con
om
hea
an
t
re
Core

A. In the “whole-mantle model,” sinking slabs of cold
oceanic lithosphere are the downward limbs of convection
cells, while rising mantle plumes carry hot material from the
core–mantle boundary toward the surface.

Figure 2.38

Isolated
lower
mantle

Hot
rising
mega-plume

Co

C

“Sluggish
flow”

le

660 km

Hot
rising
mantle
plume

removed by p
eat
lum
eh
es
or
Core

Subducting
oceanic
lithosphere

Upper mantle

Cold descending
oceanic plate

B. The “layer cake model” has two largely disconnected convective layers.
A dynamic upper layer driven by descending slabs of cold oceanic
lithosphere and a sluggish lower layer that carries heat upward without
appreciably mixing with the layer above.

r Mantle convection and plate tectonics are part of
the same system. Subducting oceanic plates drive
the cold downward-moving portion of convective
flow, while shallow upwelling of hot rock along the
oceanic ridge and buoyant mantle plumes are the
upward-flowing arms of the convective mechanism.
r Convective flow in the mantle is a major mechanism
for transporting heat away from Earth’s interior to the
surface, where it is eventually radiated into space.
What is not known with certainty is the exact structure of
this convective flow. Several models have been proposed
for plate–mantle convection, and we will look at two of
them.

Whole-Mantle Convection

One group of researchers favor some type of whole-mantle convection model,
also called the plume model, in which cold oceanic lithosphere sinks to great depths and stirs the entire mantle
(Figure 2.38A). The whole-mantle model suggests that the
ultimate burial ground for these subducting lithospheric
slabs is the core–mantle boundary. The downward flow
of these subducting slabs is balanced by buoyantly rising
mantle plumes that transport hot mantle rock toward the
surface.
Two kinds of plumes have been proposed—narrow
tube-like plumes and giant upwellings, often referred to
as mega-plumes. The long, narrow plumes are thought
to originate from the core–mantle boundary and produce hot-spot volcanism of the type associated with the
Hawaiian Islands, Iceland, and Yellowstone. Scientists
believe that areas of large mega-plumes, as shown in
Figure 2.38A, occur beneath the Pacific basin and southern Africa. The latter structure is thought to explain
why southern Africa has an elevation much higher than
would be predicted for a stable continental landmass. In
the whole-mantle convection model, heat for both types
of plumes is thought to arise mainly from Earth’s core,
while the deep mantle provides a source for chemically
distinct magmas. However, some researchers have questioned that idea and instead propose that the source of

magma for most hot spot volcanism is found in the upper
mantle (asthenosphere).

Layer Cake Model Some researchers argue that the
mantle resembles a “layer cake” divided at a depth of
perhaps 660 kilometers (410 miles) but no deeper than
1000 kilometers (620 miles). As shown in Figure 2.38B,
this layered model has two zones of convection—a thin,
dynamic layer in the upper mantle and a thick, larger,
sluggish one located below. As with the whole-mantle
model, the downward convective flow is driven by the
subduction of cold, dense oceanic lithosphere. However,
rather than reach the lower mantle, these subducting
slabs penetrate to depths of no more than 1000 kilometers (620 miles). Notice in Figure 2.38B that the upper
layer in the layer cake model is littered with recycled
oceanic lithosphere of various ages. Melting of these fragments is thought to be the source of magma for some of
the volcanism that occurs away from plate boundaries,
such as the hot-spot volcanism of Hawaii.
In contrast to the active upper mantle, the lower
mantle is sluggish and does not provide material to support volcanism at the surface. Very slow convection
within this layer likely carries heat upward, but very little
mixing between these two layers is thought to occur.
Geologists continue to debate the nature of the convective flow in the mantle. As they investigate the possibilities, perhaps a hypothesis that combines features from
the layer cake model and the whole-mantle convection
model will emerge.

2.11

Concept Checks

1. Describe slab pull and ridge push. Which of these
forces appears to contribute more to plate motion?
2. Briefly describe the two models of mantle–plate
convection.
3. What geologic processes are associated with the
upward and downward circulation in the mantle?

3
Matter and
Minerals

The Cave of Crystals, Chihuahua, Mexico, contains giant
gypsum crystals, some of the largest natural crystals ever
found. (Photo by Carsten Peter/Speleoresearch & Films/National
Geographic Stock /Getty Images)

E

arth’s crust and oceans are home to a wide variety of useful and essential
minerals. Most people are familiar with the common uses of many basic metals,
including aluminum in beverage cans, copper in electrical wiring, and gold and silver in
jewelry. But some people are not aware that pencil “lead” contains the greasy-feeling
mineral graphite and that bath powders and many cosmetics contain the mineral talc.
Moreover, many do not know that dentists use drill bits impregnated with diamonds
to drill through tooth enamel. In fact, practically every manufactured product contains
materials obtained from minerals.
In addition to the economic uses of rocks and minerals, every process that
geologists study in some way depends on the properties of these basic Earth
materials. Events such as volcanic eruptions, mountain building, weathering and
erosion, and even earthquakes involve rocks and minerals. Consequently, a basic
knowledge of Earth materials is essential to understanding all geologic phenomena.

3.1

Minerals: Building Blocks of Rocks
List the main characteristics that an Earth material must possess to be considered a
mineral and describe each.

We begin our discussion of Earth materials with an overview of mineralogy (mineral 5 mineral,
ology 5 study of) because minerals are the building blocks of rocks. In addition, humans have used
minerals for both practical and decorative purposes for thousands of years. For example, the common mineral quartz is the source of silicon for computer chips (Figure 3.1).
Figure 3.1
Quartz crystals
A collection of welldeveloped quartz crystals
found near Hot Springs,
Arkansas. (Photo by Jeff Scovil)

The first minerals mined were flint and chert, which
people fashioned into weapons and cutting tools. As early
as 3700 b.c.e., Egyptians began mining gold, silver, and
copper. By 2200 b.c.e., humans had discovered how
to combine copper with tin to make bronze—a strong,

hard alloy. Later, humans developed a process to extract
iron from minerals such as hematite—a discovery that
marked the decline of the Bronze Age. During the Middle Ages, mining of a variety of minerals became common, and the impetus for the formal study of minerals
was in place.
The term mineral is used in several different ways.
For example, those concerned with health and fitness
extol the benefits of vitamins and minerals. The
mining industry typically uses the word mineral to refer to anything extracted from Earth,
such as coal, iron ore, or sand and gravel. The
guessing game Twenty Questions usually
begins with the question Is it animal, vegetable, or mineral? What criteria do geologists use to determine whether something is a
mineral?

Defining a Mineral
Geologists define mineral as any naturally occurring
inorganic solid that possesses an orderly crystalline
structure and a definite chemical composition that
allows for some variation. Thus, Earth materials that are
classified as minerals exhibit the following characteristics:

75

3.1 Minerals: Building Blocks of Rocks

Figure 3.2 Ordered versus unordered
arrangement of atoms Minerals A. have
a repetitive, orderly arrangement of atoms, whereas substances such a glass
B. have an unordered atomic structure.
A.
_TT7


B.

1. Naturally occurring. Minerals form by natural geologic processes. Synthetic materials, meaning those
produced in a laboratory or by human intervention,
are not considered minerals.
2. Generally inorganic. Inorganic crystalline solids,
such as ordinary table salt (halite), that are found
naturally in the ground are considered minerals. (Organic compounds, on the other hand, are generally
not. Sugar, a crystalline solid like salt but extracted
from sugarcane or sugar beets, is a common example
of such an organic compound.) Many marine animals
secrete inorganic compounds, such as calcium carbonate (calcite), in the form of shells and coral reefs.
If these materials are buried and become part of the
rock record, geologists consider them minerals.
3. Solid substance. Only solid crystalline substances
are considered minerals. Ice (frozen water) fits this
criterion and is considered a mineral, whereas liquid
water and water vapor do not. The exception is mercury, which is found in its liquid form in nature.
4. Orderly crystalline structure. Minerals are crystalline substances, made up of atoms (or ions) that are
arranged in an orderly, repetitive manner (Figure 3.2).
This orderly packing of atoms is reflected in the regularly shaped objects called crystals. Some naturally
occurring solids, such as volcanic glass (obsidian), lack
a repetitive atomic structure and are not considered
minerals.
5. Definite chemical composition that allows for
some variation. Minerals are chemical compounds
having compositions that can be expressed by a chemical formula. For example, the common mineral quartz
has the formula SiO2, which indicates that quartz consists of silicon (Si) and oxygen (O) atoms in a 1:2 ratio.
This proportion of silicon to oxygen is true for any
sample of pure quartz, regardless of its origin. However, the compositions of some minerals vary within
specific, well-defined limits. This occurs because certain elements can substitute for others of similar size
without changing the mineral’s internal structure.

in such a way that their individual properties are
retained. Note that the different minerals that make up
granite can be easily identified. However, some rocks
are composed almost entirely of one mineral. A common
example is the sedimentary rock limestone, which is an
impure mass of the mineral calcite.
In addition, some rocks are composed of nonmineral
matter. These include the volcanic rocks obsidian and
pumice, which are noncrystalline glassy substances, and
coal, which consists of solid organic debris.
Although this chapter deals primarily with the
nature of minerals, keep in mind that most rocks are
simply aggregates of minerals. Because the properties of
rocks are determined largely by the chemical composition and crystalline structure of the minerals contained
within them, we will first consider these Earth materials.

3.1

Concept Checks

1. List five characteristics of a mineral.
2. Based on the definition of a mineral, which of the
following—gold, water, synthetic diamonds, ice,
and wood materials—are not classified as
minerals?
3. Define the term rock. How do rocks differ from
minerals?

Granite
(Rock)

SmartFigure 3.3
Most rocks are aggregates
of minerals Shown here
is a hand sample of the
igneous rock granite and
three of its major constituent minerals. (Photos by E. J.
Tarbuck) (https://goo.gl/7cZXyr)

What Is a Rock?
In contrast to minerals, rocks are more loosely
defined. Simply, a rock is any solid mass of mineral, or mineral-like, matter that occurs naturally as part of our planet. Most rocks, like the
sample of granite shown in Figure 3.3, occur as
aggregates of several different minerals. The
term aggregate implies that the minerals are joined

Quartz

Hornblende

Feldspar

(Mineral)

(Mineral)

(Mineral)

76

Matter and Minerals

CHAPTER 3

E Y E ON E A R T H

3.1

T

QUESTION 1 What is one environmental advantage that
underground mining has over open pit mining?
QUESTION 2 If you had been employed at this mine,
what change in working conditions would have
occurred as it evolved from an underground mine to
an open pit mine?

3.2

McPHOTO/AGE Fotostock

he accompanying image is of the world’s largest
open pit gold mine, located near Kalgoorlie,
Australia. Known as the Super Pit, it originally
consisted of a number of small underground mines that
were consolidated into a single, open pit mine. Each
year, about 28 metric tons of gold are extracted from the
15 million tons of rock shattered by blasting and then
transported to the surface.

Atoms: Building Blocks of Minerals
Compare and contrast the three primary particles contained in atoms.

When minerals are carefully examined, even under optical microscopes, the innumerable tiny
particles of their internal structures are not visible. Nevertheless, scientists have discovered that
all matter, including minerals, is composed of minute building blocks called atoms—the smallest
particles that cannot be chemically split. Atoms, in turn, contain even smaller particles: protons and
neutrons located in a central nucleus that is surrounded by electrons (Figure 3.4).

Properties of Protons, Neutrons, and
Electrons
Protons and neutrons are very dense particles with
almost identical masses. By contrast, electrons have a
Figure 3.4 Two models
of an atom A. Simplified
view of an atom consisting of a central nucleus
composed of protons and
neutrons encircled by highspeed electrons. B. This
model of an atom shows
spherically shaped electron
clouds (shells) surrounding a central nucleus. The
nucleus contains virtually
all of the mass of the atom.
The remainder of the atom
is the space occupied by
negatively charged electrons. (The relative sizes
of the nuclei shown are
greatly exaggerated.)

Protons (charge +1)

negligible mass, about 1/2000 that of a proton. To illustrate this difference, imagine a scale where a proton has
the mass of a baseball and an electron has the mass of a
single grain of rice.
Both protons and electrons share a fundamental
property, called electrical charge. Protons have an electrical charge of 11, and electrons have a charge of –1.
Neutrons, as the name suggests, have no charge. The

Neutrons (charge 0)
Electrons (charge –1)

Electron cloud

Electron

Nucleus

Nucleus

A.
B.

77

3.2 Atoms: Building Blocks of Minerals

charges of protons and electrons are equal in magnitude
but opposite in polarity, so when these two particles are
paired, the charges cancel each other out. Since matter
typically contains equal numbers of positively charged
protons and negatively charged electrons, most substances are electrically neutral.
Illustrations sometimes show electrons orbiting the
nucleus in a manner that resembles the planets of our
solar system orbiting the Sun (see Figure 3.4A). However,
electrons do not actually behave this way. A more realistic
depiction is to show electrons as a cloud of negative charges
surrounding the nucleus (see Figure 3.4B). Studies of the
arrangements of electrons show that they move about the
nucleus in regions called principal shells, each with an associated energy level. In addition, each shell can hold a specific number of electrons, with the outermost shell containing valence electrons. These electrons can be transferred
to or shared with other atoms to form chemical bonds.
Most of the atoms in the universe (except hydrogen
and helium) were created inside massive stars by nuclear
fusion and released into interstellar space during hot,
fiery supernova explosions. As this
ejected material cooled, the newly
Tendency to
formed nuclei attracted electrons to
lose outermost
electrons
complete their atomic structure. At
to uncover full
outer shell

the temperatures found at Earth’s surface, all free atoms
(those not bonded to other atoms) have a full complement
of electrons—one for each proton in the nucleus.

Elements: Defined by Their Number of
Protons
The simplest atoms have only 1 proton in their nuclei,
whereas others have more than 100. The number of
protons in the nucleus of an atom, called the atomic
number, determines its chemical nature. All atoms with
the same number of protons have the same chemical and
physical properties. Together, a group of the same kind of
atoms is called an element. There are about 90 naturally
occurring elements and several more that have been synthesized in the laboratory. You are probably familiar with
the names of many elements, including carbon, nitrogen,
and oxygen. All carbon atoms have six protons, whereas
all nitrogen atoms have seven protons, and all oxygen
atoms have eight.
Scientists have organized elements so those with
similar properties line up in columns, referred to as
groups. This arrangement, called the periodic table, is
shown in Figure 3.5. Each element is assigned a one- or

Atomic number
1

H

1.0080
Hydrogen
IA

5

Vertical columns
contain elements
with similar
properties.

B

Atomic weight

10.81
Boron

3

4

Be

6.939
Lithium

9.012
Beryllium

11

12

Na

22.990
Sodium

24.31

III A

IV B

VB

VI B

19

20

21

22

23

24

K

Ca

Sc

Ti

V

Cr

40.08
Calcium

44.96
Scandium

47.90
Titanium

37

38

39

40

41

Rb

Sr

Y

Zr

Nb

39.102
Potassium

85.47
Rubidium

25

Mn

52.00
54.94
Chromium Manganese

50.94
Vanadium

42

43

Mo

Tc

88.91
Yttrium

91.22
Zirconium

55

56

73

74

75

Ba

#57
TO
#71

72

Cs

Hf

Ta

W

Re

137.34
Barium

87

88

Fr

Ra

(223)
Francium

226.05
Radium

#89
TO
#103

Metals
Metalloids
Nonmetals
Lanthanide series
Actinide series

178.49
Hafnium

92.91
Niobium

VII B

87.62
Strontium

132.91
Cesium

Step-like line
divides metals
from nonmetals.

Tendency to lose electrons
III B

138.91
Lanthanum

58

Ce

140.12
Cerium

89

90

Ac

Th

(227)
Actinium

232.04
Thorium

183.85
Tungsten

186.2
Rhenium

10.81
Boron

12.011
Carbon

14.007
Nitrogen

15.9994
Oxygen

18.998
Fluorine

13

14

17

18

Si

15

16

Al

S

Cl

Ar

26.98
Aluminum

30

31

Ga

65.37
Zinc

69.72
Gallium

28.09
Silicon

P

30.974
Phosphorus

32

Ge

39.948
Argon

33

34

35

36

Se

Br

Kr

78.96
Selenium

79.909
Bromine

83.80
Krypton

44

45

46

47

48

49

50

51

52

53

54

Rh

Pd

Ag

Cd

In

Sn

Sb

Te

I

Xe

101.1

102.90
Rhodium

106.4
Palladium

76

77

78

Os

Ir

Pt

190.2
Osmium

192.2
Iridium

195.09
Platinum

107.87
Silver

112.40
Cadmium

114.82
Indium

79

80

Au

Hg

197.0
Gold

62

63

64

Sm

Eu

Gd

(147)

Praseodymium Neodymium Promethium

150.35
Samarium

151.96
157.25
Europium Gadolinium

200.59
Mercury

65

Tb

158.92
Terbium

118.69
Tin

121.75
Antimony

81

82

Tl

Pb

204.37
Thallium

66

Dy

162.50
Dysprosium

207.19
Lead

127.60
Tellurium

126.90
Iodine

83

84

85

86

Bi

Po

At

Rn

208.98
Bismuth

(210)
Polonium

68

69

70

71

Er

Tm

Yb

Lu

164.93
Holmium

167.26
Erbium

168.93
Thullium

173.04
Ytterbium

174.97
Lutetium

102

103

93

94

95

96

Np

97

Pu

Am

Cm

98

99

100

101

Bk

Cf

Es

Fm

Md

(247)
Curium

(222)
Radon

67

U

(237)
(242)
(243)
Neptunium Plutonium Americium

(210)
Astatine

131.30
Xenon

Ho

92
238.03
Uranium

35.453
Chlorine

As

74.92
Arsenic

72.59
Germanium

32.064
Sulfur

20.183
Neon

Ru

61

(231)

10

Ne

Zn

Pm

Protactinium

9

F

29

60

91

8

O

Cu

Nd

Pa

4.003
Helium

7

Ni

63.54
Copper

VII A

N

28
58.71
Nickel

VI A

6

27
58.93
Cobalt

VA

C

Co

59

144.24

II B

IV A

5

26

Pr

140.91

2

B

Fe

Molybdenum Technetium Ruthenium

180.95
Tantalum

57

La

(99)

95.94

IB

VIII B

55.85
Iron

VIII A

He

Mg

Magnesium

Noble gases
are inert
because
outer shell
is full

Name of element

II A

Li

Periodic table of the
elements

Tendency
to gain
electrons
to make full
outer shell

Tendency to fill
outer shell by
sharing electrons

Symbol of element

Figure 3.5

(249)
(251)
(254)
Berkelium Californium Einsteinium

(253)
Fermium

(256)

Mendelevium

No

Lw

(254)
(257)
Nobelium Lawrencium

78

CHAPTER 3

Matter and Minerals

Figure 3.6
Examples of minerals that
are composed of a single
element (Photos by Dennis
Tasa)

A. Gold on quartz

B. Sulfur

C. Copper

two-letter symbol. The atomic numbers and masses for
each element are also shown on the periodic table.
Atoms of the naturally occurring elements are the
basic building blocks of Earth’s minerals. Most elements
join with atoms of other elements to form chemical
compounds. Therefore, most minerals are chemical
compounds composed of atoms of two or more elements.

3.2

These include the minerals
quartz (SiO2), halite (NaCl),
and calcite (CaCO3). However, a few minerals, such
as native (occurring in pure
form in nature) copper, diamonds, sulfur, and gold, are
made entirely of atoms of
only one element (Figure 3.6).

Concept Checks

1. Make a simple sketch of an atom and label its
three main particles. Explain how these particles
differ from one another.
2. What is the significance of valence electrons?

Why Atoms Bond

3.3

Distinguish among ionic bonds, covalent bonds, and metallic bonds.

Except for a group of elements known as the noble gases, atoms bond to one another under the
temperature and pressure conditions that occur on Earth. Some atoms bond to form ionic compounds, some form molecules, and still others form metallic substances. Why does this happen?
Experiments show that electrical forces hold atoms together and bond them to each other. These
electrical attractions lower the total energy of the bonded atoms, which, in turn, generally makes
them more stable. Consequently, atoms that are bonded in compounds tend to be more stable than
atoms that are free (not bonded).
_TT8


The Octet Rule and Chemical Bonds
As noted earlier, valence (outer shell) electrons are generally involved in chemical bonding. Figure 3.7 shows a
shorthand way of representing the number of valence
electrons. Notice that the elements in Group I have one
valence electron, those in Group II have two valence
electrons, and so on, up to eight valence electrons in
Group VIII.
The noble gases have very stable electron arrangements with eight valence electrons (except helium which
Figure 3.7
Dot diagrams for certain
elements Each dot represents a valence electron
found in the outermost
principal shell.

Electron Dot Diagrams for Some Representative Elements
I

II

III

IV

V

VI

VII

VIII

He

H
Li

Be

B

C

N

O

F

Ne

Na

Mg

Al

Si

P

S

Cl

Ar

K

Ca

Ga

Ge

As

Se

Br

Kr

has two) and, therefore, tend to lack chemical reactivity.
Many other atoms gain, lose, or share electrons during
chemical reactions, ending up with electron arrangements of the noble gases. This observation led to a chemical guideline known as the octet rule: Atoms tend to
gain, lose, or share electrons until they are surrounded
by eight valence electrons. Although there are exceptions
to the octet rule, it is a useful rule of thumb for understanding chemical bonding.
When an atom’s outer shell does not contain eight
electrons, it is likely to chemically bond to other atoms
to fill its shell. A chemical bond is a transfer or sharing of electrons that allows each atom to attain a full
valence shell of electrons. Some atoms do this by
transferring all their valence electrons to other
atoms, so that an inner shell becomes the full
valence shell.
When the valence electrons are transferred between
the elements to form ions, the bond is an ionic bond.
When the electrons are shared between the atoms, the
bond is a covalent bond. When the valence electrons are
shared among all the atoms in a substance, the bonding
is metallic.

79

3.3 Why Atoms Bond

Ionic Bonds: Electrons Transferred
Perhaps the easiest type of bond to visualize is the ionic
bond, in which one atom gives up one or more valence
electrons to another atom to form ions—positively and
negatively charged atoms. The atom that loses electrons
becomes a positive ion, and the atom that gains electrons
becomes a negative ion. Oppositely charged ions are
strongly attracted to one another and join to form ionic
compounds.
Consider the ionic bonding that occurs between
sodium (Na) and chlorine (Cl) to produce the solid
ionic compound sodium chloride—the mineral halite
(common table salt). Notice in Figure 3.8A that a sodium
atom gives up its single valence electron to chlorine
and, as a result, becomes a positively charged sodium
ion. Chlorine, on the other hand, gains one electron
and becomes a negatively charged chloride ion. We
know that ions having unlike charges attract. Thus, an
ionic bond is the attraction of oppositely charged ions
to one another, and it produces an electrically neutral
ionic compound.
Figure 3.8B illustrates the arrangement of sodium and
chlorine ions in ordinary table salt. Notice that salt consists of alternating sodium and chlorine ions, positioned
in such a manner that each positive ion is attracted to and
surrounded on all sides by negative ions and vice versa.
This arrangement maximizes the attraction between ions
with opposite charges while minimizing the repulsion
between ions with identical charges. Thus, ionic compounds consist of an orderly arrangement of oppositely
charged ions assembled in a definite ratio that provides
overall electrical neutrality.

The properties of a chemical compound are dramatically different from the properties of the various
elements comprising it. For example, sodium is a
soft silvery metal that is extremely reactive and poisonous. If you were to consume even a small amount
of elemental sodium, you would need immediate
medical attention. Chlorine, a green poisonous gas,
is so toxic that it was used as a chemical weapon during World War I. Together, however, these elements
produce sodium chloride, a harmless flavor enhancer
that we call table salt. Thus, when elements combine to form compounds, their properties change
significantly.

Covalent Bonds: Electron Sharing
Sometimes the forces that hold atoms together cannot
be understood on the basis of the attraction of oppositely
charged ions. One example is the hydrogen molecule
(H2), in which the two hydrogen atoms are held together
tightly and no ions are present. The strong attractive
force that holds two hydrogen atoms together results
from a covalent bond, a chemical bond formed by the
sharing of one or more valence electrons between a pair
of atoms.
Imagine two hydrogen atoms (each with one proton and one electron) approaching one another, as
shown in Figure 3.9. Once they meet, the electron configuration will change so that both electrons will primarily occupy the space between the atoms. In other
words, the two electrons are shared by both hydrogen
atoms and are attracted simultaneously by the positive

B. The arrangement of Na+ and Cl–
in the solid ionic compound sodium
chloride (NaCl), table salt.

A. The transfer of an electron from a sodium (Na) atom to a chlorine (Cl)
atom leads to the formation of a Na+ ion and a Cl– ion.
11 p+
11 e

11 p+

–

–

10 e
Loses an
electron

Na+

Na+ ion

Na atom
–

e

Cl–
17 p+

17 p+
–

18 e

17 e–
Gains an
electron

Cl atom

Cl– ion

Figure 3.8
Formation of the ionic
compound sodium
chloride

80

CHAPTER 3

Figure 3.9
Formation of a covalent
bond When hydrogen
atoms bond, the negatively
charged electrons are
shared by both hydrogen
atoms and attracted simultaneously by the positive
charge of the proton in the
nucleus of each atom.

Matter and Minerals

Metallic Bonds: Electrons Free
to Move

Two hydrogen atoms combine to form a hydrogen molecule,
held together by the attraction of oppositely charged
particles—positively charged protons in each nucleus and
negatively charged electrons that surround these nuclei.

H + H

H H

1 p+

1 p+
–

–

1e

1e

H
Hydrogen atom

H
Hydrogen atom

1 p+

1 p+

2 e–

H2
Hydrogen molecule

charge of the proton in the nucleus of each atom. In
this situation the hydrogen atoms do not form ions,
rather the force that holds these atoms together arises
from the attraction of oppositely charged particles—
positively charged protons in the nuclei and negatively
charged electrons that surround these nuclei.
Figure 3.10
Metallic bonding
Metallic bonding is the
result of each atom contributing its valence electrons
to a common pool of
electrons that are free
to move throughout the
entire metallic structure.
The attraction between the
“sea” of negatively charged
electrons and the positive
ions produces the metallic
bonds that give metals their
unique properties.

The central core of each metallic atom, which
has an overall positive charge, consists of the
nucleus and inner electrons.

e–

+

+

e–

e–

+

–

e

+

+

e–

–

+
+

e–

+
+

–

e

+

e

+
e–

+

+

+

–

e
–

e

+

+
e–

+
+

e–

e–

+

+

+

+

e–

+

+
e

+

We have described the extremes in chemical bonding—complete transfer of electrons and perfect sharing of electrons. As you may suspect, many chemical
bonds are actually hybrids that exhibit some degree of
electron sharing and some degree of electron transfer.
Bonds can be found with almost every possible combination of covalent and ionic character. For example,
silicate minerals are composed of silicon and oxygen
atoms that are joined together with other elements by
bonds that display characteristics of both ionic and
covalent bonds.

3.3
–

e–

Hybrid Bonds

e–

e–

e–

A few minerals, such as native gold, silver, and copper,
are made entirely of metal atoms packed tightly together
in an orderly way. The bonding that holds these atoms
together results from each atom contributing its valence
electrons to a common pool of electrons, which freely
move throughout the entire metallic structure. The contribution of one or more valence electrons leaves an array
of positive ions immersed in a “sea” of valence electrons,
as shown in Figure 3.10.
The attraction between this “sea” of negatively
charged electrons and the positive ions produces the
metallic bonds that give metals their unique properties.
Metals are good conductors of electricity because the
valence electrons are free to move from one atom to
another. Metals are also malleable, which means they
can be hammered into thin sheets, and ductile, which
means they can be drawn into thin wires. By contrast,
ionic and covalent solids tend to be brittle, and fracture
when stress is applied. Consider the difference between
dropping a metal frying pan and a ceramic plate onto a
concrete floor.

e–

A “sea” of negatively charged outer electrons, that
are free to move throughout the structure, surrounds
the metallic atoms.

Concept Checks

1. What is the difference between an atom and an
ion?
2. How does an atom become a positive ion? A
negative ion?
3. Briefly distinguish among ionic, covalent, and
metallic bonding and the role that electrons play
in each.

81

3.4 How Do Minerals Form?

3.4

How Do Minerals Form?
Describe three mechanisms that generate minerals and rocks.

Minerals form through a wide variety of processes and in many different environments. We will
examine three ways minerals can form: precipitation of mineral matter from a solution, crystallization of molten rock by cooling, and mineral matter deposition as a result of biological processes.
Because most rocks are aggregates of minerals, they also form by these same processes. In Chapter 8
we will examine the ways existing minerals can be altered to form new minerals through the process of metamorphism.

Precipitation of Mineral
Matter

Mining salt in Bolivia’s Salar de Uyuni, the largest known reserve of lithium
chloride in the world. Lithium is in great demand because it is used to manufacture batteries for cell phones, computers, and electric and hybrid automobiles.

Perhaps the most familiar way in which
minerals grow is from an aqueous
(water) solution containing dissolved
material matter (ions). As long as the
solution is not saturated, the motion
of the dissolved ions keeps them from
joining together. Two factors—a drop
in temperature and water lost through
evaporation—cause the solution to
become closer to reaching saturation.
Once saturation is reached, the ions
begin to bond, forming crystalline solids (called salts) that precipitate from
(settle out of) the solution.
The Great Salt Lake in Utah and Bolivia’s great salt
flat, Salar de Uyuni, provide good examples of this process at work (Figure 3.11). Because they are located in arid
regions with high evaporation rates, these water bodies
regularly precipitate the minerals halite, sylvite, and
gypsum, as well as other soluble salts, called evaporite
deposits. Worldwide, extensive evaporite deposits, some
exceeding hundreds of meters in thickness, provide evidence of ancient seas that have long since evaporated (see
Figure 3.42, page 100).
Minerals can also precipitate from slowly moving
groundwater filling in fractures and voids in rocks and
sediments. One interesting example, called a geode,
is a somewhat spherically shaped object with inwardprojecting crystals that were gradually deposited by
groundwater (Figure 3.12). Geodes sometimes contain
spectacular crystals of quartz, calcite, or other less common minerals.

igneous rocks that consist of a mosaic of intergrown
crystals that tend to lack well-developed planar surfaces, or faces (see Figure 3.3). This process is discussed in greater detail in Chapter 4.

Salt being mined in Bolivia’s Salar de Uyuni
The Salar de Uyuni is a salt
flat that overlies a lake of
brine up to 20 meters (66
feet) deep. It is the world’s
largest salt flat—25 times
larger than the Bonneville
Salt Flats in Utah. This
region is completely
surrounded by mountains
and is quite arid, so water
that enters the valley leaves
via evaporation—which
results in deposition of
salts, including sodium
chloride, magnesium chloride, and lithium chloride.
(Photo by imagebrocker.net/
SuperStock)
_TT9


Figure 3.12
Geode partially filled with
amethyst Geodes form
in cavities in rocks, such
as limestone and volcanic rocks. Slowly moving
groundwater deposits
dissolved mineral matter
in these voids. (Photo by Jeff
Scovil)

Crystallization of Molten Rock
The crystallization of minerals from molten rock,
although more complicated, is a process similar to
water freezing (Figure 3.13). When magma is hot,
the atoms are very mobile, but as the molten material cools, the atoms slow and begin to chemically
combine. Crystallization of a molten mass generates

Figure 3.11

Geodes like this one form
when silica dissolved in
groundwater precipitates
to form quartz crystals
that grow within cavities
in rocks.

82

Gold

Matter and Minerals

CHAPTER 3

GEO GRAPHICS 3.1

Gold has been treasured
since long before recorded
history for its beauty.

$41,280

How valuable is gold?

In early 2015, the value of one troy ounce of gold was about
US$1,290. Based on that value, a 1000-gram (32-ounce) bar
of gold, like the one shown, was worth $41,280. In 1970, the
price of gold was less than $40 per troy ounce!

Shutterstock

Where is the world's gold produced?
1100

In 1970, South Africa dominated global
gold production—accounting for 79%
of production throughout the world.

1000

Metric Tons Per Year

900
800
700
Since 2011 China has become the
world’s largest producer of gold.

600
500
400
300

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

China
Australia
United States
Russia
South Africa

Although its nickname is the “Silver
State,” Nevada accounts for about
74% of the U.S. gold production, and
more than all other countries, except
for China, Australia, and Russia.

200
100
0
1960

Figure 3.13
Minerals can form when
molten rock solidifies
(Photo by Arctic-Images/Getty
Images)

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

Deposition as a Result of Biological
Processes
Water-dwelling organisms are responsible for transforming substantial quantities of dissolved material into
mineral matter. For example, corals are organisms capable of creating large quantities of marine limestones,
rocks composed of the mineral calcite. These relatively
simple invertebrate animals use calcium (Ca) ions from
seawater and in turn secrete external skeletons composed of calcium carbonate (CaCO3). Over time, these
small organisms are capable of creating massive limestone structures called reefs.
Mollusks (such as clams) and other marine invertebrates also secrete shells composed of the carbonate

6.1 Weathering

Shutterstock

Native gold
Because gold does not easily react with other elements,
it often occurs as a native element in nuggets found in
stream deposits or as grains in igneous rocks.

What are the uses of gold?

Shutterstock

About 50% of gold is used in jewelry. Another 40% is used for
currency and investment, and about 10% is used in industry,
including electronic devices such as cell phones and televisions.
Gold is also used in gourmet foods and cocktails as a decorative
ingredient. Because metallic gold is one of the least reactive
materials, it has no taste, provides no nutritional value, and
leaves the human body unaltered.

ck

to

rs

te

ut

Sh

Questions:
1. What is the chemical symbol for gold?
2. What is the term for the property of
tenacity, which allows gold to be easily
hammered into different shapes?

Shutterstock

minerals calcite and aragonite. When the remains of
these shells are buried, they become the major component of the sedimentary rock limestone. Limestone is a
very common rock at Earth’s surface and is visible across
the entire United States.
Although most water-dwelling organisms produce
hard parts made of calcium carbonate, some, such as diatoms and radiolarians, produce glasslike silica skeletons.
During burial, this material forms microscopic silicon
dioxide (quartz) crystals that are the main constituents of
rocks such as chert and flint.

3.4

Concept Checks

1. Describe three ways minerals and rocks can form.
2. Crystallization of molten rock produces which
one of the three types of rock?
3. What is the chemical composition of the
mineral matter secreted by most organisms?
What is the mineral and rock resulting from this
process?

83

84

CHAPTER 3

Matter and Minerals

of Minerals
3.5 Properties
List and describe the properties used in mineral identification.
Minerals have definite crystalline structures and chemical compositions that give them unique sets
of physical and chemical properties shared by all specimens of that mineral, regardless of when
or where they formed. For example, two samples of the mineral quartz will be equally hard and
equally dense, and they will break in a similar manner. However, the physical properties of individual samples may vary within specific limits due to ionic substitutions, inclusions of foreign elements
(impurities), and defects in the crystalline structure.
Figure 3.14
Metallic versus submetallic luster (Photo courtesy of

A. This freshly broken sample of
galena displays a metallic luster.

B. This sample of galena is
tarnished and has a submetallic
luster.

E. J. Tarbuck)

Submetallic
Metallic

Some mineral properties, called diagnostic properties, are particularly useful in identifying an unknown
mineral. The mineral halite, for example has a salty taste.
Because so few minerals share this property, a salty taste
is considered a diagnostic property of halite. Other properties of certain minerals vary among different specimens
of the same mineral. These properties are referred to as
ambiguous properties.

Optical Properties.


Of the many optical properties of minerals, their luster,
their ability to transmit light, their color, and their streak
are most frequently used for mineral identification.
SmartFigure 3.15
Color variations in
minerals Some minerals,
such as quartz, occur in a
variety of colors. (Photo by
E. J. Tarbuck)
(https://goo.gl/wznOpk)

Quartz

Luster The appearance or quality of light

reflected from the surface of a mineral is known
as luster. Minerals that have the appearance
of a metal, regardless of color, are said to have a
metallic luster (Figure 3.14A). Some metallic minerals, such as native copper and galena, develop
a dull coating or tarnish when exposed to the
atmosphere. Because they are not as shiny as
samples with freshly broken surfaces, these samples are often said to exhibit a submetallic luster
(Figure 3.14B).
Most minerals have a nonmetallic luster and
are described using various adjectives, such as vitreous or glassy. Other nonmetallic minerals are described
as having a dull, or earthy, luster (a dull appearance like
soil) or a pearly luster (such as a pearl or the inside of
a clamshell). Still others exhibit a silky luster (like satin
cloth) or a greasy luster (as though coated in oil).

Ability to Transmit Light An optical property used to
identify minerals is the ability to transmit light. When no
light is transmitted, the mineral is described as opaque;
when light, but not an image, is transmitted through a
mineral sample, the mineral is said to be translucent.
When both light and an image are visible through the
sample, the mineral is described as transparent.
Color Although color is generally the most conspicuous characteristic of any mineral, it is considered a diagnostic property of only a few minerals. Slight impurities
in the common mineral quartz, for example, give it a variety of tints, including pink, purple, yellow, white, gray,
and even black (Figure 3.15). Other minerals, such as tourmaline, also exhibit a variety of hues, with multiple colors
sometimes occurring in the same sample. Thus, the use
of color as a means of identification is often ambiguous or
even misleading.
Streak The color of a mineral in powdered form,
called streak, is often useful in identification. A mineral’s streak is obtained by rubbing it across a streak plate
(a piece of unglazed porcelain) and observing the color of
the mark it leaves (Figure 3.16). Although a mineral’s color
may vary from sample to sample, its streak is usually
consistent in color. (Note that not all minerals produce

SmartFigure 3.16
Streak

(https://goo.gl/ULVLM4)

Figure 3.17

Mineral
(Pyrite)

(Photo by Dennis Tasa)

Color
(Brass yellow)

85

3.5 Properties of Minerals

Common crystal shapes
of pyrite

Streak
(Black)

Although the color of a mineral is not
always helpful in identification, the streak, which is
the color of the powdered mineral, can be very useful.

a streak when rubbed across a streak plate. Quartz, for
example, is harder than a porcelain streak plate and
therefore leaves no streak.)
Streak can also help distinguish between minerals
with metallic luster and those with nonmetallic luster.
Metallic minerals generally have a dense, dark streak,
whereas minerals with nonmetallic luster typically have a
light-colored streak.

Crystal Shape, or Habit
Mineralogists use the term crystal shape, or habit,
to refer to the common or
characteristic shape of individual crystals or aggregates
of crystals. Some minerals
tend to grow equally in all
three dimensions, whereas
others tend to be elongated
in one direction or flattened
if growth in one dimension is suppressed. A few
minerals have crystals that
exhibit regular polygons
that are helpful in their
A. Fibrous
identification. For example,
magnetite crystals sometimes occur as octahedrons,
garnets often form dodecahedrons, and halite and fluorite crystals tend to grow
as cubes or near-cubes.
Minerals tend to have one
common crystal shape, but
a few, such as the pyrite
samples shown in Figure 3.17,
have two or more characteristic crystal shapes.
C. Banded

Although most minerals
exhibit only one common
crystal shape, some, such
as pyrite, have two or more
characteristic habits.
Dennis Tasa

In addition, some mineral samples consist of numerous intergrown crystals that exhibit characteristic shapes
that are useful for identification. Terms commonly used
to describe these and other crystal habits include equant
(equidimensional), bladed, fibrous, tabular, prismatic,
platy, and blocky. Some of these habits are pictured in
Figure 3.18.

Mineral Strength
How easily minerals break or deform under stress is
determined by the type and strength of the chemical
bonds that hold the crystals together. Mineralogists use
SmartFigure 3.18

Hardness

One of the most useful diagnostic properties is hardness, a measure of the resistance of a mineral
to abrasion or scratching. This property is determined
by rubbing a mineral of unknown hardness against one
of known hardness or vice versa. A numerical value of
hardness can be obtained by using the Mohs scale of
hardness, which consists of 10 minerals arranged in order
from 1 (softest) to 10 (hardest), as shown in Figure 3.19A.
It should be noted that the Mohs scale is a relative ranking and does not imply that a mineral with a hardness of
2, such as gypsum, is twice as hard as a mineral with a
hardness of 1, like talc. In fact, gypsum is only slightly
harder than talc, as Figure 3.19B indicates.
SmartFigure 3.20
Micas exhibit perfect
cleavage The thin sheets
shown here exhibit one
plane of cleavage. (Photo by
Chip Clark/Fundamental Photos)
(https://goo.gl/JYClSi)

Weak
bonds

Knife blade

Strong bonds

2

3

4

5
6
7
MOHS SCALE

8

9

10

In the laboratory, common objects used to determine
the hardness of a mineral can include a human fingernail,
which has a hardness of about 2.5, a copper penny (3.5),
and a piece of glass (5.5). The mineral gypsum, which has
a hardness of 2, can be easily scratched with a fingernail.
On the other hand, the mineral calcite, which has a hardness of 3, will scratch a fingernail but will not scratch
glass. Quartz, one of the hardest common minerals, will
easily scratch glass. Diamonds, hardest of all, scratch
anything, including other diamonds.

Cleavage In the crystal structure of many minerals,
some atomic bonds are weaker than others. It is along
these weak bonds that minerals tend to break when they
are stressed. Cleavage (kleiben 5 carve) is the tendency
of a mineral to break (cleave) along planes of weak bonding. Not all minerals have cleavage, but those that do can
be identified by the relatively smooth, flat surfaces that
are produced when the mineral is broken.
The simplest type of cleavage is exhibited by the
micas (Figure 3.20). Because these minerals have very
weak bonds in one direction, they cleave to form thin,
flat sheets. Some minerals have excellent cleavage in
one, two, three, or more directions, whereas others
exhibit fair or poor cleavage, and still others have no
cleavage at all. When minerals break evenly in more
than one direction, cleavage is described by the number
of cleavage directions and the angle(s) at which they
meet (Figure 3.21).
Each cleavage surface that has a different orientation is counted as a different direction of cleavage. For
example, some minerals cleave to form six-sided cubes.
Because cubes are defined by three different sets of parallel planes that intersect at 90-degree angles, cleavage is
described as three directions of cleavage that meet at 90
degrees.
Do not confuse cleavage with crystal shape. When
a mineral exhibits cleavage, it will break into pieces

87

3.5 Properties of Minerals

that all have the same
geometry. By contrast, the
smooth-sided quartz crystals
shown in Figure 3.1 do not
have cleavage. If broken, they
fracture into shapes that do not
resemble one another or the original crystals.

Fracture Minerals having

SmartFigure 3.21
1

1

2

90°

Cleavage directions exhibited by minerals (Photos by
E. J. Tarbuck and Dennis Tasa)
(https://goo.gl/5Ikkd6)

Fracture not
cleavage
A. Cleavage in one direction.
Example: Muscovite

chemical bonds that are
1
equally, or nearly equally,
strong in all directions
2
exhibit a property called
120°
fracture. When minerals fracture, most produce
Fracture not
cleavage
uneven surfaces and are
described as exhibiting
irregular fracture (Figure
C. Cleavage in two directions not at
3.22A). However, some min90° angles. Example: Hornblende
erals, including quartz, can
break into smooth, curved sur1
faces resembling broken glass.
Such breaks are called conchoi2
75°
dal fractures (Figure 3.22B). Still
3
other minerals exhibit fractures
that produce splinters or fibers,
referred to as splintery fracture
and fibrous fracture, respectively.

B. Cleavage in two directions at 90° angles.
Example: Feldspar
1

90°

2

3

D. Cleavage in three directions at
90° angles. Example: Halite

2
1
3

4

Tenacity The term tenac-

E. Cleavage in three directions not at 90° angles.
F. Cleavage in four directions.
ity describes a mineral’s
Example: Calcite
Example: Fluorite
resistance to breaking, bending, cutting, or other forms of deformation. As mentioned
specific gravity of 2.65. By contrast, some metallic
earlier, nonmetallic minerals such as quartz and halite
minerals, such as pyrite, native copper, and magnetite,
tend to be brittle and fracture or exhibit cleavage when
are more than twice as dense and thus have more than
struck. Minerals that are ionically bonded, such as fluorite
twice the specific gravity of quartz. Galena, an ore from
and halite, tend to be brittle and shatter into small pieces
which lead is extracted, has a specific gravity of roughly
when struck. By contrast, native metals, such as copper
7.5, whereas 24-karat gold has a specific gravity of
and gold, are malleable, which means they can be hamapproximately 20.
mered without breaking. In addition, minerals that can
With a little practice, you can estimate the specific
be cut into thin shavings, including gypsum and talc, are
gravity
of a mineral by hefting it in your hand. Does
described as sectile. Still others, notably the micas,
are elastic and will bend and snap back to their
original shape after stress is released.

Irregular versus conchoidal fracture (Photos by E. J.
Tarbuck)

Density and Specific Gravity
Density, an important property of matter, is
defined as mass per unit volume. Mineralogists often use a related measure called specific gravity to describe the density of minerals. Specific gravity is a number representing
the ratio of a mineral’s weight to the weight of
an equal volume of water.
Most common minerals have a specific gravity between 2 and 3. For example, quartz has a

Figure 3.22

A. Irregular fracture
(Quartz)

B. Conchoidal fracture
(Quartz)

88

CHAPTER 3

Matter and Minerals

Figure 3.23
Double refraction
This sample of calcite
exhibits double refraction.
(Photo by Chip Clark/Fundamental
Photos)

this mineral feel about as “heavy” as similarly sized
rocks you have handled? If the answer is “yes,” the
specific gravity of the sample will likely be between
2.5 and 3.

can be picked up with a magnet, while some varieties
(such as lodestone) are themselves natural magnets
and will pick up small iron-based objects such as pins
and paper clips (see Figure 3.41F, page 99).
Moreover, some minerals exhibit special optical
properties. For example, when a transparent piece of
calcite is placed over printed text, the letters appear
twice. This optical property is known as double
refraction (Figure 3.23).
One very simple chemical test to detect carbonate
minerals involves placing a drop of dilute hydrochloric
acid onto a freshly broken mineral surface. Samples
containing carbonates will effervesce (fizz) as carbon
dioxide gas is released (Figure 3.24). This test is especially useful in identifying calcite, a common carbonate
mineral.

3.5

Concept Checks

1. Define luster.

Other Properties of Minerals

SmartFigure 3.24
Calcite reacting with a
weak acid (Photo by Chip
Clark/Fundamental Photos)
(https://goo.gl/pnGkML)

In addition to the properties discussed thus far, some
minerals can be recognized by other distinctive properties. For example, halite is ordinary salt, so it can
be quickly identified through taste. Talc and graphite
both have distinctive feels: Talc feels soapy, and graphite feels greasy. Further, the streaks of many sulfurbearing minerals smell like rotten eggs. A few minerals, such as magnetite, have a high iron content and

3.6

2. Why is color not always a useful property in
mineral identification? Give an example of a
mineral that supports your answer.
3. What differentiates cleavage from fracture?
4. What is meant by a mineral’s tenacity? List three
terms that describe tenacity.
5. Describe a simple chemical test that is useful in
identifying the mineral calcite.

Mineral Structures and Compositions
Distinguish between compositional and structural variations in minerals and provide
one example of each.

Many people associate the word crystal with delicate wine goblets or glassy objects with smooth
sides and gem-like shapes. In geology, the term crystal or crystalline refers to any natural solid
with an orderly, repeating internal structure. Therefore, all mineral samples are crystals or crystalline solids, even if they lack smooth-sided faces. The specimen shown in Figure 3.1, for example,
exhibits the characteristic crystal form associated with quartz—a six-sided prismatic shape with
pyramidal ends. However, the quartz crystals in the sample of granite shown in Figure 3.3 do not
display well-defined faces. Both quartz samples are nonetheless crystalline.

Mineral Structures
The smooth faces and symmetry possessed by well-developed crystals are surface manifestations of the orderly
packing of the atoms or ions that constitute a mineral’s
internal structure. This highly ordered atomic arrangement within minerals can be illustrated by using spherically shaped atoms held together by ionic, covalent, or

metallic bonds. The simplest crystal structures are those
of native metals, such as gold and silver, which are composed of only one element. These materials consist of
atoms packed together in a rather simple three-dimensional network that minimizes voids. Imagine a group
of cannon balls stacked in layers such that the spheres
in one layer nestle in the hollows between spheres in the
adjacent layers.

89

3.6 Mineral Structures and Compositions

Negative Ions
O2–

S2–

Cl–

F–

Positive Ions
Mg2+
0 1 2 3

Angstroms

Fe2+
Na+

Mn2+

Al3+

Si4+

K+

Ca2+

Fe3+

Ti4+

Figure 3.25
Relative sizes and charges of selected ions Ionic radii are
usually expressed in angstroms (1 angstrom equals 10 -8 cm).

The atomic structure of most minerals consists of at
least two different ions (often of very different sizes).
Figure 3.25 illustrates the relative sizes of some of the
most common ions found in minerals. Notice that the
negative ions, which are atoms that gained electrons, tend
to be larger than the positive ions, which lost electrons.
Crystal structures can be considered threedimensional stacks of larger spheres (negative ions) with

Na+

Cl–
Cl– Na+

A. Sodium and chlorine ions.

smaller spheres (positive ions) located in the spaces
between them, so that the positive and negative charges
cancel each other out. Consider the mineral halite
(NaCl), which has a relatively simple framework composed of an equal number of positively charged sodium
ions and negatively charged chlorine ions. Because ions
of similar charge repel, they are spaced as far apart
from each other as possible. Consequently, in halite,
each sodium ion (Na1) is surrounded on all sides by
chlorine ions and vice versa (Figure 3.26). This particular arrangement forms basic building blocks, called
unit cells, that have cubic shapes. As shown in Figure
3.26C, these cubic unit cells combine to form cubeshaped halite crystals, including those that come out of
salt shakers.
The shape and symmetry of these building blocks
relate to the shape and symmetry of the entire crystal.
It is important to note, however, that two minerals can
be constructed of geometrically similar building blocks
yet exhibit different external forms. For example, fluorite, magnetite, and garnet are minerals constructed of
cubic unit cells, but these unit cells can join to produce
crystals of many shapes. Typically, fluorite crystals are
cubes, whereas magnetite crystals are octahedrons,
and garnets form dodecahedrons built up of many
small cubes, as shown in Figure 3.27. Because the building blocks are so small, the resulting crystal faces are
smooth and flat.
Despite the fact that natural crystals are rarely
perfect, the angles between equivalent crystal faces
of the same mineral are remarkably consistent. This
observation was first made by Nicolas Steno in 1669.
Steno found that the angles between adjacent prism
faces of quartz crystals are 120 degrees, regardless
of sample size, the size of
the crystal faces, or where
the crystals were collected
B. Basic building
(Figure 3.28). This observablock of the
tion is commonly called
mineral halite.
Steno’s Law, or the Law of
Constancy of Interfacial
Angles, because it applies to
all minerals. Because Steno’s
Law holds for all minerals,
crystal shape is frequently
a valuable tool in mineral
identification.
Figure 3.26

D. Crystals of the mineral halite.

C. Collection of basic building
blocks (crystal).

Arrangement of sodium and
chloride ions in the mineral
halite The arrangement of atoms into basic building blocks
that have a cubic shape results
in regularly shaped cubic crystals. (Photo by Dennis Tasa)

A. Cube (fluorite)

B. Octahedron (magnetite)

C. Dodecahedron (garnet)

Figure 3.27
Cubic unit cells These cells
stack together in different
ways to produce crystals
that exhibit different shapes.
Fluorite A. tends to display
cubic crystals, whereas
magnetite crystals B. are
typically octahedrons, and
garnets C. usually occur as
dodecahedrons. (Photos by
Dennis Tasa)

90

CHAPTER 3

Matter and Minerals

Figure 3.28

Goniometer

Steno’s Law Because
some faces of a crystal
may grow larger than
others, two crystals of the
same mineral may not have
identical shapes. Nevertheless, the angles between
equivalent faces are
remarkably consistent.

120°
120°

120°
Cross section
Quartz crystal

Compositional Variations in Minerals
Mineralogists have determined that the chemical composition of some minerals varies substantially from sample
to sample. These compositional variations are possible
because ions of similar size can readily substitute for one
another without disrupting a mineral’s internal framework. This is analogous to a wall made of bricks of different colors and materials. As long as the bricks are roughly

Figure 3.29
Diamond versus graphite
Both diamond and graphite
are natural substances
with the same chemical
composition: carbon
atoms. Nevertheless,
their internal structures
and physical properties
reflect the fact that each
formed in a very different
environment. (Photo A Marcel
Clemens/Shutterstock; photo B by
E. J. Tarbuck)

The carbon atoms in
diamonds are covalently
bonded into a compact,
three-dimensional framework, which accounts for the
extreme hardness of the
mineral.

Strong
bonds

Carbon
atoms
A. Diamond
Strong
bonds

Weak bonds

Carbon
atoms
B. Graphite

In graphite the carbon atoms are
bonded into sheets that are
joined together by very weak
electrical forces.

the same size, the shape of the wall is unaffected; only its
composition changes.
Consider the mineral olivine as an example of
chemical variability. The chemical formula for olivine
is (Mg,Fe)2SiO4 —which has the variable components
magnesium and iron in parentheses. Magnesium (Mg21)
and iron (Fe21) readily substitute for one another because
they are nearly the same size and have the same electrical charge. At one extreme, olivine may contain magnesium without any iron or vice versa. Most samples of
olivine, however, have some of both of these ions in their
structure. Olivine has a range of combinations, from a
variety called forsterite (Mg2SiO4) at one end to fayalite
(Fe2SiO4) at the other. Nevertheless, all specimens of
olivine have the same internal structure and exhibit very
similar, but not identical, properties. For example, ironrich olivines have a higher density than magnesium-rich
specimens, a reflection of the greater atomic weight of
iron as compared to magnesium.
In contrast to olivine, minerals such as quartz (SiO2)
and fluorite (CaF2) tend to have chemical compositions
that differ very little from their chemical formulas. However, even these minerals often contain tiny amounts of
other less common elements, referred to as trace elements. Although trace elements have little effect on most
mineral properties, they can significantly influence a
mineral’s color.

Structural Variations in Minerals
It is possible for two minerals with exactly the same
chemical composition to have different internal structures and, hence, different external forms. Minerals of
this type are called polymorphs (poly 5 many, morph 5
form). Graphite and diamond are particularly good examples of polymorphism because, when pure, they are both
made up exclusively of carbon atoms. Graphite is the soft
gray mineral from which pencil “lead” is made, whereas
diamond is the hardest-known mineral. The differences
between these minerals can be attributed to the conditions under which they form. Diamonds form at depths
that may exceed 200 kilometers (nearly 125 miles), where
extreme pressures and temperatures produce the compact structure shown in Figure 3.29A. Graphite, on the
other hand, forms under comparatively low pressures and
consists of sheets of carbon atoms that are widely spaced
and weakly bonded (Figure 3.29B). Because the carbon
sheets in graphite easily slide past one another, graphite
has a greasy feel and makes an excellent lubricant.
Scientists have learned that by heating graphite
under high confining pressures, they can generate synthetic diamonds. Because human-made diamonds often
contain flaws, they are generally not gem quality, but
due to their hardness, they have many industrial uses.
Further, because diamonds form in environments of
extreme pressure and temperature, they are somewhat
unstable at Earth’s surface. Fortunately for jewelers, “diamonds are forever” because the rate at which

91

3.7 Mineral Groups

diamonds change to their more stable form, graphite, is
infinitesimally slow.
The transformation of one polymorph to another is an
example of a phase change. In nature, certain minerals go
through phase changes as they move from one environment
to another. For example, when a slab of ocean crust composed of olivine-rich basalt is carried to great depths by a
subducting plate, olivine changes to a more compact, denser
polymorph with the same structure as the mineral spinel.
Recall that oceanic lithosphere sinks because it
is colder and more dense than the underlying mantle.
It follows, therefore, that during subduction, the

3.7

transformation of olivine from its low- to high-density
form would contribute to plate subduction. Stated
another way, this phase change causes an increase in the
overall density of the slab, thereby enhancing its rate of
descent.

3.6

Concept Checks

1. Explain Steno’s Law in your own words.
2. Define polymorph and give an example.

Mineral Groups
Explain how minerals are classified and name the most abundant mineral group in
Earth’s crust.

More than 4000 minerals have been named, and several new ones are identified each year. Fortunately for students who are beginning to study minerals, no more than a few dozen are abundant.
Collectively, these few make up most of the rocks of Earth’s crust and they are therefore often
referred to as the rock-forming minerals.
Although less abundant, many other minerals are used
extensively in the manufacture of products and are called
economic minerals. However, rock-forming minerals
and economic minerals are not mutually exclusive groups.
When found in large deposits, some rock-forming minerals are economically significant. One example is calcite,
the primary component of the sedimentary rock limestone. Calcite has many uses, including the production of
concrete. Chapter 23 provides an overview of the importance of Earth’s vast natural resources.

Classifying Minerals
Minerals are placed into categories in much the same
way that plants and animals are classified. Mineralogists use the term mineral species for a collection of
specimens that exhibit similar internal structures and
chemical compositions. Some common mineral species
are quartz, calcite, galena, and pyrite. However, just
as individual plants and animals within a species differ
somewhat from one another, so do most specimens of the
same mineral.
Some mineral species are further subdivided into
mineral varieties. For example, pure quartz (SiO2) is colorless and transparent. However, when small amounts of aluminum are incorporated into its atomic structure, quartz
appears quite dark, in a variety called smoky quartz.
Amethyst, another variety of quartz, owes its violet color to
the presence of trace amounts of iron.
Mineral species are assigned to mineral classes.
Some important mineral classes are the silicates (SiO442),
carbonates (CO322), halides (Cl12, F12, Br12), and sulfates
(SO422). Minerals within each class tend to have similar
_TT10


internal structures and, hence, similar properties. For
example, minerals belonging to the carbonate class react
chemically with acid—albeit to varying degrees—and
many exhibit similar cleavage. Furthermore, minerals
within the same class are often found together in the
same rock. For example, halite (NaCl) and silvite (KCl)
belong to the halide class and commonly occur together
in evaporite deposits.

Silicate Versus Nonsilicate Minerals
It is worth noting that only eight elements make up the
vast majority of the rock-forming minerals and represent
more than 98 percent (by weight) of the continental crust
(Figure 3.30). These elements, in order of most to least
Figure 3.30
The eight most abundant
elements in the continental crust

Oxygen (O)
46.6%

Silicon (Si)
27.7%

Aluminum
(Al)
8.1%
Iron (Fe)
5.0%

Others
1.5%

Calcium (Ca)
3.6%
Sodium (Na)
Potassium (K)
2.6%
Magnesium (Mg) 2.8%
2.1%

92

CHAPTER 3

Matter and Minerals

abundant, are oxygen (O), silicon (Si), aluminum (Al),
iron (Fe), calcium (Ca), sodium (Na), potassium (K), and
magnesium (Mg). As shown in Figure 3.30, oxygen and
silicon are by far the most common elements in Earth’s
crust. Furthermore, these two elements readily combine
to form the basic “building block” for the most common
mineral group, the silicates. More than 800 silicate
minerals are known, and they account for more than 90
percent of Earth’s crust.
Because other mineral groups are far less abundant
in Earth’s crust than the silicates, they are often grouped
together under the heading nonsilicates. Although not
as common as silicates, some nonsilicate minerals are
very important economically. They provide us with iron
and aluminum to build automobiles, gypsum for plaster
and drywall for home construction, and copper wire

that carries electricity and connects us to the Internet.
Common nonsilicate mineral groups include the carbonates, sulfates, and halides. In addition to their economic
importance, these groups include minerals that are major
constituents in sediments and sedimentary rocks.

3.7

Concept Checks

1. Distinguish between rock-forming minerals and
economic minerals.
2. List the eight most common elements in Earth’s
crust.
3. Distinguish between a mineral species and a
variety.

The Silicates

3.8

Sketch the silicon–oxygen tetrahedron and explain how these fundamental building
blocks join together to form other silicate structures.

Every silicate mineral contains the two most abundant elements in Earth’s crust, oxygen and
silicon. Further, most contain one or more of the other common elements. Together, these elements
give rise to hundreds of silicate minerals with a wide variety of properties, including hard quartz,
soft talc, sheetlike mica, fibrous asbestos, green olivine, and blood-red garnet.

Silicate Structures
All silicate minerals have the same fundamental building
block, the silicon–oxygen tetrahedron (SiO442). This
structure consists of four oxygen ions that are covalently
bonded to one comparatively small silicon ion, forming a tetrahedron—a pyramid shape with four identical
faces (Figure 3.31). These tetrahedra are not chemical
compounds but rather complex ions (SiO442) having a
net charge of 24. To become electrically balanced, these
Figure 3.31
Two representations of the
silicon–oxygen tetrahedron

Si4+

O2–

O2–

O2–
O2–

Si4+

2–

O

SiO44–
A. Silicon–oxygen
tetrahedron

O2–

complex ions bond to positively charged metal ions. Specifically, each O22 has one of its valence electrons bonding with the Si41 located at the center of the tetrahedron.
The remaining 12 charge on each oxygen is available to
bond with another positive ion, or with the silicon ion in
an adjacent tetrahedron. It is important to note that the
silicon–oxygen tetrahedron is the fundamental building
block that all silicate minerals have in common.

Minerals with Independent Tetrahedra One of
the simplest silicate structures consists of independent
tetrahedra that have their four oxygen ions bonded to
positive ions, such as Mg21, Fe21, and Ca 21. The mineral
olivine, with the formula (Mg,Fe)2SiO4, is a good example. In olivine, magnesium (Mg21) and/or iron (Fe21)
ions pack between comparatively large independent
SiO4 tetrahedra, forming a dense three-dimensional
structure (Figure 3.32). Garnet, another common silicate,
is also composed of independent tetrahedra that are
ionically bonded by positive ions. Both olivine and garnet form dense, hard, equidimensional crystals that lack
cleavage.

O2–
O2–

B. Expanded view of
silicon–oxygen
tetrahedron

Minerals with Chain or Sheet Structures One reason for the great variety of silicate minerals is the ability
of SiO4 tetrahedra to link to one another in a variety
of configurations. This important phenomenon, called

93

3.8 The Silicates

polymerization, is achieved by the sharing of one, two,
three, or all four of the oxygen atoms with adjacent tetrahedra. Vast numbers of tetrahedra join together to form
single chains, double chains, sheet structures, or threedimensional frameworks, as shown in Figure 3.33.
To see how oxygen atoms are shared between adjacent tetrahedra, select one of the silicon ions (small blue
spheres) near the middle of the single chain shown in
Figure 3.33B. Notice that this silicon ion is completely
surrounded by four larger oxygen ions. Also notice
that two of the four oxygen atoms are bonded to two
silicon atoms, whereas the other two are not shared in
this manner. It is the linkage across the shared oxygen
ions that joins the tetrahedra into a chain structure.
Now examine a silicon ion near the middle of the
sheet structure (Figure 3.33D) and count the number of
shared and unshared oxygen ions surrounding it. As
you likely observed, the sheet structure is the result of
three of the four oxygen atoms being shared by adjacent
tetrahedra.

Minerals with Three-Dimensional Frameworks In
the most common silicate structure, all four oxygen ions
are shared, producing a complex three-dimensional
framework (Figure 3.33E). Quartz and the most common
mineral group, the feldspars, have structures in which all
of the oxygens are shared.
The ratio of oxygen ions to silicon ions differs in each
type of silicate structure. In independent tetrahedra
(SiO4) there are four oxygen ions for every silicon ion. In
single chains, the oxygen-to-silicon ratio is 3:1 (SiO3), and
in three-dimensional frameworks, as found in quartz, the
ratio is 2:1 (SiO2). As more oxygen ions are shared, the
percentage of silicon in the structure increases. Silicate
minerals are therefore described as having a low or high
silicon content, based on their ratio of oxygen to silicon.
A. Independent
tetrahedra

B. Single
chain

C. Double chain

Independent tetrahedra, which have an overall negative charge,
form bonds (not shown) with positively charged metallic ions
(green) to form a stable chemical compound.
Independent tetrahedra
(SiO44–)

Positive ions
(Mg2+, Fe2+)

Figure 3.32
How independent tetrahedra bond with metallic
ions The internal structure
of the mineral olivine,
which is composed of
independent tetrahedra
that are bonded together,
with metallic ions (iron
and magnesium) shown in
green. This is an expanded
view that does not show the
bonds between the metallic
ions and the tetrahedra.

Silicate minerals with three-dimensional structures have
the highest silicon content, while those composed of
independent tetrahedra have the lowest.

Joining Silicate Structures
Except for quartz (SiO2), the basic structure (chains,
sheets, or three-dimensional frameworks) of most silicate
minerals has a net negative charge. Therefore, metal ions
are required to bring the overall charge into balance
and to serve as the “mortar” that holds these structures
together. The positive ions that most often link silicate
structures are iron (Fe21), magnesium (Mg21), potassium (K11), sodium (Na11), aluminum (Al31), and calcium
D. Sheet structure

Top view

E. Three-dimensional
framework

SmartFigure 3.33
Five basic silicate
structures A. Independent
tetrahedra. B. Single
chains. C. Double chains.
D. Sheet structures.
E. Three-dimensional
framework.
(https://goo.gl/xpaEPC)

Bottom view

Top view

Top view

Top view

End view

End view

End view

94

CHAPTER 3

Matter and Minerals

(Ca 21). These positively charged ions bond with the
unshared oxygen ions that occupy the corners of the silicate tetrahedra.
As a general rule, the hybrid covalent bonds between
silicon and oxygen are stronger than the ionic bonds that
hold one silicate structure to the next. Consequently,
properties such as cleavage and, to some extent, hardness
are controlled by the nature of the silicate framework.
Quartz (SiO2), which has only silicon–oxygen bonds, has
great hardness and lacks cleavage, mainly because it has
equally strong bonds in all directions. By contrast, the
mineral talc (the source of talcum powder) has a sheet
structure. Magnesium ions occur between the sheets and
weakly join them together. The slippery feel of talcum
powder is due to the silicate sheets sliding relative to
one another, in much the same way that sheets of carbon
atoms in graphite slide, giving this mineral its lubricating
properties.
Recall that atoms of similar size can substitute freely
for one another without altering a mineral’s structure.
For example, in olivine, iron (Fe21) and magnesium
(Mg21) substitute for each other. This also holds true
for the third-most-common element in Earth’s crust,

3.9

aluminum (Al31), which often substitutes for silicon (Si41)
in the center of silicon–oxygen tetrahedra.
Because most silicate structures will readily accommodate two or more different positive ions at a given
bonding site, individual specimens of a particular mineral
may contain varying amounts of certain elements. As a
result, many silicate minerals form a mineral group that
exhibits a range of compositions between two end members. Examples include the olivines, pyroxenes, amphiboles, micas, and feldspars.

3.8

Concept Checks

1. Sketch the silicon–oxygen tetrahedron and label
its parts.
2. What is the ratio of oxygen to silicon found in
single tetrahedrons? How about framework
structures? Which has the highest silicon
content?
3. What differences in their silicate structures
account for the slipperiness of talc and the
hardness of quartz?

Common Silicate Minerals
Compare and contrast the light (nonferromagnesian) silicates with the dark
(ferromagnesian) silicates and list three minerals common to each group.

The major groups of silicate minerals and common examples are given in Figure 3.34. The feldspars
are by far the most plentiful silicate group, comprising more than 50 percent of Earth’s crust.
Quartz, the second-most-abundant mineral in the continental crust, is the only common mineral
made completely of silicon and oxygen.
Most silicate minerals form when molten rock cools and
crystallizes. Cooling can occur at or near Earth’s surface
(low temperature and pressure) or at great depths (high
temperature and pressure). The environment during
crystallization and the chemical composition of the molten rock determine, to a large degree, which minerals
are produced. For example, the silicate mineral olivine
crystallizes early, whereas quartz forms much later in the
crystallization process.
In addition, some silicate minerals form at Earth’s
surface from the weathered products of other silicate
minerals. Still others are formed under the extreme
pressures associated with mountain building. Each silicate mineral, therefore, has a structure and a chemical
composition that indicate the conditions under which it
formed. By carefully examining the mineral constituents
of rocks, geologists can usually determine the circumstances under which the rocks formed.

We will now examine some of the most common silicate minerals, which we divide into two major groups on
the basis of their chemical makeup: the light silicates and
the dark silicates.

The Light Silicates
The light (or nonferromagnesian) silicates are generally light in color and have a specific gravity of about
2.7, less than that of the dark (ferromagnesian) silicates.
These differences are mainly attributable to the presence
or absence of iron and magnesium, which are “heavy.”
The light silicates contain varying amounts of aluminum,
potassium, calcium, and sodium rather than iron and
magnesium.

Feldspar Group

Feldspar minerals, the most common mineral group, can form under a wide range of

95

3.9 Common Silicate Minerals

Figure 3.34

Common Silicate Minerals and Mineral Groups
Mineral/Formula

Cleavage

Silicate Structure

Common silicate minerals
Note that the complexity
of the silicate structure
increases from top to
bottom. (Photos by Dennis Tasa

Example

Single tetrahedra
Olivine group
(Mg,Fe)2SiO4

and E. J. Tarbuck)

None

Olivine
Single chains
Pyroxene group
(Augite)
(Mg,Fe,Ca,Na)AlSiO3

Two planes at
90°
Augite
Double chains

Amphibole group
(Hornblende)
Ca2 (Fe,Mg)5Si8O22(OH)2

Two planes at
60° and 120°
Hornblende
Sheets
_TT11


Biotite

Micas

Biotite
K(Mg,Fe)3AlSi3O10(OH)2

One plane

Muscovite
KAl2(AlSi3O10)(OH)2

Feldspars

Muscovite
Potassium feldspar
(Orthoclase)
KAlSi3O8

Potassium
feldspar

Three-dimensional
networks
Two planes at
90°

Plagioclase
(Ca,Na)AlSi3O8

Quartz
SiO2

None

Quartz

96

CHAPTER 3

Figure 3.35
Feldspar minerals
A. Characteristic crystal
form of potassium feldspar. B. Most salmoncolored feldspar belongs
to the potassium feldspar
subgroup. C. Sodium-rich
plagioclase feldspar
tends to be light colored
and has a pearly luster.
D. Calcium-rich plagioclase
feldspar tends to be gray,
blue-gray, or black in color.
Labradorite, the variety
shown here, exhibits striations on one of its crystal
faces. (Photos by Dennis Tasa

Matter and Minerals

Potassium Feldspar

A. Potassium feldspar
crystal (orthoclase)

B. Potassium feldspar showing
cleavage (orthoclase)

Plagioclase Feldspar

and E. J. Tarbuck)

C. Sodium-rich plagioclase
feldspar (albite)

A. Potassium feldspar

B. Plagioclase feldspar

Figure 3.36
Feldspar crystals in
igneous rocks When found
in igneous rocks, feldspar
crystals tend to be rectangular in shape and exhibit
smooth, shiny faces. (Photos
by E. J. Tarbuck)

D. Plagioclase feldspar showing
striations (labradorite)

temperatures and pressures, which partially accounts
for their abundance (Figure 3.35). Two different feldspar
structures exist. One group of feldspar minerals contains potassium ions in its structure and is therefore
referred to as potassium feldspar. (Orthoclase and
microcline are common members of the potassium
feldspar group.) The other group, called plagioclase
feldspar, contains both sodium and calcium ions that
freely substitute for one another, depending on the
environment during crystallization. Despite these differences, all feldspar minerals have similar physical
properties. They have two planes of cleavage meeting at
or near 90-degree angles, are relatively hard (6 on the
Mohs scale), and have a luster that ranges from glassy to
pearly. As a component in igneous rocks, feldspar crystals can be identified by their rectangular shape and
rather smooth, shiny faces (Figure 3.36).
Potassium feldspar is usually light cream, salmon
pink, or occasionally blue-green in color. The plagioclase
feldspars, on the other hand, range in color from white
to medium gray. However, color should not be used to
distinguish these groups. The only way to distinguish the
feldspars physically is to look for a multitude of fine parallel lines, called striations. Striations are found on some
cleavage planes of plagioclase feldspar but are not present
on potassium feldspar (see Figure 3.35).

Quartz Quartz (SiO2) is the only common silicate

mineral that consists entirely of silicon and oxygen. As
such, the term silica is applied to quartz. Because quartz
contains a ratio of two oxygen ions (O22) for every silicon

ion (Si41), no other positive ions are needed to attain
neutrality.
In quartz, a three-dimensional framework is
developed through the complete sharing of oxygen by
adjacent silicon atoms. Thus, all the bonds in quartz
are of the strong silicon–oxygen type. Consequently,
quartz is hard, resists weathering, and does not have
cleavage. When broken, quartz generally exhibits
conchoidal fracture. When pure, quartz is clear and,
if allowed to grow without interference, will develop
hexagonal crystals with pyramid-shaped ends. However, like most other clear minerals, quartz is often
colored by inclusions of various ions (impurities) and
forms without developing good crystal faces. The most
common varieties of quartz are milky (white), smoky
(gray), rose (pink), amethyst (purple), citrine (yellow to
brown), and rock crystal (clear) (see Figure 3.15).

Muscovite Muscovite is a common member of the
mica family. It is light in color and has a pearly luster
(see Figure 3.20). Like other micas, muscovite has excellent cleavage in one direction. In thin sheets, muscovite
is clear, a property that accounts for its use as window
“glass” during the Middle Ages. Because muscovite is
very shiny, it can often be identified by the sparkle it
gives a rock. If you have ever looked closely at beach
sand, you may have seen the glimmering brilliance of the
mica flakes scattered among the other sand grains.
Clay Minerals

Clay is a term used to describe a category of complex minerals that, like the micas, have a
sheet structure. Unlike other common silicates, most
clay minerals originate as products of the chemical
breakdown (chemical weathering) of other silicate minerals. Thus, clay minerals make up a large percentage
of the surface material we call soil. (Weathering and
soils are discussed in detail in Chapter 6.) Because of
soil’s importance to agriculture, and because of its role
as a supporting material for buildings, clay minerals
are extremely important to humans. In addition, clays
account for nearly half the volume of sedimentary rocks.
Clay minerals are generally very fine grained, which
makes them difficult to identify unless they are studied
microscopically. Their layered structure and weak bonding between layers give them a characteristic feel when
wet. Clays are common in shales, mudstones, and other
sedimentary rocks.
One of the most common clay minerals is kaolinite
(Figure 3.37), which is used in the manufacture of fine
china and as a coating for high-gloss paper, such as that
used in this textbook. Further, some clay minerals absorb
large amounts of water, which allows them to swell to
several times their normal size. These clays have been
used commercially in a variety of ingenious ways, including as an additive to thicken milkshakes in fast-food
restaurants.

97

3.9 Common Silicate Minerals

E. J. Tarbuck

Figure 3.37
Kaolinite Kaolinite is a common clay mineral formed by
weathering of feldspar minerals.

The Dark Silicates
The dark (or ferromagnesian) silicates are minerals
containing ions of iron (ferro 5 iron) and/or magnesium
in their structure. Because of their iron content, ferromagnesian silicates are dark in color and have a greater
specific gravity, between 3.2 and 3.6, than nonferromagnesian silicates. The most common dark silicate minerals
are olivine, the pyroxenes, the amphiboles, dark mica
(biotite), and garnet.

Olivine Group Olivine, a family of high-temperature
silicate minerals, is black to olive green in color and has a
glassy luster and a conchoidal fracture (see Figure 3.34).
Transparent olivine is occasionally used as a gemstone
called peridot. Rather than develop large crystals, olivine
commonly forms small, rounded crystals that give olivine-rich rocks a granular appearance (Figure 3.38). Olivine
and related forms are typically found in basalt, a common
igneous rock of the oceanic crust and volcanic areas on
the continents, and are thought to constitute up to 50
percent of Earth’s upper man tle.

Biotite Biotite is a dark,
iron-rich member of the mica
family (see Figure 3.34). Like
other micas, biotite possesses
a sheet structure that gives
it excellent cleavage in one
direction. Biotite also has a
shiny black appearance that
helps distinguish it from the
other dark ferromagnesian
minerals. Like hornblende,
biotite is a common constituent of igneous rocks, including the rock granite.
Garnet Garnet is similar

Amphibole Group The most common member of a
chemically complex group of minerals called amphiboles
(Figure 3.39B) is hornblende. Hornblende is usually dark
green to black in color, and except for its cleavage angles,
which are about 60 degrees and 120 degrees, it is very similar in appearance to augite. In a rock, hornblende often
forms elongated crystals. This helps distinguish it from
pyroxene, which forms rather blocky crystals. Hornblende
is found in igneous rocks, where it often makes up the dark
portion of an otherwise light-colored rock (see Figure 3.3).

Dennis Tasa

Olivine-rich peridotite
(variety dunite)

to olivine in that its structure
is composed of individual
tetrahedra linked by metallic ions. Also like olivine,
garnet has a glassy luster, lacks cleavage, and exhibits
conchoidal fracture. Although the colors of garnet are
varied, this mineral is most often brown to deep red.
Well-developed garnet crystals have 12 diamondshaped faces and are most
A. Augite
commonly found in
metamorphic rocks
Figure 3.39 Augite
(Figure 3.40). Transparent
and hornblende
garnets are prized as
These dark-colored
semiprecious gemstones.
silicate minerals are
common constituents
of a variety of igneous
rocks. (Photos courtesy of

B. Hornblende

Figure 3.40

Pyroxene Group The pyroxenes are a group of diverse
minerals that are important components in dark-colored
igneous rocks. The most common member, augite, is a
black, opaque mineral with two directions of cleavage
that meet at nearly a 90-degree angle. Augite is one of
the dominant minerals in basalt (Figure 3.39A).

Figure 3.38
Olivine Commonly black
to olive green in color,
olivine has a glassy luster
and is often granular in
appearance.

2 cm

Well-formed garnet
crystal Garnets come in
a variety of colors and
are commonly found
in mica-rich metamorphic rocks. (Photo by E. J.
Tarbuck)

3.9

Concept Checks

1. Apart from their difference in color, what is one
main distinction between light and dark silicates?
What accounts for this difference?
2. Based on the chart in Figure 3.34, what do
muscovite and biotite have in common? How do
they differ?
3. Is color a good way to distinguish between
orthoclase and plagioclase feldspar? If not, what
is a more effective means of distinguishing them?

E. J. Tarbuck)

98

CHAPTER 3

Matter and Minerals

E Y E ON E A R T H

3.2

G

lass bottles, like most other manufactured
products, contain substances obtained
from minerals extracted from Earth’s crust
and oceans. The primary ingredient in commercially
produced glass bottles is the mineral quartz. Glass also
contains lesser amounts of the mineral calcite. (Photo by

Chris Brignell/Shutterstock)

QUESTION 1 In what mineral group does quartz belong?
QUESTION 2 Glass beer bottles are usually clear, green,
or brown. Based on what you know about how the
mineral quartz is colored, what do glass manufacturers
do to make bottles green and brown?
QUESTION 3 Why did some brewers start using brown
bottles instead of the green bottles that were popular
until the 1930s?

3.10

Important Nonsilicate Minerals
List the common nonsilicate minerals and explain why each
is important.

Nonsilicate minerals are typically divided into groups, based on the negatively charged ion or complex ion that the members have in common. For example, the oxides contain the negative oxygen
ions (O22), which bond to one or more kinds of positive ions (Figure 3.41). Thus, within each mineral
group, the basic structure and type of bonding is similar. As a result, the minerals in each group
have similar physical properties that are useful in mineral identification.
Although the nonsilicates make up only about 8 percent
of Earth’s crust, some minerals, such as gypsum, calcite,
and halite, occur as constituents in sedimentary rocks
in significant amounts. Furthermore, many others are
important economically. Figure 3.41 lists some of the
major nonsilicate mineral groups and gives a few examples of each.
Some of the most common nonsilicate minerals
belong to one of three classes of minerals: the carbonates
(CO322), the sulfates (SO422), and the halides (Cl12, F12,
Br12). The carbonate minerals are much simpler structurally than the silicates. This mineral group is composed
of the carbonate ion (CO322) and one or more kinds of
positive ions. The two most common carbonate minerals
are calcite, CaCO3 (calcium carbonate), and dolomite,
CaMg(CO3)2 (calcium/magnesium carbonate) (see Figure
3.41A,B). Calcite and dolomite are usually found together
as the primary constituents in the sedimentary rocks
limestone and dolostone. When calcite is the dominant

mineral, the rock is called limestone, whereas dolostone
results from a predominance of dolomite. Limestone has
many uses, including as road aggregate, as building stone,
and as the main ingredient in Portland cement.
Two other nonsilicate minerals frequently found in
sedimentary rocks are halite and gypsum (see Figure
3.41C,I). Both minerals are commonly found in thick
layers that are the last vestiges of ancient seas that have
long since evaporated (Figure 3.42). Like limestone, both
halite and gypsum are important nonmetallic resources.
Halite is the mineral name for common table salt
(NaCl). Gypsum (CaSO4 · 2 H2O), which is calcium sulfate with water bound into the structure, is the mineral
from which plaster and other similar building materials
are formed.
Most nonsilicate mineral classes contain members prized for their economic value. This includes
the oxides, whose members hematite and magnetite
are important ores of iron (see Figure 3.41E,F). Also
_TT12


100

CHAPTER 3

Matter and Minerals

Figure 3.42
Thick bed of halite exposed in an underground
mine Halite (salt) mine in
Grand Saline, Texas. Note
the person for scale. (Photo
by Tom Bochsler)

significant are the sulfides, which are basically compounds of sulfur (S) and one or more metals. Important
sulfide minerals include galena (lead), sphalerite (zinc),
and chalcopyrite (copper). In addition, native elements—including gold, silver, and carbon (diamonds)—
plus a host of other nonsilicate minerals—fluorite (flux
in making steel), corundum (gemstone, abrasive), and
uraninite (a uranium source)—are economically important (see GEOgraphics 3.1, p.82 and 3.2, p.101).

3.10

Concept Checks

1. List six common nonsilicate mineral groups. What
key ions or elements define each group?
2. What is the most common carbonate mineral?
3. List eight common nonsilicate minerals and their
economic uses.

4
Magma,
Igneous
Rocks, and
Intrusive
Activity

Aerial view of Yosemite valley which makes up a portion
of the Sierra Nevada batholith, California. (Photo by Michael
Collier)

U

nderstanding the structure, composition, and internal workings of our
planet requires a basic knowledge of igneous rocks. Igneous rocks and metamorphic
rocks derived from igneous “parents” make up most of Earth’s crust and mantle. Thus,
Earth can be described as a huge mass of igneous and metamorphic rocks that is
covered with a thin veneer of sedimentary rock and has a relatively small iron-rich core.
Many prominent landforms are composed of igneous rocks, including volcanoes such
as Mount Rainier and the large igneous bodies that make up the Sierra Nevada, the
Black Hills, and the high peaks of the Adirondacks. Igneous rocks also make excellent
building stones and are widely used as decorative materials, such as for monuments
and household countertops.

4.1

Magma: Parent Material of Igneous Rock
List and describe the three major components of magma.

Our discussion of the rock cycle in Chapter 1 explained that igneous rocks (ignis 5 fire) form as
molten rock cools and solidifies. Considerable evidence supports the idea that the parent material for
igneous rocks, called magma, is formed by partial melting that occurs at various levels within Earth’s
crust and upper mantle to depths of about 250 kilometers (about 150 miles). Once formed, a magma
body buoyantly rises toward the surface because it is less dense than the surrounding rocks. (When
rock melts, it takes up more space and, hence, it becomes less dense than the surrounding solid rock.)
Occasionally, molten rock reaches Earth’s surface, where it is called lava (Figure 4.1). Sometimes lava
is emitted as fountains that are produced when escaping gases propel it from a magma chamber. On
other occasions, lava is explosively ejected, producing dramatic steam and ash eruptions. However, not
all eruptions are violent; many volcanoes emit quiet outpourings of fluid lava.

The Nature of Magma
Magma is completely or partly molten rock, which when
cooled solidifies to form igneous rocks composed mainly
of silicate minerals. Most magmas consist of three materials: a liquid component, a solid component, and a
gaseous component.
Figure 4.1
Fluid lava emitted from
Bardarbunga volcano,
Iceland Iceland is home
to some of the most active
volcanoes on the planet.
(Lukas Gawenda/Alamy)

The liquid portion, called melt, is composed mainly
of mobile ions of the eight most common elements found
in Earth’s crust—silicon and oxygen, along with lesser
amounts of aluminum, potassium, calcium, sodium, iron,
and magnesium.
The solid components (if any) in magma are crystals
of silicate minerals. As a magma body cools, the size and
number of crystals increase.
During the last stage of
cooling, a magma body is
like a “crystalline mush”
(resembling a bowl of very
thick oatmeal) that contains
only small amounts of melt.
The gaseous components of magma, called
volatiles, are materials
that vaporize (form a gas)
at surface pressures. The
most common volatiles
found in magma are water
vapor (H2O), carbon dioxide

4.1 Magma: Parent Material of Igneous Rock
(CO2), and sulfur dioxide (SO2), which are confined by
the immense pressure exerted by the overlying rocks.
These gases tend to separate from the melt as it moves
toward the surface (from a high- to a low-pressure environment). As the gases build up, they may eventually propel magma from the vent. When deeply buried magma
bodies crystallize, the remaining volatiles collect as hot,
water-rich fluids that migrate through the surrounding
rocks. These hot fluids play an important role in metamorphism and will be considered in Chapter 8.

Potassium feldspar
(pink)

109
Figure 4.2

Amphibole
(black)

Igneous rock composed of
interlocking crystals The
largest crystals are about
1 centimeter in length.

From Magma to Crystalline Rock
To better understand how magma crystallizes, let us
consider how a simple crystalline solid melts. Recall that,
in any crystalline solid, the ions are arranged in a closely
packed regular pattern. However, they are not without
some motion; they exhibit a restricted vibration about
fixed points. As the temperature rises, ions vibrate more
rapidly and consequently collide with ever-increasing
vigor with their neighbors. Thus, heating causes the ions
to occupy more space, which in turn causes the solid
to expand. When the ions are vibrating rapidly enough
to overcome the force of their chemical bonds, melting
occurs. At this stage, the ions are able to slide past one
another, and the orderly crystalline structure disintegrates. Thus, melting converts a solid consisting of tight,
uniformly packed ions into a liquid composed of unordered ions moving randomly about.
In the process called crystallization, cooling
reverses the events of melting. As the temperature of
the liquid drops, ions pack more closely together as
their rate of movement slows. When they are cooled
sufficiently, the forces of the chemical bonds will again
confine the ions to an orderly crystalline arrangement.
When a magma body cools, the silicon and oxygen
atoms link together first to form silicon–oxygen tetrahedra, the basic building blocks of the silicate minerals (see
A. Molten rock may
crystallize at depth or at
Earth’s surface.

Dennis Tasa

Quartz
(gray, glassy)

Plagioclase feldspar
(white)

Figure 3.31, page 92). As magma continues to lose heat to
its surroundings, the tetrahedra join with each other and
with other ions to form embryonic crystal nuclei. Slowly
each nucleus grows as ions lose their mobility and join
the crystalline network.
The minerals that form the earliest have space to
grow and tend to have better-developed crystal faces
than do the ones that form later and occupy the remaining spaces. Eventually all of the melt is transformed into
a solid mass of interlocking silicate minerals that we call
an igneous rock (Figure 4.2).

Igneous Processes

SmartFigure 4.3

Igneous rocks form in two basic settings. Molten
rock may crystallize within Earth’s crust over a
range of depths, or it may solidify at Earth’s surface
(Figure 4.3).

wnDbqk)

Intrusive versus extrusive
igneous rocks (https://goo.gl/

Extrusive
igneous
rocks

Lava flow

Magma
chamber
Intrusive
igneous rocks
B. When magma crystallizes at depth, intrusive igneous rocks
form. When magma solidifies on Earth’s surface, extrusive
igneous rocks form.

110

CHAPTER 4

Figure 4.4
Mount Rushmore National
Memorial This memorial,
located in the Black Hills
of South Dakota, is carved
from intrusive igneous
rocks. (Photo by Barbara A.
Harvey/Shutterstock)

When magma crystallizes at depth, it forms intrusive
igneous rocks, also known as plutonic rocks—after
Pluto, the god of the underworld in classical mythology.
These rocks are observed at the surface in locations
where uplifting and erosion have stripped away the overlying rocks. Exposures of intrusive igneous rocks occur
in many places, including the White Mountains, New
Hampshire; Stone Mountain, Georgia; Mount Rushmore in the Black Hills of South Dakota; and Yosemite
National Park, California (Figure 4.4).
Igneous rocks that form when molten rock solidifies at the surface are classified as extrusive igneous
rocks. They are also called volcanic rocks—after
Vulcan, the Roman fire god. Extrusive igneous rocks
form when lava solidifies or when volcanic debris falls
to Earth’s surface. Extrusive igneous rocks are abundant in western portions of the Americas, where they
make up the volcanic peaks of the Cascade Range

and the Andes Mountains. In addition, many oceanic
islands, including the Hawaiian chain and Alaska’s
Aleutian Islands, are composed almost entirely of
extrusive igneous rocks. The nature of volcanic activity
will be addressed in more detail in Chapter 5.

4.1

Concept Checks

1. What is magma? How does magma differ from
lava?
2. List and describe the three components of
magma.
3. Describe the process of crystallization.
4. Compare and contrast extrusive and intrusive
igneous rocks.

Compositions
4.2 Igneous
Compare and contrast the four basic igneous compositions: basaltic (mafic), granitic
(felsic), andesitic (intermediate), and ultramafic.

Igneous rocks are composed mainly of silicate minerals. Chemical analyses show that silicon and
oxygen are by far the most abundant constituents of igneous rocks. These two elements, plus ions
of aluminum (Al), calcium (Ca), sodium (Na), potassium (K), magnesium (Mg), and iron (Fe), make
up roughly 98 percent, by weight, of most magmas. In addition, magma contains small amounts
of many other elements, including titanium and manganese, and trace amounts of much rarer elements, such as gold, silver, and uranium.
As magma cools and solidifies, these elements combine
to form two major groups of silicate minerals (Figure 4.5).
The dark (or ferromagnesian) silicates are rich in iron

and/or magnesium and comparatively low in silica. Olivine, pyroxene, amphibole, and biotite mica are the common dark silicate minerals of Earth’s crust. By contrast,

4.2 Igneous Compositions

111
SmartFigure 4.5

Composition

Granitic
(Felsic)

(Intermediate)

Andesitic

Basaltic

Ultramafic

Phaneritic
(Coarse-grained)

Granite

Diorite

Gabbro

Peridotite

Aphanitic
(Fine-grained)

Rhyolite

Andesite

Basalt

Komatiite
(Rare)

100

Mineralogy of common
igneous rocks (Based on
Dietrich, Daily, and Larson.)
(https://goo.gl/vST3z8)

Muscovite
Quartz

80

Percent
by
volume

(Mafic)

60

Li

Potassium
feldspar

g

-c
ht

tite

Bio

75%

rals

Plagioclase
feldspar
)
rich

m-

diu

(So

40

20

olo

d
re

e
min

)

rich

um-

lci
(Ca

a
er

ls

in
m Pyroxene
d
re
o
l
Amphibole
co
rk
Da

Olivine

Increasing silica (SiO2)

40%

Increasing potassium and sodium
Increasing iron, magnesium and calcium
650°C

Temperature at which melting begins

the light (or nonferromagnesian) silicates contain greater
amounts of potassium, sodium, and calcium rather than
iron and magnesium. The light silicate minerals, including quartz, muscovite mica, and the most abundant
mineral group, the feldspars, are richer in silica than the
dark silicates.

Granitic (Felsic) Versus Basaltic
(Mafic) Compositions
Despite their great compositional diversity, igneous
rocks (and the magmas from which they form) can be
divided into broad groups according to their proportions of light and dark minerals (see Figure 4.5). Near
one end of the continuum are rocks composed almost
entirely of light-colored silicates—quartz and potassium
feldspar. Igneous rocks in which these are the dominant
minerals have a granitic composition (Figure 4.6A).
Geologists also refer to granitic rocks as being felsic, a
term derived from feldspar and silica (quartz). In addition to quartz and feldspar, most granitic rocks contain
about 10 percent dark silicate minerals, usually biotite
mica and amphibole. Granitic rocks are rich in silica
(about 70 percent) and are major constituents of the continental crust.

1250°C

Rocks that contain at least 45 percent dark silicate
minerals and calcium-rich plagioclase feldspar (but no
quartz) are said to have a basaltic composition (Figure 4.6B). Basaltic rocks contain a high percentage of ferromagnesian minerals, so geologists also refer to them as
mafic (from magnesium and ferrum, the Latin name for
iron). Because of their iron content, mafic rocks are typically darker and denser than granitic rocks. Basaltic rocks
make up the ocean floor as well as many of the volcanic
islands located within the ocean basins. Basalt also forms
extensive lava flows on the continents.

Other Compositional Groups
As you can see in Figure 4.5, rocks with a composition
between granitic and basaltic rocks are said to have an
andesitic composition, or intermediate composition,
after the common volcanic rock andesite. Intermediate
rocks contain at least 25 percent dark silicate minerals,
mainly amphibole, pyroxene, and biotite mica, with the
other dominant mineral being plagioclase feldspar. This
important category of igneous rocks is often associated
with volcanic activity that is typically confined to the
seaward margins of the continents and on volcanic island
arcs such as the Aleutian chain.

112

Magma, Igneous Rocks, and Intrusive Activity

CHAPTER 4

Figure 4.6
Granitic (felsic) versus
basaltic (mafic) compositions Inset images are
photomicrographs that
show the interlocking crystals that make up granite
and basalt, respectively.
(Photos by E. J. Tarbuck)

Mica
Feldspar
Feldspar

Quartz

A. Granite is a felsic, coarse-grained
igneous rock composed of lightcolored silicates—quartz and
potassium feldspar.

than 70 percent in felsic rocks (see Figure
4.5). The percentage of silica in igneous
rocks varies in a systematic manner that
parallels the abundance of other elements. For example, rocks that are
relatively low in silica contain large
amounts of iron, magnesium, and
calcium. By contrast, rocks high in
silica contain very little iron, magnesium, or calcium but are enriched with
sodium and potassium. Consequently,
the chemical makeup of an igneous
rock can be inferred directly from its
Feldspar silica content.
(white)
Further, the amount of silica
present in magma strongly influences its behavior. Granitic magma, which
has a high silica content, is quite viscous
(“thick”) and may erupt at temperatures as
low as 650°C (1200°F). On the other
hand, basaltic magmas are low in
Pyroxene silica and are generally more fluid.
(black)
Basaltic magmas also erupt at
B. Basalt is a fine-grained mafic
higher temperatures than granitic
igneous rock containing substantial
magmas—usually at temperatures
amounts of dark colored silicates
between 1050° and 1250°C (1920°
and plagioclase feldspar.
and 2280°F).

Another important igneous rock, peridotite,
contains mostly olivine and pyroxene and thus falls on
the opposite side of the compositional spectrum from
granitic rocks (see Figure 4.5). Because peridotite is
composed almost entirely of ferromagnesian minerals,
its chemical composition is referred to as ultramafic.
Although ultramafic rocks are rare at Earth’s surface,
peridotite is the main constituent of the upper mantle.

Silica Content as an Indicator of
Composition
An important aspect of the chemical composition of
igneous rocks is silica (SiO2) content. Typically, the
silica content of crustal rocks ranges from a low of
about 40 percent in ultramafic rocks to a high of more

4.3

4.2

Concept Checks

1. Igneous rocks are composed mainly of which
group of minerals?
2. How do light-colored igneous rocks differ in
composition from dark-colored igneous
rocks?
3. List the four basic compositional groups of
igneous rocks, in order from the group with the
highest silica content to the group with the lowest
silica content.
4. Name two minerals typically found in rocks
with high silica content and two minerals
found in rocks with relatively low silica
content.

Igneous Textures: What Can They Tell Us?
Identify and describe the six major igneous textures.

The term texture is used to describe the overall appearance of a rock based on the size, shape,
and arrangement of its mineral grains—not how it feels to touch. Texture is an important property
because it reveals a great deal about the environment in which the rock formed (Figure 4.7). Geologists can make inferences about a rock’s origin based on careful observations of grain size and other
characteristics of the rock.

4.3 Igneous Textures: What Can They Tell Us?

D. Vesicular texture
Extrusive rock containing voids left by
gas bubbles that escape as lava
solidifies. (Pumice is a frothy volcanic
glass that displays a vesicular texture.)

A. Glassy texture
Composed of unordered atoms and resembles
dark manufactured glass. (Obsidian is a
natural glass that usually forms when highly
silica-rich magmas solidify.)

E. Pyroclastic (fragmental) texture
Produced by the consolidation of
fragments that may include ash, once
molten blobs, or large angular blocks
that were ejected during an explosive
volcanic eruption.

B. Porphyritic texture
Composed of two distinctly different
crystal sizes.

C. Phaneritic (coarse-grained) texture
Composed of mineral grains that are
large enough to be identified without a
microscope.

Three factors influence the textures of igneous rocks:
r The rate at which molten rock cools
r The amount of silica present in the magma
r The amount of dissolved gases in the magma
Among these, the rate of cooling tends to be the
dominant factor. A very large magma body located many
kilometers beneath Earth’s surface remains insulated
from lower surface temperatures by the surrounding rock
and thus will cool very slowly over a period of perhaps
tens of thousands to millions of years. Initially, relatively
few crystal nuclei form. Slow cooling permits ions to
migrate freely until they eventually join one of the existing crystals. Consequently, slow cooling promotes the
growth of fewer but larger crystals.

113

F. Aphanitic (fine-grained) texture
Composed of crystals that are too
small for the individual minerals to
be identified without a microscope.

On the other hand, when cooling occurs rapidly—
for example, in a thin lava flow—the ions quickly lose
their mobility and readily combine to form crystals.
This results in the development of numerous embryonic
nuclei, all of which compete for the available ions. The
result is a solid mass of many tiny intergrown crystals.

Types of Igneous Textures
The effect of cooling on rock textures is fairly straightforward: Slow cooling promotes the growth of large crystals,
whereas rapid cooling tends to generate small crystals.
However, a magma body may migrate to a new location
or erupt at the surface before it completely solidifies. As
a result, several types of igneous textures exist, including

SmartFigure 4.7
Igneous rock textures
(Photos by E. J. Tarbuck)
(https://goo.gl/U00Ix8)

114

CHAPTER 4

Magma, Igneous Rocks, and Intrusive Activity

Figure 4.8

(a 5 not, phaner 5 visible). By definition, the crystals
that make up aphanitic rocks are so small that individual minerals can be distinguished only with the
aid of a polarizing microscope or other sophisticated
techniques (see Figure 4.6B). Therefore, we commonly
characterize fine-grained rocks as being light, intermediate, or dark in color. Using this system of grouping, light-colored aphanitic rocks are those containing
primarily light-colored nonferromagnesian silicate
minerals.

Porphyritic texture The
large crystals in porphyritic
rocks are called phenocrysts, and the matrix of
smaller crystals is called
groundmass. (Photo by Dennis
Tasa)

Phaneritic (Coarse-Grained) Texture When large
masses of magma slowly crystallize at great depth,
they form igneous rocks that exhibit a coarse-grained
texture described as phaneritic (phaner 5 visible).
Coarse-grained rocks consist of a mass of intergrown
crystals that are roughly equal in size and large
enough to distinguish the individual minerals without
the aid of a microscope (see Figure 4.6A). Geologists
often use a small magnifying lens to aid in identifying
minerals in a phaneritic rock.

Groundmass

Phenocryst

1 cm

aphanitic (fine-grained), phaneritic (coarse-grained), porphyritic, vesicular, glassy, pyroclastic (fragmented), and
pegmatitic.

Aphanitic (Fine-Grained) Texture Igneous rocks
that form at the surface or as small intrusive masses
within the upper crust where cooling is relatively rapid
exhibit a fine-grained texture termed aphanitic
Lava flow

Figure 4.9

Vesicular texture

USGS

Vesicular texture The larger image shows a lava
flow on Hawaii’s Kilauea volcano. The inset photo
is a close-up showing the vesicular texture of
hardened lava. Vesicles are small holes left by
escaping gas bubbles. (Inset photo by E. J. Tarbuck)

Porphyritic Texture A large mass of magma may
require thousands or even millions of years to solidify.
Because different minerals crystallize under different environmental conditions (temperatures and
pressure), it is possible for crystals of one mineral to
become quite large before others even begin to form.
If molten rock containing some large crystals moves
to a different environment—for example, by erupting
at the surface—the remaining liquid portion of the
lava cools more quickly. The resulting rock, which has
large crystals embedded in a matrix of smaller crystals, is said to have a porphyritic texture (Figure 4.8).
The large crystals in porphyritic rocks are referred
to as phenocrysts (pheno 5 show, cryst 5 crystal), whereas the matrix of smaller crystals is called
groundmass. A rock with a porphyritic texture is
termed a porphyry.
Vesicular Texture Common features of many extrusive rocks are the voids left by gas bubbles that escape as
lava solidifies. These nearly spherical openings are called
vesicles, and the rocks that contain them are said to have
a vesicular texture. Rocks that exhibit a vesicular texture often form in the upper zone of a lava flow, where
cooling occurs rapidly enough to preserve the openings produced by the expanding gas bubbles (Figure 4.9).
Another common vesicular rock, called pumice, forms
when silica-rich lava is ejected during an explosive eruption (see Figure 4.7D).
Glassy Texture During some volcanic eruptions,
molten rock is ejected into the atmosphere, where it is
quenched (very quickly cooled) to become a solid. Rapid

cooling of this type may generate
rocks having a glassy texture. Glass
results when unordered ions are
“frozen in place” before they are able
to unite into an orderly crystalline
structure.
Obsidian, a common type of natural glass, is similar in appearance to
dark chunks of manufactured glass.
Because of its excellent conchoidal
fracture and ability to hold a sharp,
hard edge, obsidian was a prized
Figure 4.10
material from which Native AmeriObsidian arrowhead Native
cans chipped arrowheads and cutting
Americans made
tools (Figure 4.10).
arrowheads and
Obsidian flows, typically a
cutting tools from
few hundred feet thick, provide
obsidian, a natuevidence that rapid cooling is not
ral glass. (Photo by
the only mechanism that produces
Jeffrey Scovil)
a glassy texture. Magmas with
high silica content tend to form long, chainlike structures (polymers) before crystallization is complete.
These structures, in turn, impede ionic transport
and increase the magma’s viscosity. (Viscosity is a
measure of a fluid’s resistance to flow.) So, granitic
magma, which is rich in silica, may be extruded as an
extremely viscous mass that eventually solidifies to
form obsidian.
By contrast, basaltic magma, which is low in silica,
forms very fluid lavas that, upon cooling, usually generate
fine-grained crystalline rocks. However, when a basaltic
lava flow enters the ocean, its surface is quenched rapidly
enough to form a thin, glassy skin.

Pyroclastic (Fragmental) Texture Another group of

Figure 4.11
Pyroclastic rocks are the product of explosive eruptions
These volcanic fragments may eventually consolidate to
become rocks displaying a pyroclastic texture. (Photo by
Richard Roscoe/Getty Images)

pegmatites, may form. Rocks of this type, in which
most of the crystals are larger than 1 centimeter
in diameter, are described as having a pegmatitic
texture (Figure 4.12). Most pegmatites occur as small
masses or thin veins within or around the margins of
large intrusive igneous bodies.
Pegmatites form late in the crystallization of
a magma, when water and other materials, such as
carbon dioxide, chlorine, and fluorine, make up an
unusually high percentage of the melt. Because ion

igneous rocks is formed from the consolidation of individual rock fragments ejected during explosive volcanic
eruptions. The ejected particles might be very fine ash,
molten blobs, or large angular blocks torn from the
walls of a vent during an eruption (Figure 4.11). Igneous
rocks composed of these rock fragments are said to
have a pyroclastic texture, or fragmental texture
(see Figure 4.7E).
A common type of pyroclastic rock, called welded
tuff, is composed of fine fragments of glass that
remained hot enough to fuse together. Other pyroclastic rocks are composed of fragments that solidified
before impact and became cemented together at some
later time. Because pyroclastic rocks are made of individual particles or fragments rather than interlocking
crystals, their textures often resemble those exhibited
by sedimentary rocks rather than those associated with
igneous rocks.

Pegmatitic Texture Under special conditions,
exceptionally coarse-grained igneous rocks, called

Figure 4.12
Pegmatitic texture This
granite pegmatite, found
in the inner gorge of
the Grand Canyon, is
composed mainly of quartz
and feldspar. (Photo by Joanne
Feldspar

Quartz

Bannon/E. J. Tarbuck)

116

CHAPTER 4

Magma, Igneous Rocks, and Intrusive Activity

E Y E ON E A R T H

4.1

T

hese two types of hardened lava, called Pele’s
hair and Pele’s tears, are commonly generated
during lava fountaining that occurs at Kilauea
volcano. They are named after Pele, the Hawaiian
goddess of fire and volcanoes. Pele’s hair consists of
goldish strands that are created when tiny blobs of lava
are stretched by strong winds. When lava droplets cool
quickly, they form Pele’s tears, which are sometimes
connected to strands of Pele’s hair.

QUESTION 1 What is the texture of Pele’s hair and
Pele’s tears?
QUESTION 2 What kind of igneous rock is Pele’s tears?

Pele’s tears
Pele’s hair

migration is enhanced in these fluid-rich environments, the crystals that form are abnormally large.
Thus, the large crystals in pegmatites do not result
from inordinately long cooling histories; rather, they
are the consequence of a fluid-rich environment that
enhances crystallization.
The composition of most pegmatites is similar to
that of granite. Thus, pegmatites contain large crystals of
quartz, feldspar, and muscovite. However, some contain
significant quantities of relatively rare and hence valuable elements—gold, tungsten, beryllium, and the rare
earth elements that are used in modern high-technology
devices, including cell phones and hybrid autos.

USGS

Marli Miller

4.3

Concept Checks

1. Define texture.
2. How does the rate of cooling influence crystal
size? What other factors influence the texture of
igneous rocks?
3. List the six major igneous rock textures.
4. Explain how the crystals in pegmatites are able to
grow so large.
5. What does a porphyritic texture indicate about
the cooling history of an igneous rock?

Igneous Rocks
4.4 Naming
Distinguish among the common igneous rocks based on texture and mineral
composition.

Geologists classify igneous rocks on the basis of their texture and mineral composition (Figure 4.13).
The various igneous textures described in the previous section result mainly from different cooling
histories, whereas the mineral composition of an igneous rock depends on the chemical makeup of
its parent magma. Because igneous rocks are classified on the basis of both mineral composition
and texture, some rocks having similar mineral constituents but exhibiting different textures are
given different names.

Granitic (Felsic) Igneous Rocks
Granite Of all the igneous rocks, granite is perhaps
the best known (see GEOgraphics 4.1). This is because
of its natural beauty, which is enhanced when it is polished, and its abundance in the continental crust. Slabs
of polished granite are commonly used for tombstones
and monuments and as building stones. Well-known
areas in the United States where granite is quarried

include Barre, Vermont; Mount Airy, North Carolina;
and St. Cloud, Minnesota.
Granite is a coarse-grained rock composed of about
10 to 20 percent quartz and roughly 50 percent feldspar.
When examined close up, the quartz grains appear somewhat rounded in shape, glassy, and clear to gray in color.
By contrast, feldspar crystals are generally white, gray, or
salmon pink in color, and they are blocky or rectangular
in shape. Other minor constituents of granite include

4.4 Naming Igneous Rocks

I G N E O U S R O C K C L A S S I F I C AT I O N C H A RT
MINERAL COMPOSITION
Granitic

Andesitic

Basaltic

(Felsic)

(Intermediate)

(Mafic)

Dominant
Minerals

Quartz
Potassium feldspar

Amphibole
Plagioclase feldspar

Pyroxene
Plagioclase feldspar

Olivine
Pyroxene

Accessory
Minerals

Plagioclase feldspar
Amphibole
Muscovite
Biotite

Pyroxene
Biotite

Amphibole
Olivine

Plagioclase feldspar

Ultramafic

Phaneritic
(coarse-grained)
Granite

Gabbro

Diorite

Peridotite

Aphanitic

Komatiite
(rare)
_TT13


(fine-grained)
Rhyolite

Andesite

Basalt

TEXTURE

Porphyritic
Uncommon

(two distinct
grain sizes)
Granite porphyry

Glassy

Andesite porphyry

Basalt porphyry

Less
common

Less
common

Uncommon

Obsidian

Vesicular

Uncommon

(contains voids)
Pumice (also glassy)

Scoria

Most
fragments
< 4mm

Most
fragments
> 4mm

Pyroclastic

Uncommon

(fragmental)
Tuff or welded tuff

Rock Color
(based on % of
dark minerals)

0% to 25%

Volcanic breccia
25% to 45%

45% to 85%

85% to 100%

117
SmartFigure 4.13
Classification of igneous
rocks Igneous rocks are
classified based on mineral
composition and texture.
(Photos by Dennis Tasa and
E. J. Tarbuck) (https://goo.gl/
WiyTul)

118

CHAPTER 4

Magma, Igneous Rocks, and Intrusive Activity

SmartFigure 4.14

Cory Rich/Getty Images

Rocks contain information
about the processes that
produced them This massive
granitic monolith (El Capitan)
located in Yosemite National
Park, California, was once a
molten mass deep within Earth.
(http://goo.gl/z8XJ1i)

Michael Collier

Granite

small amounts of dark silicates, particularly biotite and
amphibole, and sometimes muscovite. Although the dark
components generally make up less than 10 percent of
most granites, dark minerals appear to be more prominent than their percentage indicates.
At a distance, most granitic rocks appear gray in
color (Figure 4.14). However, when composed of dark pink
feldspar grains, granite can exhibit a reddish color. In
addition, some granites have a porphyritic texture. These
specimens contain elongated feldspar crystals a few centimeters in length that are scattered among smaller crystals
of quartz and amphibole (see Figure 4.13).

Rhyolite Rhyolite is the fine-grained equivalent of
granite and, like granite, is composed essentially of
the light-colored silicates (see Figure 4.13). This fact
accounts for its color, which is usually buff to pink or
occasionally light gray. Rhyolite is fine-grained and frequently contains glass fragments and voids, indicating
that it cooled rapidly in a surface, or near-surface, environment. In contrast to granite, which is widely distributed as large intrusive masses, rhyolite deposits are less
common and generally less voluminous. The thick rhyolite lava flows and extensive ash deposits in and around
Yellowstone National Park are well-known exceptions to
this generalization.

Dennis Tasa

Obsidian Obsidian is a dark-colored glassy rock that
usually forms when highly silica-rich lava cools quickly
at Earth’s surface (see Figure 4.13). In contrast to the
orderly arrangement of ions characteristic of minerals,
the arrangement of ions in glass is unordered. Consequently, glassy rocks such as obsidian are not composed
of minerals in the same sense as most other rocks.
Although usually black or reddish-brown in color,
obsidian has a chemical composition that is roughly
equivalent to that of the light-colored igneous rock granite, not like dark rocks such as basalt. Obsidian’s dark
color results from small amounts of metallic ions in an
otherwise relatively clear, glassy substance. If you examine a thin edge, obsidian will appear nearly transparent
(see Figure 4.7A).
Pumice Pumice is a glassy volcanic rock with a vesicular texture that forms when large amounts of gas escape
through silica-rich lava to generate a gray, frothy mass. In
some samples, the voids are quite noticeable, whereas in
others the pumice resembles fine shards of intertwined
glass. Because of the large percentage of voids, many
samples of pumice float when placed in water (Figure 4.15).
Oftentimes, flow lines are visible in pumice, indicating
that some movement occurred before solidification was
complete. Moreover, pumice and obsidian can often be

4.4 Naming Igneous Rocks
Figure 4.16

2 cm

Basaltic lava flowing from Kilauea
volcano, Hawaii (Photo by David Reggie/
Getty Images)

Figure 4.15
Pumice, a vesicular (and also glassy) igneous rock Most
samples of pumice will float in water because they contain
numerous vesicles. (Left photo by E. J. Tarbuck; right photo by Chip Clark/
Fundamental Photos)

found in the same rock mass, where they exist in alternating layers.

Andesitic (Intermediate)
Igneous Rocks
Andesite Andesite is a medium-gray, fine-grained
rock typically of volcanic origin. Its name comes from
South America’s Andes Mountains, where numerous
volcanoes are composed of this rock type. In addition,
the volcanoes of the Cascade Range and many of the
volcanic structures occupying the continental margins
that surround the Pacific Ocean are of andesitic composition. Andesite commonly exhibits a porphyritic texture
(see Figure 4.13). When this is the case, the phenocrysts
are often light, rectangular crystals of plagioclase feldspar or black, elongated amphibole crystals. Andesite
may also resemble rhyolite, so its identification usually
requires microscopic examination to verify mineral
makeup.

Diorite Diorite is the intrusive equivalent of andesite.
It is a coarse-grained rock that looks somewhat like gray
granite. However, it can be distinguished from granite
because it contains little or no visible quartz crystals and
has a higher percentage of dark silicate minerals. The
mineral makeup of diorite is primarily plagioclase feldspar and amphibole. Because the light-colored feldspar
grains and dark amphibole crystals appear to be roughly
equal in abundance, diorite has a salt-and-pepper appearance (see Figure 4.13).

Basaltic (Mafic) Igneous Rocks
Basalt Basalt is a very dark green to black, finegrained rock composed primarily of pyroxene and
calcium-rich plagioclase feldspar, with lesser amounts
of olivine and amphibole (see Figure 4.13). When it

119

is porphyritic, basalt commonly contains small, lightcolored feldspar phenocrysts or green, glassy-appearing
olivine grains embedded in a dark groundmass.
Basalt is the most common extrusive igneous rock.
Many volcanic islands, such as the Hawaiian Islands
and Iceland, are composed mainly of basalt (Figure
4.16). Further, the upper layers of the oceanic crust
consist of basalt. In the United States, large portions
of central Oregon and Washington were the sites of
extensive basaltic outpourings (discussed in detail in
Chapter 5). At some locations, these once-fluid basaltic flows have accumulated to a combined thicknesses
approaching 3 kilometers (nearly 2 miles).

Gabbro Gabbro is the intrusive equivalent of basalt
(see Figure 4.13). Like basalt, it tends to be dark green
to black in color and composed primarily of pyroxene
and calcium-rich plagioclase feldspar. Although gabbro
is uncommon in the continental crust, it makes up a
significant percentage of oceanic crust.

Pyroclastic Rocks
Pyroclastic rocks are composed of fragments ejected
during a volcanic eruption. One of the most common
pyroclastic rocks, called tuff, is composed mainly of tiny,

GEO GRAPHICS 4.1

Granite: An Intrusive Igneous Rock
To geologists, granite is an intrusive igneous rock with a rather precise mineral composition.
However, the term granite is commonly used to describe a group of related rocks that are rich
in quartz and feldspar. We will follow the latter convention here.

Where is granite found?
This map shows the distribution of exposed
granitic rocks in the United States, Canada,
and Mexico. Granitic rocks labeled batholiths
along the west coast are mainly Mesozoic in
age. Those in the north central United States
and the Canadian Shield are intermixed with
metamorphic rocks and are Precambrian,
while the granitic rocks of the Appalachian
Mountains are mostly of Paleozoic age.
1

glowimages

SuperStock

2

Coast Range
batholith

nrothko

8

3

Idaho
batholith

Grand
Teton NP

Ro

7

SuperStock

4

Black Hills

ck
n

ia

nta

Pikes Peak

ins

Elephant
Rocks SP

ch

ou

Sierra Nevada
batholith

Mt

M

s.

y
Yosemite NP

la
pa
Ap

Southern
California
batholith

Alan Majchrowicz

Erin Paul Donovan

6

5

Locations of granite outcrops
1. Coast Range batholith, British Columbia
2. Canadian Shield, Ontario, Canada
3. Cadillac Mountain, Acadia National Park, Maine
4. Cathedral Ledge State Park, White Mountains,
New Hampshire
5. Stone Mountain, Georgia
6. Mount Lemmon from Catalina Highway, Tuscon, Arizona
7. Joshua Tree National Park, California
8. Canyon Creek Lakes, Trinity Alps, California
William Helsel

Alamy Images

What are the uses of granite?
Granite is widely used as a building material for countertops, floor tiles, building stones, and memorials.

Shutterstock

Polished granite is popular for countertops because it
is durable as well as aesthetically pleasing. However, in
the stone trade the name “granite” is applied to almost
every coarse-grained igneous rock. “Black granite”, for
example, is usually the rock gabbro.

Shutterstock

Granite is used in large construction projects as a
structural element and decorative facing or veneer.
The Arlington Memorial Bridge, constructed mainly of
concrete, is covered by a decorative granite veneer.

John Greim

Granite is commonly used for memorials and
gravestones because of its resistance to
chemical weathering. The Trenton Battle
Monument commemorates the December 26,
1776 battle in which the Continental Army
defeated the British forces in Trenton, New Jersey.

“Rock of Ages” granite quarry, Barre, Vermont
Granite was originally quarried using handsaws and
explosives to blast away slabs of rock. Today, saws
with diamond chips imbedded in steel wires and saw
blades are used.

Question:
List at least four different uses for granite.

Raymond Forbes
Alamy Images

122

CHAPTER 4

Magma, Igneous Rocks, and Intrusive Activity

Figure 4.17

hundreds of feet thick and extend for more than 100
kilometers (60 miles) from their source. Most formed
millions of years ago as volcanic ash spewed from large
volcanic structures (calderas), sometimes spreading laterally at speeds approaching 100 kilometers per hour. Early
investigators of these deposits incorrectly classified them
as rhyolite lava flows. Today, we know that silica-rich lava
is too viscous (thick) to flow more than a few miles from
a vent.
Pyroclastic rocks composed mainly of particles larger
than ash are called volcanic breccia. The particles in volcanic breccia may consist of streamlined lava blobs that
solidified in air, blocks broken from the walls of the vent,
ash, and glass fragments.
Unlike most igneous rock names, such as granite and
basalt, the terms tuff and volcanic breccia do not imply
mineral composition. Instead, they are frequently identified with a modifier; for example, rhyolite tuff indicates
a rock composed of ash-size particles having a felsic
composition.

Welded tuff, a pyroclastic igneous
rock Outcrop of welded tuff
from Valles Caldera near Los
Alamos, New Mexico. Tuff
is composed mainly of
ash-sized particles and
may contain larger
fragments of pumice
or other volcanic
rocks. (Photo by Marli
Miller)

4.4

Concept Checks

1. List the two criteria by which igneous rocks are
classified.
2. How are granite and rhyolite different? In what
way are they similar?
Close-up

ash-size fragments that were later cemented together. In
situations where the ash particles remained hot enough
to fuse, the rock is called welded tuff. Although welded
tuff consists mostly of tiny glass shards, it may contain
walnut-size pieces of pumice and other rock fragments.
Welded tuff deposits cover vast portions of previously volcanically active areas of the western United
States (Figure 4.17). Some of these tuff deposits are

E Y E ON E A R T H

3. Classify each of the following rocks by their
mineral composition (felsic, intermediate, or
mafic): gabbro, obsidian, granite, and andesite.
4. Describe each of the following in terms of
composition and texture: diorite, rhyolite, and
basalt porphyry.
5. In what way does tuff and volcanic breccia differ
from other igneous rocks such as granite and
basalt?

4.2

T

his photo shows rock exposed at Hole in the
Wall, California, which formed as a result of an
explosive ash eruption about 18.5 million years

ago.

QUESTION 1 Most of this rock is composed of tiny ash
fragments. What name is given to rocks of this type?
QUESTION 2 What rock name is given to the dark
fragment in the upper part of the photo?
10 mm

Mark A. Wilson

4.5 Origin of Magma

4.5

123

Origin of Magma
Summarize the major processes that generate magma from solid rock.

Based on evidence from the study of earthquake waves, we know that Earth’s crust and
mantle are composed primarily of solid, not molten, rock. Although the outer core is fluid,
this iron-rich material is very dense and remains deep within Earth. So where does magma
come from?
Most magma originates in Earth’s uppermost mantle. The
greatest quantities are produced at divergent plate boundaries, in association with seafloor spreading, with lesser
amounts forming at subduction zones, where oceanic lithosphere descends into the mantle. Magma also can be generated when crustal rocks are heated sufficiently to melt.

Generating Magma from Solid Rock

melting temperature. When confining pressure drops sufficiently, decompression melting is triggered. Decompression melting occurs wherever hot, solid mantle rock
ascends, thereby moving into regions of lower pressure.
Recall from Chapter 2 that tensional forces along
spreading centers promote upwelling where plates diverge.
This process is responsible for generating magma along
oceanic ridges (divergent plate boundaries) where plates
are rifting apart (Figure 4.19). Below the ridge crest, hot
mantle rock rises and melts, generating a magma that
replaces the material that shifted horizontally away from
the ridge axis.
Decompression melting also occurs when ascending
mantle plumes reach the uppermost mantle. If this rising
magma reaches the surface, it will trigger an episode of
hot-spot volcanism.

Workers in underground mines know that temperatures
increase as they descend deeper below Earth’s surface.
Although the rate of temperature change varies considerably from place to place, it averages about 25°C (75°F) per
kilometer in the upper crust. This increase in temperature
with depth is known as the geothermal gradient. As
shown in Figure 4.18, when a typical geothermal gradient
is compared to the melting point curve for the mantle rock
Addition of Water An important factor affecting the
peridotite, the temperature at which peridotite melts is
melting temperature of rock is its water content. Water
higher than the geothermal gradient. Thus, under normal
and other volatiles act as salt does to melt ice. That is,
conditions, the mantle is solid. However, tectonic processes trigger melting though
various means, including
Temperature (°C)
reducing the melting point
(temperature) of mantle rock.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
0

Decrease in Pressure:
Decompression Melting

200

300

400

500

Solid rock
(100% peridotite)

Comparing the geothermal
gradient to the melting curve for
peridotite we see that the
temperature at which peridotite
melts is higher than its surroundings at every depth. Thus, under
normal conditions the mantle is
solid.

ltic melt)
us basa
otite pl
(perid

Depth in kilometers

100

Complete
melting
(100%
melt)

25

50

75

100

125

150

Pressure in kilobars

Geothermal
gradient

elting
ial m
Part

If temperature were the
only factor that determined
whether rock melts, our planet
would be a molten ball covered with a thin, solid outer
shell. This is not the case
because pressure, which also
increases with depth, influences the melting temperatures of rocks.
Melting, which is accompanied by an increase in volume, occurs at progressively
higher temperatures with
increased depth. This is the
result of the steady increase in
confining pressure exerted by
the weight of overlying rocks.
Conversely, reducing confining pressure lowers a rock’s

0

Melting curve for
the mantle rock
peridotite

SmartFigure 4.18
Why the mantle is mainly
solid This diagram shows
the geothermal gradient
(the increase in temperature with depth) for the
crust and upper mantle.
Also illustrated is the melting point curve for the
mantle rock peridotite.
(https://goo.gl/1ZogEy)

124

CHAPTER 4

Figure 4.19
Decompression melting
As hot mantle rock
ascends, it continually
moves into zones of lower
and lower pressure. This
drop in confining pressure initiates decompression melting in the upper
mantle.

Magma
chamber
Basaltic magma
rises to generate
new oceanic
crust

Solid rock
(peridotite)
Partial
melting begins

Rising
mantle rock

water causes rock to melt at lower temperatures, just as
putting rock salt on an icy sidewalk induces melting.
The introduction of water to generate magma
occurs mainly at convergent plate boundaries,
Oceanic where cool slabs of oceanic lithosphere descend
crust
into the mantle (Figure 4.20). As an oceanic plate
sinks, heat and pressure drive water from the
subducting oceanic crust and overlying sediments.
These fluids migrate into the wedge of hot mantle that
lies directly above. At a depth of about 100 kilometers
(60 miles) the wedge of mantle rock is sufficiently hot
that the addition of water leads to some melting. Partial melting of the mantle rock peridotite generates
hot basaltic magma whose temperatures may exceed
1250°C (nearly 2300°F).

Temperature Increase: Melting Crustal Rocks

As soon as mantle-derived basaltic magma forms, it
will buoyantly rise toward the surface. In continental
settings, basaltic magma often “ponds” beneath crustal
rocks, which have a lower density and are already near
Mid-oceanic
their melting temperature. The hot basaltic magma
ridge
may heat the overlying crustal rocks sufficiently
to generate a secondary, silica-rich magma. If
these low-density, silica-rich magmas reach
the surface, they tend to produce explosive
eruptions that we associate with converLithosphere
gent plate boundaries.
Upwelling
Crustal rocks can also melt during
Asthenosphere
mantle rocks
continental collisions that result in the
formation of a large mountain belt. During
Figure 4.20 Water lowers the melting temperature of hot mantle rock to trigger partial
these events, the crust is greatly thickened, and some
melting As an oceanic plate descends into the mantle,
crustal rocks are buried to depths where the temperaContinental
water and other volatiles are driven from the subducting
tures are elevated sufficiently to cause partial melting.
volcanic arc
crustal rocks into the mantle above.
The felsic (granitic) magmas produced in this manner
usually solidify before reaching the surface, so volcaTrench
nism is not typically associated with these collisiontype mountain belts.
In summary, magma can be generated three ways:
(1) A decrease in pressure (without an increase in temOceanic crust
perature) can result in decompression melting; (2) the
Continental crust
introduction of water can lower the melting temperature
Suducting oce
Continental
anic
of hot mantle rock sufficiently to generate magma; and
lithosphere
lith
Solidified
(3) heating of crustal rocks above their melting temperaosp
magma
he
ture produces magma.
re
(plutons)
Asthenosphere

Mantle
rock melts
Basaltic
magma
rises toward
the surface

4.5

Concept Checks

1. What is the geothermal gradient? Describe
how the geothermal gradient compares with
the melting temperatures of the mantle rock
peridotite at various depths.
2. Explain the process of decompression melting.

Water driven
from oceanic crust
causes partial melting
of mantle rock to generate
basaltic magma

3. What role do water and other volatiles play in the
formation of magma?
4. Name two plate tectonic settings in which you
would expect magma to be generated.

4.6 How Magmas Evolve

125

How Magmas Evolve

4.6

Describe how magmatic differentiation can generate a magma body that has a
mineralogy (chemical composition) that is different from its parent magma.

Geologists have observed that, over time, a volcano may extrude lavas that vary in composition.
Data of this type led them to examine the possibility that magma might change (evolve), and thus
one magma body could become the parent to a variety of igneous rocks. To explore this idea,
N. L. Bowen carried out a pioneering investigation into the crystallization of magma early in the
twentieth century.

Bowen’s Reaction Series and the
Composition of Igneous Rocks

The absence of these elements causes the melt to become
enriched in sodium and potassium. Further, because the
original basaltic magma contained about 50 percent silica
(SiO2), the crystallization of the earliest-formed mineral,
olivine, which is only about 40 percent silica, leaves the
remaining melt richer in SiO2. Thus, the silica component
of the remaining melt becomes enriched as the magma
evolves.
Bowen also demonstrated that if the solid components in a magma remain in contact with the remaining
melt, they will chemically react and change mineralogy
(chemical composition), as shown in Figure 4.21. For this
reason, this order of mineral formation became known
as Bowen’s reaction series. However, in nature, the
earliest-formed minerals can separate from the melt, thus
halting any further chemical reaction.
The diagram of Bowen’s reaction series in Figure 4.21
depicts the sequence in which minerals crystallize from
a magma of basaltic composition under laboratory conditions. Evidence that this highly idealized crystallization

Recall that ice freezes at a specific temperature, whereas
basaltic magma crystallizes over a range of at least 200°C
of cooling (about 1200° to 1000°C). In a laboratory setting, Bowen and his coworkers demonstrated that as a
basaltic magma cools, minerals tend to crystallize in a
systematic fashion, based on their melting temperatures.
As shown in Figure 4.21, the first mineral to crystallize is
the ferromagnesian mineral olivine. Further cooling generates calcium-rich plagioclase feldspar as well as pyroxene, and so forth down the diagram.
During this crystallization process, the composition
of the remaining liquid portion of the magma also continually changes. For example, at the stage when about
one-third of the magma has solidified, the remaining
molten material will be nearly depleted in iron, magnesium, and calcium because these elements are major constituents of the minerals that form earliest in the process.

BOWEN'S REACTION SERIES
Temperature
High temperatures
(~1200°C)

Composition
(rock types)
Ultramafic
(peridotite/
komatiite)

Sequence in which minerals crystallize from magma
Olivine
Calciumrich

Biotite mica

gio
cla
Co
se
nti
fel
of nu
dsp
Cry ou
ar
sta s S
lliz erie
ati s
on

Intermediate
(diorite/andesite)

Amphibole

Pla

Mafic
(gabbro/basalt)

es
eri
sS n
ou tio
nu liza
nti tal
co rys
Dis of C

Cooling magma

Pyroxene

Sodiumrich
Low temperatures
(~750°C)

Felsic
(granite/rhyolite)

Potassium feldspar
+
Muscovite mica
+
Quartz

Figure 4.21
Bowen’s reaction series
This diagram shows the
sequence in which minerals crystallize from a
mafic magma. Compare
this figure to the mineral
composition of the rock
groups in Figure 4.13.
Note that each rock group
consists of minerals that
crystallize in the same
temperature range.

126

CHAPTER 4

Magma,
Igneous
Fluid
basalticRocks, and Intrusive Activity
lava flow

Explosive
eruption of
silica-rich magma

Figure 4.22
Crystal settling results in a
change in the composition
of the remaining melt A
magma evolves as the
earliest-formed minerals (those richer in iron,
magnesium, and calcium)
crystallize and settle to
the bottom of the magma
chamber, leaving the
remaining melt richer in
sodium, potassium, and
silica (SiO2).

Mafic
magma body

A. Magma having a mafic composition
erupts fluid basaltic lavas.

Magma

B. Cooling of the magma
body causes crystals of
olivine, pyroxene, and
calcium-rich plagioclase
to form and settle out, or
crystallize along the
magma body’s cool
margins.

model approximates what can happen in nature comes
from analysis of igneous rocks. In particular, scientists
know that minerals that form in the same general temperature regime depicted in Bowen’s reaction series are found
together in the same igneous rocks. For example, notice in
Figure 4.21 that the minerals quartz, potassium feldspar,
and muscovite, which are located in the same region of
Bowen’s diagram, are typically found together as major
constituents of the intrusive igneous rock granite.

Magmatic Differentiation and Crystal
Settling
Bowen demonstrated that minerals crystallize from
magma in a systematic fashion. But how do Bowen’s findings account for the great diversity of igneous rocks? It
has been shown that, at one or more stages during the
Figure 4.23
The Palisades Sill, as seen
from New York City The
Palisades form impressive cliffs along the west
side of the Hudson River
for more than 80 kilometers (50 miles). This
structure, which is visible
from Manhattan, formed
when magma was injected
between layers of sandstone and shale. (Terese Loeb
Kreuzerl/Alamy)

Pyroxene
Olivine

Calcium-rich
plagioclase

Magma
Solid
rock
C. The remaining melt will be enriched
with silica, and should a subsequent
eruption occur, the rocks generated will
be more silica-rich and closer to the
felsic end of the compositional range
than the initial magma.

crystallization of magma, a separation of various components can occur. One mechanism that causes this to happen is called crystal settling. This process occurs when
the earlier-formed minerals are denser (heavier) than the
liquid portion and sink toward the bottom of the magma
chamber, as shown in Figure 4.22. When the remaining
melt solidifies—either in place or in another location, if
it migrates into fractures in the surrounding rocks—it
will form a rock with a mineral composition that is different than the parent magma. The formation of a magma
body having a mineralogy or chemical composition that
is different than the parent magma is called magmatic
differentiation.
A classic example of magmatic differentiation is
found in the Palisades Sill, which is a 300-meter-thick
(1000-foot-thick) slab of dark igneous rock exposed along
the west bank of the lower Hudson River across from New
York City (Figure 4.23). Because of its great thickness and

4.6 How Magmas Evolve
Figure 4.25

subsequent slow rate of solidification, crystals of olivine
(the first mineral to form) sank and make up about 25 percent of the lower portion of the Palisades Sill. By contrast,
near the top of this igneous body, where the last melt crystallized, olivine represents only 1 percent of the rock mass.*

Magma mixing This is one
way the composition of a
magma body can change.

Magma body A

Assimilation and Magma Mixing
Bowen successfully demonstrated that through magmatic
differentiation, a single parent magma can generate several mineralogically different igneous rocks. However,
more recent work indicates that magmatic differentiation
involving crystal settling cannot, by itself, account for the
entire compositional spectrum of igneous rocks.
Once a magma body forms, the incorporation of
foreign material can also change its composition. For
example, in near-surface environments where rocks are
brittle, the magma pushing upward can cause numerous
fractures in the overlying rock. The force of the injected
magma is often sufficient to dislodge and incorporate
the surrounding host rock (Figure 4.24). Melting of these

Magma body B

A. During the ascent of two chemically distinct magma bodies,
the more buoyant mass may overtake the slower rising body.

Mixing

*Recent studies indicate that the Palisades Sill was produced by multiple
injections of magma and does not represent a simple case of crystal settling.
However, it is nonetheless an instructional example of that process.

Fractures

Host
rock

B. Once joined, convective flow will mix the two magmas,
generating a mass that is a blend of the two magma bodies.

blocks, a process called assimilation, changes the overall chemical composition of the magma body.
Another means by which the composition of
magma can be altered is called magma mixing.
Magma mixing may occur during the ascent of two
chemically distinct magma bodies as the more buoyant mass overtakes the more slowly rising body (Figure
4.25). Once they are joined, convective flow stirs the
two magmas, generating a single mass that has an
intermediate composition.
Rising
magma
As magma rises through Earth’s brittle upper crust, it may
dislodge and incorporate the surrounding host rocks. Melting
of these blocks, a process called assimilation, changes the
overall composition of the rising magma body.

Figure 4.24
Assimilation of the host rock by a magma body The composition of magma changes when the molten mass incorporates pieces of surrounding host rock, in a process called
assimilation.

127

4.6

Concept Checks

1. Define Bowen’s reaction series.
2. How does the crystallization and settling of the
earliest formed minerals affect the composition of
the remaining magma?
3. Compare the processes of assimilation and
magma mixing.

128

CHAPTER 4

Magma, Igneous Rocks, and Intrusive Activity

4.7

Partial Melting and Magma Composition
Describe how partial melting of the mantle rock peridotite can generate a basaltic
(mafic) magma.
_TT14


Recall that igneous rocks are composed of a mixture of minerals and, therefore, tend to melt over
a temperature range of at least 200°C (nearly 400°F). As rock begins to melt, the minerals with
the lowest melting temperatures are the first to melt. If melting continues, minerals with higher
melting points begin to melt, and the composition of the melt steadily approaches the overall composition of the rock from which it was derived. Most often, however, melting is not complete. The
incomplete melting of rocks is known as partial melting, a process that produces most magma.
Recall from Bowen’s reaction series that rocks with a
granitic composition are composed of minerals with the
lowest melting (crystallization) temperatures—namely,
quartz and potassium feldspar (see Figure 4.21). Also
note that as we move up Bowen’s reaction series, the
minerals have progressively higher melting temperatures and that olivine, which is found at the top, has the
highest melting point. When a rock undergoes partial
melting, it will form a melt that is enriched in ions from
minerals with the lowest melting temperatures, while the
unmelted portion is composed of minerals with higher
melting temperatures (Figure 4.26). Separation of these
two fractions yields a melt with a chemical composition
that is richer in silica and nearer the felsic (granitic) end
of the spectrum than the rock from which it formed. In
general, partial melting of ultramafic rocks tends to yield
mafic (basaltic) magmas, partial melting of mafic rocks
generally yields intermediate (andesitic) magmas, and
partial melting of intermediate rocks can generate felsic
(granitic) magmas.
SmartFigure 4.26
Partial melting Partial
melting generates a
magma that is nearer the
felsic (granitic) end of the
compositional spectrum
than the parent rock from
which it was derived. (https://

Partial melting of a
hypothetical rock
composed of the
minerals on Bowen’s
reaction series yields
two products.

goo.gl/s5Vigs)

Key
Olivine
Quartz
Plagioclase feldspar
Potassium feldspar
Pyroxene
Amphibole

Formation of Basaltic Magma
Most magma that erupts at Earth’s surface is basaltic in
composition and falls in a temperature range of 1000°
to 1250°C. Experiments show that under the high-pressure conditions calculated for the upper mantle, partial
melting of the ultramafic rock peridotite can generate a
magma of basaltic composition. Further evidence that
many basaltic magmas have a mantle source are the
inclusions of the rock peridotite, which basaltic magmas
often carry up to Earth’s surface from the mantle.
Basaltic (mafic) magmas that originate from partial
melting of mantle rocks are called primary or primitive
magmas because they have not yet evolved. Recall that
partial melting that produces mantle-derived magmas
may be triggered by a reduction in confining pressure
during the process of decompression melting. This can
occur, for example, where hot mantle rock ascends as
part of slow-moving convective flow at mid-ocean ridges
(see Figure 4.19). Basaltic magmas are also generated at
subduction zones, where water driven from the descending slab of oceanic crust promotes partial melting of the
mantle rocks that lie above (see Figure 4.20).

Formation of Andesitic and Granitic
Magmas
If partial melting of mantle rocks generates most basaltic
magmas, what is the source of the magma that crystallizes to form andesitic (intermediate) and granitic (felsic)
A melt having
an intermediate rocks? Recall that silica-rich magmas erupt mainly along
to felsic
the continental margins. This is strong evidence that
composition.
continental crust, which is thicker and has a lower density
than oceanic crust, must play a role in generating these
more highly evolved magmas.
One way andesitic magma can form is when a rising mantle-derived basaltic magma undergoes magmatic
differentiation as it slowly makes its way through the
continental crust. Recall from our discussion of Bowen’s
reaction series that as basaltic magma solidifies, the
An unmelted residue having
silica-poor ferromagnesian minerals crystallize first.
a mafic composition.
If these iron-rich components are separated from the

4.8 Intrusive Igneous Activity
liquid by crystal settling, the remaining melt will have an
andesitic composition (see Figure 4.22).
Andesitic magmas can also form when rising basaltic
magmas assimilate crustal rocks that tend to be silica rich.
Partial melting of basaltic rocks is yet another way in which
at least some andesitic magmas are thought to be produced.
Although granitic magmas can be formed through
magmatic differentiation of andesitic magmas, most granitic
magmas probably form when hot basaltic magma ponds
(becomes trapped because of its greater density) below
continental crust (Figure 4.27). When the heat from the hot
basaltic magma partially melts the overlying crustal rocks,
which are silica rich and have a much lower melting temperature, the result can be the production of large quantities
of granitic magmas. This process is thought to have been
responsible for the volcanic activity in and around Yellowstone National Park in the distant past.

4.7

Vent
Conduit
Magma
chamber

Lithosphere

Partial melting of continental
crust generates magma with
a granitic composition.
Basaltic magma ponds
beneath less dense crustal
rocks.
Basaltic magma buoyantly
rises through lithospheric
mantle.

Concept Checks

1. Briefly describe why partial melting results in a
magma having a composition different from the
rock from which it was derived.

Partial melting of peridotite
generates basaltic magma.

2. How are most basaltic magmas thought to have
formed?
3. What is the process that is thought to generate
most granitic magmas?

4.8

SmartFigure 4.27

Atmosphere

Continental
crust

Asthenosphere

Intrusive Igneous Activity
Compare and contrast these intrusive igneous structures: dikes, sills, batholiths,
stocks, and laccoliths.

Although volcanic eruptions can be violent and spectacular events, most magma is emplaced and
crystallizes at depth, without fanfare. Therefore, understanding the igneous processes that occur
deep underground is as important to geologists as studying volcanic events.

Nature of Intrusive Bodies
When magma rises through the crust, it forcefully displaces preexisting crustal rocks, termed host rock,
or country rock. The structures that result from the
emplacement of magma into preexisting rocks are called
intrusions, or plutons. Because all intrusions form far
below Earth’s surface, they are studied primarily after
uplifting and erosion (covered in later chapters) have
exposed them. The challenge lies in reconstructing the
events that generated these structures in vastly different
conditions deep underground, millions of years ago.
Intrusions are known to occur in a great variety of
sizes and shapes. Some of the most common types are

129

illustrated in Figure 4.28. Notice that some plutons have a
tabular (tabula 5 table) shape, whereas others are best
described as massive (blob shaped). Also, observe that
some of these bodies cut across existing structures, such
as sedimentary strata, whereas others form when magma
is injected between sedimentary layers. Because of these
differences, intrusive igneous bodies are generally classified according to their shape, as either tabular or massive, and by their orientation with respect to the host
rock. Igneous bodies are said to be discordant (discordare 5 to disagree) if they cut across existing structures
and concordant (concordare 5 to agree) if they inject
parallel to features such as sedimentary strata.

Formation of granitic
magma Granitic magmas
are generated by the partial
melting of continental
crust. (https://goo.gl/P4Bffs)

130

Magma, Igneous Rocks, and Intrusive Activity

CHAPTER 4

A. Interrelationship between volcanism and intrusive igneous activity.
Composite
cones

Cinder
cones

Fissure
eruption

Pipe

Laccolith

Fissure
eruption

Sills

Magma
chamber

Magma
chamber

Sill
USGS

Dike

B. Basic intrusive structures, some of which have been exposed by erosion.
Volcanic
necks

Laccolith
Sills

Dike
Dike

Dikes
Solidified magma bodies
(plutons)
Marli Miller

Batholith

C. Extensive uplift and erosion exposes a batholith composed of several smaller
intrusive bodies (plutons).
Batholith

Plutons

SuperStock

SmartFigure 4.28
Intrusive igneous structures

(https://goo.gl/3sS9U5)

4.8 Intrusive Igneous Activity

131

Tabular Intrusive
Bodies: Dikes and
Sills
Dikes and Sills Tabular
intrusive bodies are proSill
duced when magma is forcibly injected into a fracture
or zone of weakness, such
as a bedding surface (see
Figure 4.28). Dikes are
discordant bodies that form
when magma is forcibly
injected into fractures and
cut across bedding surfaces
and other structures in
the host rock. By contrast,
sills are nearly horizontal,
concordant bodies that
form when magma exploits
weaknesses between sedimentary beds or other rock
structures (Figure 4.29).
In general, dikes serve as tabular conduits that transport magma upward, whereas sills tend to accumulate
magma and increase in thickness.
Dikes and sills are typically shallow features, occurring where the country rocks are sufficiently brittle to
fracture. They can range in thickness from less than 1
millimeter to more than 1 kilometer.
While dikes and sills can occur as solitary bodies,
dikes tend to form in roughly parallel groups called dike
swarms. These multiple structures reflect the tendency
for fractures to form in sets when tensional forces pull
apart brittle country rock. Dikes can also radiate from
an eroded volcanic neck, like spokes on a wheel. In these
situations, the active ascent of magma generated fissures
in the volcanic cone out of which lava flowed. Dikes frequently are more resistant and thus weather more slowly
than the surrounding rock. Consequently, when exposed
by erosion, dikes tend to have a wall-like appearance, as
shown in Figure 4.30.
Because dikes and sills are relatively uniform in
thickness and can extend for many kilometers, they are
assumed to be the product of very fluid, and therefore
mobile, magmas. One of the largest and most studied of
all sills in the United States is the Palisades Sill (see Figure 4.23). Exposed for 80 kilometers (50 miles) along the
west bank of the Hudson River in southeastern New York
and northeastern New Jersey, this sill is about 300 meters
(1000 feet) thick. Because it is resistant to erosion, the
Palisades Sill forms an imposing cliff that can be easily
seen from the opposite side of the Hudson.
Columnar Jointing In many respects, sills closely
resemble buried lava flows. Both are tabular and can

SmartFigure 4.29

Sill

Sill exposed in Sinbad
Country, Utah The dark,
essentially horizontal band is
a sill of basaltic composition
that intruded horizontal layers
of sedimentary rock. (Photo by
Michael Collier) (http://goo.gl/4MZelh)

Sill

extend over a wide area, and both may exhibit columnar
jointing. Columnar jointing occurs when igneous rocks
cool and develop shrinkage fractures that produce elongated, pillar-like columns that most often have six sides
SmartFigure 4.30
Dike exposed in
the Spanish Peaks,
Colorado This wall-like dike
is composed of igneous
rock that is more resistant
to weathering than the
surrounding material.
(Photo by Michael Collier) (https://
goo.gl/MJHkem)

Dike

132

CHAPTER 4

Magma, Igneous Rocks, and Intrusive Activity

Figure 4.31
Columnar jointing
Columnar jointing on
Akun Island located in the
Aleutian Islands, Alaska.
(Photo by Steve Hillebrand, U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service)

(Figure 4.31). Further, because sills and dikes generally
form in near-surface environments and may be only a few
meters thick, the emplaced magma often cools quickly
enough to generate a fine-grained texture. (Recall that
most intrusive igneous bodies have a coarse-grained
texture.)

Massive Intrusive Bodies: Batholiths,
Stocks, and Laccoliths
Batholiths By far the largest intrusive igneous bodies
are batholiths (bathos 5 depth, lithos 5 stone). Batholiths occur as mammoth linear structures several hundred kilometers long and up to 100 kilometers (60 miles)
wide (Figure 4.32). The Sierra Nevada batholith, for example, is a continuous granitic structure that forms much
of the “backbone” of the Sierra Nevada in California.
An even larger batholith extends for over 1800 kilometers (1100 miles) along the Coast Mountains of western
Canada and into southern Alaska. Although batholiths
can cover a large area, recent geophysical studies indicate that most are less than 10 kilometers (6 miles) thick.
Some are even thinner; the coastal batholith of Peru, for
example, is essentially a flat slab with an average thickness of only 2 to 3 kilometers (1 to 2 miles). Batholiths are
typically composed of felsic (granitic) and intermediate
rock types and are often called “granite batholiths.”
Early investigators thought the Sierra Nevada
batholith was a huge single body of intrusive igneous

rock. Today we know that large batholiths are produced by hundreds of discrete injection of magma that
form smaller intrusive bodies (plutons) that intimately
crowd against or penetrate one another. These bulbous
masses are emplaced over spans of millions of years.
The intrusive activity that created the Sierra Nevada
batholith, for example, occurred nearly continuously over
a 130-million-year period that ended about 80 million
years ago (see Figure 4.32).
By definition, a plutonic body must have a surface exposure greater than 100 square kilometers (40
square miles) to be considered a batholith. Smaller
plutons are termed stocks. However, many stocks
appear to be portions of much larger intrusive bodies
that would be classified as batholiths if they were fully
exposed.
_TT15


Emplacement of Batholiths How did massive granitic
batholiths come to reside within sedimentary and metamorphic rocks that are only moderately deformed? What
happened to the rock that was displaced by these huge
igneous masses? (Geologists call this the “room problem.”) How do magma bodies make their way through
several kilometers of solid rock? Geologists continue to
study and debate these questions.
We know that magma rises because it is less dense
than the surrounding rock, much as a cork held at
the bottom of a container of water will rise when it is
released. In the upper mantle and lower crust, where
temperatures and pressures are high, rock is ductile
(able to flow). In this setting, buoyant magma bodies

4.8 Intrusive Igneous Activity
some of the host rock that was displaced will fill in the
space left by the magma body as it passes.*
As a magma body nears the surface, it encounters
relatively cool, brittle country rock that is not easily pushed aside. Further upward movement may be
accomplished by a process called stoping, in which
blocks of the roof overlying a hot, rising mass become
dislodged and sink through the magma (see Figure
4.24). Evidence supporting stoping is found in plutons
that contain suspended blocks of country rock called
xenoliths (xenos 5 a stranger, lithos 5 stone)
(Figure 4.33).
Magma may also melt and assimilate some of the
overlying host rock. However, this process is greatly
limited by the available thermal energy contained in
the magma body. When plutons are emplaced near the
surface, the room problem may be solved by “lifting the
roof” that overlies the intrusive body.

Coast Range batholith

Pacific
Ocean

Idaho
batholith

Laccoliths A nineteenth-century study by G. K.
Gilbert of the U.S. Geological Survey in the Henry
* An analogous situation occurs when a can of oil-based paint is left in storage.
The oily component of the paint is less dense than the pigments used for coloration; thus, oil collects into drops that slowly migrate upward, while the heavier
pigments settle to the bottom.

Sierra Nevada
batholith

Southern
California
batholith

Xenolith
Figure 4.32
Granitic batholiths along the western margin of North
America These gigantic, elongated bodies consist of numerous plutons that were emplaced beginning about 150 million
years ago.

are assumed to rise in the form of diapirs, invertedteardrop-shaped masses with rounded heads and
tapered tails. However, in the upper crust, large dikelike structures may provide conduits for the ascent of
magma.
Depending on the tectonic environment, several
mechanisms have been proposed to solve the room problem. At great depths, where rock is ductile, a mass of
buoyant, rising magma can forcibly make room for itself
by pushing aside the overlying rock—a process called
shouldering. As the magma continues to move upward,

Figure 4.33
Xenolith Xenoliths are inclusions of host rock contained within igneous bodies. This
unmelted chunk of dark (mafic) rock was incorporated into a granitic magma, eastern
Sierra Nevada, Rock Creek Canyon, California. (Photo by Mark A. Wilson)

133

134

CHAPTER 4

Magma, Igneous Rocks, and Intrusive Activity

Figure 4.34
Laccoliths Mount Ellen in
Utah’s Henry Mountains
is one of five peaks that
make up this small mountain range. Although the
main intrusions in the
Henry Mountains are
stocks, numerous laccoliths formed as offshoots of
these structures. (Photo by

Laccolith

Mt. Ellen

Michael DeFreitas North America/
Alamy)

Mountains of Utah produced the first clear evidence
that igneous intrusions can lift the sedimentary strata
they penetrate. Gilbert named the igneous intrusions he
observed laccoliths, which he envisioned as igneous rock
forcibly injected between sedimentary strata, so as to
arch the beds above while leaving those below relatively
flat. It is now known that the five major peaks of the
Henry Mountains are not laccoliths but stocks. However,
these central magma bodies are the source material for
branching offshoots that are true laccoliths, as Gilbert
defined them (Figure 4.34).
Numerous other granitic laccoliths have since been
identified in Utah. The largest is a part of the Pine Valley
Mountains located north of St. George, Utah. Others are
found in the La Sal Mountains near Arches National Park
and in the Abajo Mountains directly to the south.

E Y E ON E A R T H

4.3

S

hiprock, New Mexico, is an igneous structure that
rises more than 510 meters (1700 feet) above the
surrounding desert in northwestern New Mexico.
It consists of rock that accumulated in the vent of a
volcano that has since been eliminated by erosion. (Photo
by Michael Collier)

QUESTION 1 What type of landform is Shiprock?
QUESTION 2 What type of structure is the long, narrow
ridge extending away from Shiprock?

4.8

Concept Checks

1. What is meant by the term country rock?
2. Describe dikes and sills, using the appropriate
terms from the following list: massive, discordant,
tabular, and concordant.
3. Distinguish among batholiths, stocks, and
laccoliths in terms of size and shape.

5
Volcanoes
and Volcanic
Hazards

Villarrica volcano ejecting incandescent lava and volcanic
bombs, Chile, March 3, 2015. (Photo by REUTERS/S Aditya)

T

he significance

of igneous activity may not be obvious at first glance. However, because volcanoes extrude molten rock that formed at great depth, they provide our only means of directly observing processes that occur many kilometers below
Earth’s surface. Furthermore, Earth’s atmosphere and oceans have evolved from gases
emitted during volcanic eruptions. Either of these facts is reason enough for igneous
activity to warrant our attention.

5.1

The Nature of Volcanic Eruptions
Explain why some volcanic eruptions are explosive and others are quiescent.

Volcanic activity is commonly perceived as a process that produces a picturesque, cone-shaped
structure that periodically erupts in a violent manner (Figure 5.1). However, many eruptions are not
explosive. What determines the manner in which volcanoes erupt?

Factors Affecting Viscosity

Figure 5.1
A villager flees as Mount
Sinabung explosively
erupts in Indonesia’s
North Sumatra province,
February 1, 2014. (S. Aditya/
Reuters)

The source material for volcanic eruptions is magma,
molten rock that usually contains some solid crystalline
material and varying amounts of dissolved gas. Erupted
magma is called lava. The primary factors that affect the
behavior of magma are its temperature and composition
and, to a lesser extent, the amount of dissolved gases it
contains. To varying degrees, these factors determine
a magma’s mobility, or viscosity (viscos = sticky). The
more viscous the material, the greater its resistance to
flow. For example, syrup is more viscous, and thus more
resistant to flow, than water.

Temperature The effect of temperature on viscosity is
easily seen. Just as heating syrup makes it more fluid (less

viscous), temperature also strongly influences the mobility of lava. As lava cools and begins to congeal, its viscosity increases, and eventually the flow halts.

Composition Another significant factor influencing volcanic behavior is the chemical composition of the magma.
Recall that a major difference among various igneous
rocks is their silica (SiO2) content (Table 5.1). Magmas
that produce mafic rocks such as basalt contain about

143

5.1 The Nature of Volcanic Eruptions
TABLE 5.1 Different Compositions of Magmas Cause Properties to Vary
Composition

Silica Content

Gas Content

Eruptive
Temperatures

Viscosity

Tendency to Form
Pyroclastics

Basaltic (mafic)

Least (~50%)

Least (1–2%)

1000–1250°C

Least

Least

Andesitic (intermediate)

Intermediate (~60%)

Intermediate (3–4%)

800–1050°C

Intermediate

Intermediate

Composite cones

Rhyolitic (felsic)

Most (~70%)

Most (4–6%)

650–900°C

Greatest

Greatest

Pyroclastic flow deposits, lava domes

50 percent silica, whereas magmas that produce felsic
rocks (granite and its extrusive equivalent, rhyolite)
contain more than 70 percent silica. Intermediate rock
types—andesite and diorite—contain about 60 percent
silica. A magma’s viscosity is directly related to its silica
content: The more silica in magma, the greater its viscosity. Silica impedes the flow of magma because silicate
structures begin to link together into long chains early in
the crystallization process.
Consequently, felsic (rhyolitic) lavas are very viscous
and tend to form comparatively short, thick flows. By
contrast, mafic (basaltic) lavas, which contain less silica,
are relatively fluid and have been known to travel
300 kilometers (180 miles) or more before congealing.

Dissolved Gases The gaseous components in magma,
mainly dissolved water vapor, also affect the mobility of
magma. Other factors being equal, water vapor dissolved
in magma tends to increase fluidity because it reduces
formation of long silicate chains by breaking silicon–oxygen bonds. It follows, therefore, that the loss of gases renders magma (lava) more viscous. Gases also give magmas
their explosive character.

Quiescent Versus Explosive Eruptions
You learned in Chapter 4 that most magma is generated by partial melting of the rock peridotite in Earth’s
upper mantle, and it tends to have a basaltic composition.
Newly formed basaltic magma, which is less dense than
the surrounding rock, slowly rises toward the surface. In
some settings, high-temperature basaltic magmas reach
Earth’s surface, where they produce highly fluid lavas.
This most commonly occurs on the ocean floor, in association with seafloor spreading. In continental settings,
however, the density of crustal rocks is less than that of
the ascending material, causing the magma to pond at
the crust–mantle boundary. Heat from the hot magma
is often sufficient to partially melt the overlying crustal
rocks, generating a less-dense, silica-rich magma, which
then continues the journey toward Earth’s surface.

Quiescent Hawaiian-Type Eruptions Eruptions that
involve very fluid basaltic lavas, such as the eruptions of
Kilauea on Hawaii’s Big Island, are often triggered by the
arrival of a new batch of molten rock rising into a near-surface magma chamber. Geologists can often detect such an
event because the summit of the volcano begins to inflate

Volcanic Landform
Shield volcanoes, basalt plateaus,
cinder cones

and rise months or even years before an eruption. The
injection of a fresh supply of hot molten rock heats and
remobilizes the semi-liquid magma chamber. In addition,
swelling of the magma chamber fractures the rock above,
allowing the fluid magma to move upward along the newly
formed openings, often generating outpourings of lava for
weeks, months, or possibly years. The eruption of Kilauea
that began in 1983 has been ongoing ever since.

Triggering Explosive Eruptions All magmas contain
some water vapor and other gases that are kept in solution by the immense pressure of the overlying rock. As
magma rises (or the rocks confining the magma fail), the
confining pressure drops, causing the dissolved gases
to separate from the melt and form large numbers of
tiny bubbles. This is analogous to opening a can of soda,
where the carbon dioxide dissolved in the soda quickly
forms bubbles that rise and escape.
When fluid basaltic magmas erupt, the pressurized
gases readily escape. At temperatures that often exceed
1100°C (2000°F), these gases can quickly expand to
occupy hundreds of times their original volumes. Occasionally, these expanding gases propel incandescent lava
hundreds of meters into the air, producing lava fountains
(Figure 5.2). Although spectacular, these fountains are

Figure 5.2
Lava fountain produced
by gases escaping fluid
basaltic lava Lava erupting from Mount Etna,
Italy. (Photo by D. Szczepanski
terras/AGE Fotostock)

Gases readily escape hot fluid basaltic flows, producing lava
fountains. Although often spectacular, these features generally do
not cause great loss of life or property.

144

Volcanoes and Volcanic Hazards

CHAPTER 5

SmartFigure 5.3
Eruption column generated
by viscous, silica-rich
magma Steam and
ash eruption column
from Mount Sinabung,
Indonesia, February 7,
2014. A deadly cloud
of fiery ash can be seen
racing down the volcanoes
slope in the foreground.
_TT16


usually harmless and generally not associated with major
explosive events that cause great loss of life and property.
At the other extreme, highly viscous magmas expel
fragmented lava at nearly supersonic speeds, creating
buoyant plumes consisting mainly of volcanic ash and
gases called eruption columns. Eruption columns can
rise perhaps 40 kilometers (25 miles) into the atmosphere. Therefore, volcanoes associated with highly viscous magmas are the most destructive to property and
human life (Figure 5.3).
Because silica-rich magmas are sticky (viscous), a
significant portion of the gaseous materials remain dissolved until the magma nears Earth’s surface, at which
time tiny bubbles begin to form and grow. When the
pressure exerted by the expanding magma body exceeds
the strength of the overlying rock, fracturing occurs. As
magma moves up the fractures, a further drop in confining pressure causes even more gas bubbles to form
and grow. This chain reaction may generate an explosive
event in which magma is literally blown into fragments
(ash and pumice) that are carried to great heights by the
hot gases. As exemplified by the 1980 eruption of Mount
St. Helens, the collapse of a volcano’s flank can greatly
reduce the pressure on the magma below, triggering an
explosive eruption (see GEOgraphics 5.1).

(Photo by REUTERS/Beawiharta)
(https://goo.gl/Gd11FL)

Eruptions of highly viscous
lavas may produce explosive
clouds of hot ash and gases
called eruption columns.

When magma in the uppermost portion of the magma
chamber is forcefully ejected by the escaping gases, the
confining pressure on the molten rock directly below also
drops suddenly. Thus, rather than a single “bang,” volcanic
eruptions are really a series of explosions that can last for
days. Following explosive eruptions, degassed lava may
slowly ooze out of the vent to form rhyolitic flows or domeshaped lava bodies that grow over the vent.

5.1

Concept Checks

1. Define viscosity and list three factors that
influence the viscosity of magma.
2. List these three magmas in order, from the most
silica-rich to the least silica-rich, based on their
composition: basaltic magma, rhyolitic magma,
andesitic magma.
3. What type of magma must erupt to produce an
eruption column?
4. Are volcanoes fed by highly viscous magma more
likely or less likely to be a greater threat to life and
property than volcanoes supplied with very fluid
magma?

145

5.2 Materials Extruded During an Eruption

5.2

Materials Extruded During an Eruption
List and describe the three categories of materials extruded during volcanic
eruptions.

Volcanoes erupt lava, large volumes of gas, and pyroclastic materials (broken rock, lava “bombs,”
and ash). In this section we will examine each of these materials.

Lava Flows
The vast majority of lava on Earth—more than 90 percent of the total volume—is estimated to be basaltic
(mafic) in composition. Andesitic lavas and other lavas of
intermediate composition account for most of the rest,
while rhyolitic (felsic) flows make up as little as 1 percent
of the total.
Hot basaltic lavas, which are usually very fluid, generally flow in thin, broad sheets or streamlike ribbons.
On the island of Hawaii, these lavas have been clocked at
30 kilometers (19 miles) per hour down steep slopes.
However, flow rates of 10 to 300 meters (30 to 1000 feet)
per hour are more common. By contrast, the movement
of silica-rich rhyolitic lava may be too slow to perceive.
Furthermore, most rhyolitic lavas seldom travel more
than a few kilometers from their vents. As you might
expect, andesitic lavas, which are intermediate in composition, exhibit flow characteristics between these
extremes.

Aa and Pahoehoe Flows
Fluid basaltic magmas tend to generate two types of
lava flows known by Hawaiian names. The first, called
aa (pronounced “ah-ah”) flows, have surfaces of rough
jagged blocks with dangerously sharp edges and spiny
projections (Figure 5.4A). Crossing a hardened aa flow can

be a trying and miserable experience. The second type,
pahoehoe (pronounced “pah-hoy-hoy”) flows, exhibit
smooth surfaces that sometimes resemble twisted braids
of ropes (Figure 5.4B). Pahoehoe means “on which one can
walk.”
Although both lava types can erupt from the same
volcano, pahoehoe lavas are hotter and more fluid than
aa flows. In addition, pahoehoe lavas can change into aa
lava flows, although the reverse (aa to pahoehoe) does not
occur.
Cooling that occurs as the flow moves away from
the vent is one factor that facilitates the change from
pahoehoe to aa. The lower temperature increases viscosity and promotes bubble formation. Escaping gas bubbles
produce numerous voids (vesicles) and sharp spines in
the surface of the congealing lava. As the molten interior
advances, the outer crust is broken, transforming a relatively smooth surface of a pahoehoe flow into an aa flow
made up of an advancing mass of rough, sharp, broken
lava blocks.
Pahoehoe flows often develop cave-like tunnels
called lava tubes that were previously conduits for carrying lava from an active vent to the flow’s leading edge
(Figure 5.5). Lava tubes form in the interior of a lava
flow, where the temperature remains high long after the
exposed surface cools and hardens. Because they serve
as insulated pathways that facilitate the advance of lava

Figure 5.4
Lava flows A. A slowmoving, basaltic aa flow
advancing over hardened
pahoehoe lava. B. A typical
fluid pahoehoe (ropy) lava.
Both of these lava flows
erupted from a rift on the
flank of Hawaii’s Kilauea
volcano. (Photos courtesy of
U.S. Geological Survey)

A. Active aa flow overriding an older pahoehoe flow.

B. Pahoehoe flow displaying the characteristic ropy appearance.

Aa flow

Pahoehoe flow

GEO GRAPHICS 5.1

Eruption of
Mount St. Helens

On Sunday, May 18, 1980, the most destructive
volcanic eruption to occur in North America in
recorded history transformed a picturesque
volcano into a decapitated remnant. Despite the
fact that most residents of the area heeded evacuation warnings the event claimed 57 human lives.

Sears (Willis) Tower
1450 feet

1350 feet

Spirit Lake

USGS

The blast blew out the entire north flank of Mount St.
Helen’s, leaving a gaping hole. In a brief moment, a
prominent volcano was lowered by 1350 feet.

Spirit Lake

USGS

The initial eruption devastated 400 square kilometers of
timber-rich land. Trees lay flattened and intertwined, stripped
of their branches, and looking like toothpicks strewn about.
(Inset image by John Burnley/Photo Researchers, Inc.)

Volcanologist David Johnston, monitoring the volcano from 6 miles
away on the morning of May 18, 1980, transmitted the message
“Vancouver! Vancouver! This is it!” before being killed by the blast.
In commemoration, the USGS office in Vancouver, Washington, was
renamed the David A. Johnston Cascades Volcano Observatory.

2

USGS

USGS

Mount St. Helens May 18, 1980
Ash Fallout Distribution within the U.S.
Ritzville
Spokane

s
Mount
St. Helens
Yakima

During the days following the
historic eruption, fine volcanic
ash was carried around Earth by
strong upper-air winds.

2 to 5 inches
1/2 to 2 inches
Trace to 1/2 inch

USGS

1

Accumulation of magma over several
months caused a large bulge to form
on the volcano’s north flank.

Mt. St. Helens
Eruption Stages

3

2

An earthquake caused the
collapse of the north flank of
the volcano, which triggered a
lateral blast that destroyed a
400 square-kilometer area.

Within seconds of the lateral blast,
an enormous vertical eruption sent a
column of volcanic ash to an altitude
of 18 kilometers (11 miles).

Question:
Briefly describe the sequence of events that culminated
in the May 18, 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens.

148

CHAPTER 5

Volcanoes and Volcanic Hazards

A. Lava tubes are cave-like tunnels that once served as conduits carrying
lava from an active vent to the flow’s leading edge.

B. Skylights develop where the roofs of lava tubes collapse and reveal the
hot lava flowing through the tube.

Figure 5.5

Valentine Cave, a lava tube at Lava
Beds National Monument, California.

Lava tubes A. A lava flow may develop a solid upper crust, while the
molten lava below continues to advance in a conduit called a lava tube.
Some lava tubes exhibit extraordinary dimensions. Kazumura Cave,
located on the southeastern slope of Hawaii’s Mauna Loa volcano, is a lava
tube extending more than 60 kilometers (40 miles). (Photo by Dave Bunell) B.
The collapsed section of the roof of a lava tunnel results in a skylight. (Photo
courtesy of U.S. Geological Survey)

great distances from its source, lava tubes are important
features of fluid lava flows.

Pillow Lavas Recall that much of Earth’s volcanic out-

Figure 5.6

put occurs along oceanic ridges (divergent plate boundaries). When outpourings of lava occur on the ocean
floor, the flow’s outer skin quickly freezes (solidifies) to
form basaltic glass. However, the interior lava is able to
move forward by breaking through the hardened surface. This process occurs over and over, as molten basalt
is extruded—like toothpaste from a tightly squeezed
tube. The result is a lava flow composed of numerous
tube-like structures called pillow lavas, stacked one
atop the other (Figure 5.6). Pillow lavas are useful when
reconstructing geologic history because their presence
indicates that the lava flow formed below the surface of a
water body.

Pillow lava Pillow lava that
formed off the coast of
Hawaii. (Photo courtesy of U.S.

Gases

Block Lavas
In contrast to fluid basaltic magmas that can travel many
kilometers, viscous andesitic and rhyolitic magmas tend
to generate relatively short prominent flows—a few hundred meters to a few kilometers long. Their upper surface
consists largely of massive, detached blocks—hence the
name block lava. Although similar to aa flows, these
lavas consist of blocks with slightly curved, smooth surfaces rather than the rough, sharp, spiny surfaces typical
of aa flows.

Geological Survey)

Pillow lavas form on the
ocean floor and have
elongated shapes,
resembling toothpaste
coming out of a tube.

Magmas contain varying amounts of dissolved gases,
called volatiles, held in the molten rock by confining pressure, just as carbon dioxide is held in cans and
bottles of soft drinks. As with soft drinks, as soon as
the pressure is reduced, the gases begin
to escape. Obtaining gas samples from an
erupting volcano is difficult and dangerous, so geologists usually must estimate
the amount of gas originally contained in
the magma.
The gaseous portion of most magmas
makes up 1 to 6 percent of the total weight,
with most of this in the form of water vapor.
Although the percentage may be small, the
actual quantity of emitted gas can exceed
thousands of tons per day. Occasionally,
USGS
eruptions emit colossal amounts of volcanic

149

5.2 Materials Extruded During an Eruption

gases that rise high into the
atmosphere, where they may
reside for several years. Some
of these eruptions may have
an impact on Earth’s climate,
a topic we consider later in
this chapter.
The composition of
volcanic gases is important
because these gases contribute significantly to our planet’s atmosphere. Analyses of
samples taken during Hawaiian eruptions indicate that
the gas component is about
70 percent water vapor, 15
percent carbon dioxide, 5 percent nitrogen, and 5 percent
sulfur dioxide, with lesser
amounts of chlorine, hydrogen, and argon. (The relative proportion of each gas
varies significantly from one
volcanic region to another.)
Sulfur compounds are easily
recognized by their pungent
odor. Volcanoes are also natural sources of air pollution;
some emit large quantities of
sulfur dioxide (SO2), which
readily combines with atmospheric gases to form toxic
sulfuric acid and other sulfate
compounds.

Pyroclastic
Materials

Figure 5.7
Types of pyroclastic
materials Pyroclastic materials are also commonly
referred to as tephra.

Pyroclastic Materials (Tephra)
Particle name

Particle size

Volcanic
Ash*

Less than 2 mm
(0.08 inch)

Image

USGS

Lapilli
(Cinders)

Between 2 mm
and 64 mm
(0.08–2.5 inches)

Dennis Tasa

Volcanic
Bombs

0

More than 64 mm
(2.5 inches)

Dennis Tasa

0

30 mm
1 in.

Volcanic

Blocks
When volcanoes erupt energetically, they eject pulverized rock, lava, and glass
fragments from the vent.
USGS
The particles produced are
called pyroclastic mate*The term volcanic dust is used for fine volcanic ash less than 0.063 mm (0.0025 inch).
rials (pyro = fire, clast =
fragment) and are also referred to as tephra. These
called welded tuff. Sheets of this material, as well as ash
fragments range in size from very fine dust and sanddeposits that later consolidate, cover vast portions of the
sized volcanic ash (less than 2 millimeters) to pieces
western United States.
that weigh several tons (Figure 5.7).
Somewhat larger pyroclasts that range in size from
Ash and dust particles are produced when gas-rich
small beads to walnuts are known as lapilli (“little
viscous magma erupts explosively. As magma moves
stones”). These ejecta are commonly called cinders
up in the vent, the gases rapidly expand, generating a
(2–64 millimeters [0.08–2.5 inches]). Particles larger
melt that resembles the froth that flows from a bottle
than 64 millimeters (2.5 inches) in diameter are
of champagne. As the hot gases expand explosively, the
called blocks when they are made of hardened lava
froth is blown into very fine glassy fragments. When the
and bombs when they are ejected as incandescent
hot ash falls, the glassy shards often fuse to form a rock
lava (see Figure 5.7). Because bombs are semi-molten

150

CHAPTER 5

Volcanoes and Volcanic Hazards

Figure 5.8

from the vent during an eruption of the Japanese
volcano Asama.
So far we have distinguished various pyroclastic
materials based largely on the sizes of the fragments.
Some materials are also identified by their texture
and composition. In particular, scoria is the name
applied to vesicular ejecta produced from basaltic
magma (Figure 5.8A). These black to reddish-brown
fragments are generally found in the size range of
lapilli and resemble cinders and clinkers produced by
furnaces used to smelt iron. When magmas with intermediate (andesitic) or felsic (rhyolitic) compositions
erupt explosively, they emit ash and the vesicular
rock pumice (Figure 5.8B). Pumice is usually lighter
in color and less dense than scoria, and many
pumice fragments have so many vesicles that
they are light enough to float.

A. Scoria is a vesicular rock
commonly having a basaltic
or andesitic composition.
Pea-to-basketball size
scoria fragments make up a
large portion of most cinder
cones (also called scoria
cones).

Common vesicular
rocks Scoria and pumice
are volcanic rocks that
exhibit a vesicular texture.
Vesicles are small holes left
by escaping gas bubbles.
(Photos by E. J. Tarbuck)

B. Pumice is a low
density vesicular rock
that forms during
explosive eruptions of
viscous magma having
an andesitic to rhyolitic
composition.

upon ejection, they often take on a streamlined shape
as they hurtle through the air. Because of their size,
bombs and blocks usually fall near the vent; however,
they are occasionally propelled great distances. For
instance, bombs 6 meters (20 feet) long and weighing about 200 tons were blown 600 meters (2000 feet)

5.3

5.2

Concept Checks

1. Contrast pahoehoe and aa lava flows.
2. How do lava tubes form?
3. List the main gases released during a volcanic
eruption. What role do gases play in eruptions?
4. How do volcanic bombs differ from blocks of
pyroclastic debris?
5. What is scoria? How is scoria different from
pumice?

Anatomy of a Volcano
Label a diagram that illustrates the basic features of a typical volcanic cone.

The popular image of a volcano is a solitary, graceful, snowcapped cone, such as Mount Hood in
Oregon or Japan’s Fujiyama. These picturesque, conical mountains are produced by volcanic activity that occurred intermittently over thousands, or even hundreds of thousands, of years. However,
many volcanoes do not fit this image. Cinder cones are quite small and form during a single eruptive phase that lasts a few days to a few years. Alaska’s Valley of Ten Thousand Smokes is a flattopped ash deposit that blanketed a river valley to a depth of 200 meters (650 feet). This event
lasted less than 60 hours yet emitted more than 20 times the volcanic material of the 1980 Mount
St. Helens eruption.
Volcanic landforms come in a wide variety of shapes
and sizes, and each volcano has a unique eruptive
history. Nevertheless, volcanologists have been able
to classify volcanic landforms and determine their
eruptive patterns. In this section we will consider the
general anatomy of an idealized volcanic cone. We will
follow this discussion by exploring the three major
types of volcanic cones—shield volcanoes, cinder

cones, and composite volcanoes—as well as their associated hazards.
Volcanic activity frequently begins when a fissure
(crack) develops in Earth’s crust as magma moves forcefully toward the surface. As the gas-rich magma moves
up through a fissure, its path is usually localized into
a somewhat circular conduit that terminates at a surface opening called a vent (Figure 5.9). The cone-shaped

151
structure we call a volcanic cone is often created by
successive eruptions of lava, pyroclastic material,
Bombs
or frequently a combination of both, often separated by long periods of inactivity.
Located at the summit of most volcanic cones
is a somewhat funnel-shaped depression, called a crater (crater = a bowl). Volcanoes built primarily
of pyroclastic materials typically have craters
Lava
that form by gradual accumulation of volcanic
debris on the surrounding rim. Other craters
form during explosive eruptions, as the
rapidly ejected particles erode
the crater walls. Craters also
form when the summit area
of a volcano collapses following an eruption. Some volcanoes have very large circular
depressions, called calderas,
that have diameters greater
than 1 kilometer (0.6 mile)
and in rare cases can exceed
50 kilometers (30 miles). The
formation of various types of
calderas will be considered
later in this chapter.
During early stages of
growth, most volcanic discharges
come from a central summit vent. As a volcano matures, material also tends to be emitted
from fissures that develop along the flanks (sides) or
at the base of the volcano. Continued activity from a flank
eruption may produce one or more small parasitic cones
(parasitus = one who eats at the table of another). Italy’s
Mount Etna, for example, has more than 200 secondary
vents, some of which have built parasitic cones. Many of
these vents, however, emit only gases and are appropriately
called fumaroles (fumus = smoke).

5.4

SmartFigure 5.9
Anatomy of a volcano
Compare the structure of a
“typical” composite cone
to that of a shield volcano
(Figure 5.10) and a cinder
cone (Figure 5.13).

Vent

(https://goo.gl/Nl9iNq)

Crater

Parasitic
cone

Pyroclastic
material

Conduit

Magma
chamber

5.3

Concept Checks

1. Distinguish among a conduit, a vent, and a crater.
2. How is a crater different from a caldera?
3. What is a parasitic cone, and where does it form?
4. What is emitted from a fumarole?

Shield Volcanoes
Summarize the characteristics of shield volcanoes and provide one example.

A shield volcano is produced by the accumulation of fluid basaltic lavas and exhibits the shape of a
broad, slightly domed structure that resembles a warrior’s shield (Figure 5.10). Most shield volcanoes
begin on the ocean floor as seamounts (submarine volcanoes), a few of which grow large enough to
form volcanic islands. In fact, many small- to modest-sized oceanic islands are either a single shield
volcano or, more often, the coalescence of two or more shields built on massive amounts of pillow
lavas. Examples include the Hawaiian Islands, the Canary Islands, Iceland, the Galapagos Islands,
and Easter Island. Although less common, some shield volcanoes form on continental crust. Included
in this group are Nyamuragira, Africa’s most active volcano, and Newberry volcano in Oregon.

Shield Volcanoes of Hawaii
Extensive study of the Hawaiian Islands has revealed
that they are constructed of a myriad of thin basaltic
lava flows averaging a few meters thick intermixed with

relatively minor amounts of ejected pyroclastic material.
Mauna Loa is the largest of five overlapping shield volcanoes that comprise the Big Island of Hawaii (see Figure
5.10). From its base on the floor of the Pacific Ocean

152

CHAPTER 5

Volcanoes and Volcanic Hazards

Figure 5.10
Volcanoes of Hawaii
Mauna Loa, Earth’s
largest volcano, is one
of five shield volcanoes
that collectively make up
the Big Island of Hawaii.
Shield volcanoes are
built primarily of fluid
basaltic lava flows and
contain only a small
percentage of pyroclastic materials.

Mauna Loa

Kohala
Mauna Kea
Hualalai

HAWAII

Mauna Loa
Kilauea

Greg Vaughn/Alamy

Flank eruption

Fluid lava flow

Summit caldera

Shallow
magma chamber

SmartFigure 5.11
Comparing scales of
different types of volcanoes
A. Profile of Mauna
Loa, Hawaii, the largest
shield volcano in the
Hawaiian chain. Note size
comparison with Mount
Rainier, Washington, a
large composite cone.
B. Profile of Mount Rainier,
Washington. Note how it
dwarfs a typical cinder
cone. C. Profile of Sunset
Crater, Arizona, a typical
steep-sided cinder cone.
(http://goo.gl/VXEa4X)

Shield volcano
Mauna Loa, Hawaii
NE-SW profile

to its summit, Mauna Loa is over 9 kilometers (6 miles)
high, exceeding the elevation of Mount Everest. The
volume of material composing Mauna Loa is roughly 200
times greater than that of a large composite cone such as
Mount Rainier (Figure 5.11).
As with Hawaii’s other shield volcanoes, the flanks of
Mauna Loa have gentle slopes of only a few degrees. This
low angle is due to the very hot, fluid lava that traveled
“fast and far” from the vent. In addition, most of the lava
(perhaps 80 percent) flowed through a well-developed
system of lava tubes. Another feature common to active
shield volcanoes is one or more large, steep-walled calderas that occupy the summit (see Figure 5.22, page 164).
Calderas on shield volcanoes usually form when the roof
above the magma chamber collapses. This occurs after
the magma reservoir empties, either following a large
eruption or as magma migrates to the flank of a volcano
to feed a fissure eruption.

In their final stage of growth, shield volcanoes
erupt more sporadically, and pyroclastic ejections are
more common. The lava emitted later tends to be more
viscous, resulting in thicker, shorter flows. These eruptions steepen the slope of the summit area, which often
becomes capped with clusters of cinder cones. This
explains why Mauna Kea, a more mature volcano that has
not erupted in historic times, has a steeper summit than
Mauna Loa, which erupted as recently as 1984. Astronomers are so certain that Mauna Kea is “over the hill” that
they built an elaborate astronomical observatory on its
summit to house some of the world’s most advanced and
expensive telescopes.
The zone of greatest volcanic activity on Hawaii
began in what is presently the northwestern flanks
of the island and has gradually migrated in a southeasterly direction. Its current location is Kilauea
volcano, one of the most active and intensely studied

Caldera
Sea level

A.

0
Crater

B.

Composite cone
Mt. Rainier, Washington
NW-SE profile

Crater
C.

Cinder cone
Sunset Crater, Arizona
N-S profile

4 km

10

20 km

5.5 Cinder Cones

shield volcanoes in the world. Kilauea,
located in the shadow of Mauna Loa,
has experienced more than 50 eruptions
since record keeping began in 1823.
Several months before each eruptive
phase, Kilauea inflates as magma gradually migrates upward and accumulates
in a central reservoir located a few kilometers below the summit. For up to 24
hours before an eruption, swarms of small
earthquakes warn of the impending activity. Most of the recent activity on Kilauea
has occurred along the flanks of the volcano, in a region called the East Rift Zone
(Figure 5.12). The longest and largest rift
eruption ever recorded on Kilauea began
in 1983 and continues to this day, with no
signs of abating (see GEOgraphics 5.2).

Evolution of Volcanic Islands
Although the shield volcanoes of Hawaii are commonly
regarded as “typical” shield volcanoes, other ocean island
volcanoes exhibit significant differences. The basaltic
shields that comprise the Canary Islands, for example,
have been active for as long as 20 million years, compared to most Hawaiian volcanoes that tend to have life
spans of about 1 million years. Further, Canary Islands
volcanoes tend to eject more pyroclastic material than do
Hawaiian eruptions.
Despite their differences, most large oceanic
shields have similar origins. They form above a
long-lived, rising plume of hot mantle rock, called a
mantle plume, described in more detail in Section
5.9. As the hot plume ascends through the mantle, the
confining pressure drops, triggering partial melting
and basaltic magma. This partial melting results in
volcanic activity on the ocean floor, producing piles of
pillow lavas that evolve into seamounts. Eventually, a
few of these structures grow large enough to emerge
as volcanic islands.

5.5

SmartFigure 5.12
A lava flow from Kilauea
volcano advances toward
the village of Pahoa, Hawaii,
October 28, 2014. (Photo by
Andrew Hara/Getty Images)
(http://goo.gl/UHGrvC)

Volcanic islands continue to grow as long as they
are located over a mantle plume, which provides them
with a magma source. However, as the lithospheric
plate moves away from the zone of melting, volcanic
activity ceases. As the lithosphere cools and contracts,
the overlying island gradually subsides. Most of the
smallest volcanic islands ultimately sink below sea level
as plate motion carries them further from the magma
source.

5.4

Concept Checks

1. Describe the composition and viscosity of the
lava associated with shield volcanoes.
2. Are pyroclastic materials a significant component
of shield volcanoes?
3. Where do most shield volcanoes form—on the
ocean floor or on the continents?
4. Where are the best-known shield volcanoes in
the United States? Name some examples in other
parts of the world.

Cinder Cones
Describe the formation, size, and composition of cinder cones.

As the name suggests, cinder cones (also called scoria cones) are built from ejected lava fragments that begin to harden in flight to produce the vesicular rock scoria (Figure 5.13). These pyroclastic fragments range in size from fine ash to bombs that may exceed 1 meter (3 feet) in diameter.
However, most of the volume of a cinder cone consists of pea- to walnut-sized fragments that are
markedly vesicular and have a black to reddish-brown color. In addition, this pyroclastic material
tends to have basaltic composition.

153

GEO GRAPHICS 5.2

Kilauea’s East Rift Zone
Eruption
Kilauea, one of the most active volcanoes in the world, is located on
the island of Hawaii in the shadow of Mauna Loa. Most of the recent
activity on Kilauea has occurred along the flanks of the volcano in a
region called the East Rift Zone. The longest and largest eruption ever
recorded on Kilauea began in 1983, and continues with no signs of
abating.

1

Kilauea’s most recent
eruptive phase began
along a 6-kilometer ( 4
mile) fissure where a
100-meter (300-foot) high
“curtain of fire” formed
as red-hot basaltic lava
was ejected skyward.

Greg Vaughn/Alamy

One of many fluid
pahoehoe flows that have
moved down the flanks of
Kilauea since 1983.

3

2

The activity became
localized at a single vent
and a series of 44
short-lived episodes of
lava fountaining built a
cinder and spatter
cone—given the
Hawaiian name Puu Oo.
Michael Collier

By the summer of 1986 a
new vent opened along
the rift. Pahoehoe lava
flowing from this vent cut
off the coastal highway
and destroyed more than
180 structures including
the National Park Visitor
Center.

David Reggie/ Getty Images

4

USGS

1983 to Present

ERUPTION SUMMARY
Pahoa

2014–2015

Kilauea summit
caldera

11

Halemaumau
Crater

Ea

st

t
rif

zon

e

1986-1992

Puu Oo
N

Royal
Gardens

0

1

2
3

3

The most recent eruption of Kilauea began on
January 3, 1983 as a fissure eruption along
the East Rift Zone in an area southeast of the
summit caldera. These lava fountains quickly
built a cinder-and-spatter cone called Puu Oo
that produced abundant lava that flowed
down the volcano’s slope toward the sea.

130

Kupaianaha

0

1983-1986

In 1986 the eruption shifted eastward to new
vent that built a small shield volcano called
Kupainanaha. Lava tubes fed flows that
extended about 12 kilometers (7 miles) to the
sea. These flows buried most of the homes in
the village of Kalapana under 15-25 meters
(50-80 feet) of lava. It also destroyed a
section of the Chain of Craters Road, buried
Royal Gardens subdivision, and engulfed the
famous Black Sand Beach at Kaimu.

Kalapana

Pacific
Ocean

4 miles
6 kilometers

1983–1986
1986–1992

1992-2012

2007–2011

Royal
Gardens
N

1992–2007

Kalapana

Volcanic activity returned to the flanks of Puu
Oo in 1992 when lava flowed nearly continuously to the ocean. By 2011, the eruption
had added over 500 acres of land to the
island, destroyed over 200 structures and
buried 14 kilometers (9 miles) of the only
major highway through that part of the island.
2014-2015
Kilauea volcano continues its activity in two
locations. An eruption that began in 2008 in
Halemaumau crater, which resides within the
summit caldera, remains active. At night, the
molten lava lake churns energetically and
appears to be spewing fire. Lava continues to
flow from the flanks of Puu Oo. The most
recent flow began on June 27, 2014 and is
slowly advancing toward the town of Pahoa
and has the potential to engulf both the town
and Highway 130.

At night Halemaumau crater, continues
to thrill visitors with the vivid glow that
illuminates the plume of gases rising
from its molten churning lava lake.

USGS

Question:
What is the name of the area on Kilauea
where the 1983 eruption began?

156

CHAPTER 5

Volcanoes and Volcanic Hazards

SmartFigure 5.13
Cinder cones Cinder cones are built from
ejected lava fragments (mostly cinders and
bombs) and are relatively small—usually less
than 300 meters (1000 feet)—in height.

Lava flow

(http://goo.gl/hM5KVK)

Crater
Pyroclastic
material

Michael Collier

SP Crater is a classic
cinder cone located north
of Flagstaff, Arizona.

Although cinder cones are composed mostly of loose scoria fragments, some produce extensive lava fields. These
lava flows generally form in the final stages of the volcano’s life span, when the magma body has lost most of its
gas content. Because cinder cones are composed of loose
fragments rather than solid rock, the lava usually flows
out from the unconsolidated base of the cone rather than
from the crater.
A cinder cone has a very simple, distinct shape that
is determined by the slope the loose pyroclastic material maintains as it comes to rest (Figure 5.13). Because
cinders have a high angle of repose (the steepest angle
at which material remains stable), cinder cones are
steep-sided, having slopes between 30 and 40 degrees.
In addition, a cinder cone has quite a large, deep crater
in relation to the overall size of the structure. Although
relatively symmetrical, some cinder cones are elongated
and higher on the side that was downwind during the
final eruptive phase.
Most cinder cones are produced by a single, shortlived eruptive event. One study found that half of all
cinder cones examined were constructed in less than
1 month, and 95 percent formed in less than 1 year.
Once the event ceases, the magma in the “plumbing”
connecting the vent to the magma source solidifies, and
the volcano usually does not erupt again. (One exception
is Cerro Negro, a cinder cone in Nicaragua, which has
erupted more than 20 times since it formed in 1850.) As
a consequence of this typically short life span, cinder
cones are small, usually between 30 and 300 meters
(100 and 1000 feet) tall. A few rare examples exceed
700 meters (2300 feet) in height.
Cinder cones number in the thousands around
the globe. Some occur in groups, such as the volcanic
field near Flagstaff, Arizona, which consists of about

Central vent filled
with rock fragments

600 cones. Others are parasitic cones that are found
on the flanks or within the calderas of larger volcanic
structures.

Parícutin: Life of a Garden-Variety
Cinder Cone
One of the very few volcanoes studied by geologists
from its very beginning is a cinder cone called Parícutin, located about 320 kilometers (200 miles) west
of Mexico City. In 1943, its eruptive phase began in
a cornfield owned by Dionisio Pulido, who witnessed
the event.
For 2 weeks prior to the first eruption, numerous
tremors caused apprehension in the nearby village of
Parícutin. Then, on February 20, sulfurous gases began
billowing from a small depression that had been in the
cornfield for as long as local residents could remember.
During the night, hot, glowing rock fragments were
ejected from the vent, producing a spectacular fireworks display. Explosive discharges continued, throwing hot fragments and ash occasionally as high as 6000
meters (20,000 feet) into the air. Larger fragments fell
near the crater, some remaining incandescent as they
rolled down the slope. These built an aesthetically
pleasing cone, while finer ash fell over a much larger
area, burning and eventually covering the village of
Parícutin. In the first day, the cone grew to 40 meters
(130 feet), and by the fifth day it was more than 100
meters (330 feet) high.
The first lava flow came from a fissure that
opened just north of the cone, but after a few months,
flows began to emerge from the base of the cone. In
June 1944, a clinkery aa flow 10 meters (30 feet) thick

157

5.6 Composite Volcanoes

SmartFigure 5.14

Parícutin, a cinder cone located in Mexico, erupted for nine years.

Parícutin, a wellknown cinder cone
The village of San Juan
Parangaricutiro was engulfed by aa lava from
Parícutin. The church
steeple remains. (Photos
An aa flow emanating from the base of
the cone buried much of the village of
San Juan Parangaricutiro, leaving only
remnants of the village’s church.

moved over much of the village of San Juan Parangaricutiro, leaving only the church steeple exposed (Figure
5.14). After 9 years of intermittent pyroclastic explosions and nearly continuous discharge of lava from
vents at its base, the activity ceased almost as quickly
as it had begun. Today, Parícutin is just another one
of the scores of cinder cones dotting the landscape in
this region of Mexico. Like the others, it will not erupt
again.

5.6

5.5

Concept Checks

1. Describe the composition of a cinder cone.
2. How do cinder cones compare to shield
volcanoes in terms of size and steepness of their
flanks?
3. Over what time span does a typical cinder cone
form?

Composite Volcanoes
List the characteristics of composite volcanoes and describe how they form.

Earth’s most picturesque yet potentially dangerous volcanoes are composite volcanoes, also
known as stratovolcanoes. Most are located in a relatively narrow zone that rims the Pacific
Ocean, appropriately called the Ring of Fire and discussed in detail in Section 5.9 (see Figure 5.29,
page 169). This active zone consists of a chain of continental volcanoes distributed along the west
coast of the Americas, including the large cones of the Andes in South America and the Cascade
Range of the western United States and Canada.
Classic composite cones are large, nearly symmetrical
structures consisting of alternating layers of explosively
erupted cinders and ash interbedded with lava flows. A
few composite cones, notably Italy’s Etna and Stromboli,
display very persistent eruption activity, and molten lava
has been observed in their summit craters for decades.

Stromboli is so well known for eruptions that eject incandescent blobs of lava that it has been called the “Lighthouse of the Mediterranean.” Mount Etna has erupted,
on average, once every 2 years since 1979.
Just as shield volcanoes owe their shape to fluid
basaltic lavas, composite cones reflect the viscous nature

by Michael Collier)
(https://goo.gl/PQuC6A)

158

CHAPTER 5

Volcanoes and Volcanic Hazards

of the material from which they are made. In general,
composite cones are the product of silica-rich magma
having an andesitic composition. However, many composite cones also emit various amounts of fluid basaltic
lava and, occasionally, pyroclastic material having a felsic
(rhyolitic) composition. The silica-rich magmas typical of
composite cones generate thick, viscous lavas that travel
less than a few kilometers. Composite cones are also
noted for generating explosive eruptions that eject huge
quantities of pyroclastic material.
A conical shape with a steep summit area and gradually sloping flanks is typical of most large composite
cones. This classic profile, which adorns calendars and
postcards, is partially a result of the way viscous lavas
and pyroclastic ejected materials contribute to the cone’s
growth. Coarse fragments ejected from the summit crater tend to accumulate near their source and contribute
to the steep slopes around the summit. Finer ejected
materials, on the other hand, are deposited as a thin layer
over a large area that acts to flatten the flank of the cone.
In addition, during the early stages of growth, lavas tend
to be more abundant and flow greater distances from
the vent than they do later in the volcano’s history, which
contributes to the cone’s broad base. As a composite
volcano matures, the shorter flows that come from the
central vent serve to armor and strengthen the summit
area. Consequently, steep slopes exceeding 40 degrees
are possible. Two of the most perfect cones—Mount
Mayon in the Philippines and Fujiyama in Japan—exhibit
Figure 5.15
Mount Fujiyama, a classic composite volcano Japan’s Fujiyama exhibits the classic form of a composite
cone—a steep summit and gently
sloping flanks. (Photo by Koji Nakano/
Getty Images, Inc-Liaison)

the classic form we expect of composite cones, with steep
summits and gently sloping flanks (Figure 5.15).
Despite the symmetrical forms of many composite
cones, most have complex histories. Many composite
volcanoes have secondary vents on their flanks that
have produced cinder cones or even much larger
volcanic structures. Huge mounds of volcanic debris
surrounding these structures provide evidence that
large sections of these volcanoes slid downslope as
massive landslides. Some develop amphitheater-shaped
depressions at their summits as a result of explosive
lateral eruptions—as occurred during the 1980 eruption
of Mount St. Helens. Often, so much rebuilding has
occurred since these eruptions that no trace of these
amphitheater-shaped scars remain. Others, such as
Crater Lake, have been truncated by the collapse of
their summit (see Figure 5.21).

5.6

Concept Checks

1. What name is given to the region having the
greatest concentration of composite volcanoes?
2. Describe the materials that compose composite
volcanoes.
3. How do the composition and viscosity of lava
flows differ between composite volcanoes and
shield volcanoes?

159

5.7 Volcanic Hazards

5.7

Volcanic Hazards
Discuss the major geologic hazards associated with volcanoes.

Roughly 1500 of Earth’s known volcanoes have erupted at least once, and some several times,
in the past 10,000 years. Based on historical records and studies of active volcanoes, 70 volcanic
eruptions can be expected each year, and 1 large-volume eruption is likely to occur every decade.
Large-magnitude eruptions account for the vast majority of human fatalities. For example, the
1902 eruption of Mount Pelée killed 28,000 people—nearly the entire population of the nearby
city of St. Pierre.
Today, an estimated 500 million people from Japan and
Indonesia, and from Italy to Oregon, live near active
volcanoes. They face a number of volcanic hazards, such
as destructive pyroclastic flows, molten lava flows, mudflows called lahars, and falling ash and volcanic bombs.

Pyroclastic Flow: A Deadly Force
of Nature
Some of the most destructive forces of nature are pyroclastic flows, which consist of hot gases infused with
incandescent ash and larger lava fragments. Also referred
to as nuée ardentes (glowing avalanches), these fiery
flows can race down steep volcanic slopes at speeds
exceeding 100 kilometers (60 miles) per hour (Figure 5.16).
Pyroclastic flows have two components: a low-density
cloud of hot expanding gases containing fine ash particles
and a ground-hugging portion composed of pumice and
other vesicular pyroclastic material.

Driven by Gravity Pyroclastic flows are
propelled by the force of gravity and tend
to move in a manner similar to snow avalanches. They are mobilized by expanding
volcanic gases released from the lava fragments and by the expansion of heated air
that is overtaken and trapped in the moving
front. These gases reduce friction between
ash and pumice fragments, which gravity
propels downslope in a nearly frictionless
environment. This is why some pyroclastic
flow deposits are found many miles from
their source.
Occasionally, powerful hot blasts that
carry small amounts of ash separate from
the main body of a pyroclastic flow. These
low-density clouds, called surges, can be
deadly but seldom have sufficient force to
destroy buildings in their paths. Nevertheless, in 2014, a hot ash cloud from Japan’s
Mount Ontake killed 47 hikers and injured
69 more.
Pyroclastic flows may originate in a
variety of volcanic settings. Some occur

when a powerful eruption blasts pyroclastic material out
of the side of a volcano. More frequently, however, pyroclastic flows are generated by the collapse of tall eruption
columns during an explosive event. When gravity eventually overcomes the initial upward thrust provided by the
escaping gases, the ejected materials begin to fall, sending
massive amounts of incandescent blocks, ash, and pumice
cascading downslope.

The Destruction of St. Pierre In 1902, an infamous
pyroclastic flow and associated surge from Mount Pelée,
a small volcano on the Caribbean island of Martinique,
destroyed the port town of St. Pierre. Although the
main pyroclastic flow was largely confined to the valley of Riviere Blanche, a low-density fiery surge spread
south of the river and quickly engulfed the entire city.
The destruction happened in moments and was so devastating that nearly all of St. Pierre’s 28,000 inhabitants
were killed. Only 1 person on the outskirts of town—a

Figure 5.16
Pyroclastic flows Pyroclastic flows are composed of
hot ash and pumice and/
or blocky lava fragments
that race down the slopes
of volcanoes. (Photo by Ulet
Ifansasti/Getty Images)

160

CHAPTER 5

Figure 5.17
Destruction of St.
Pierre A. St. Pierre as it
appeared shortly after the
eruption of Mount Pelée
in 1902. (Reproduced from

Volcanoes and Volcanic Hazards

B. St. Pierre before the 1902 eruption.

A. St. Pierre following the eruption

of Mount Pelée.

the collection of the Library of
Congress) B. St. Pierre before
the eruption. Many vessels
were anchored offshore
when this photo was taken,
as was the case on the day
of the eruption. (Photo by
UPPA/Photoshot)

prisoner protected in a dungeon—and a few people on
ships in the harbor were spared (Figure 5.17).
Scientists arrived on the scene within days and found
that although St. Pierre was mantled by only a thin layer
of volcanic debris, masonry walls nearly 1 meter (3 feet)
thick had been knocked over like dominoes, large trees
had been uprooted, and cannons had been torn from
their mounts.

The Destruction of Pompeii One well-documented
event of historic proportions was the c.e. 79 eruption of
the Italian volcano we now call Mount Vesuvius. For centuries prior to this eruption, Vesuvius had been dormant,
with vineyards adorning its sunny slopes. Yet in less than
24 hours, the entire city of Pompeii (near Naples) and a
few thousand of its residents were entombed beneath a
layer of volcanic ash and pumice. The city and the victims
of the eruption remained buried for nearly 17 centuries.
The excavation of Pompeii gave archaeologists a superb
picture of ancient Roman life (Figure 5.18A).
By reconciling historic records with detailed scientific studies of the region, volcanologists reconstructed

the sequence of
events. During the
first day of the eruption, a rain of ash and
pumice accumulated
at a rate of 12 to 15
centimeters (5 to
6 inches) per hour,
causing most of the
roofs in Pompeii to
eventually give way. Then, suddenly, a surge of
searing hot ash and gas swept rapidly down the
flanks of Vesuvius. This deadly pyroclastic flow
killed those who had somehow managed to survive
the initial ash and pumice fall. Their remains were
quickly buried by falling ash, and subsequent rainfall caused the ash to harden. Over the centuries,
the remains decomposed, creating cavities that were
discovered by nineteenth-century excavators. Casts
were then produced by pouring plaster of Paris into
the voids (Figure 5.18B). Mount Vesuvius has had more
than two dozen explosive eruptions since c.e. 79, the
most recent occurring in 1944. Today, Vesuvius towers
over the Naples skyline, a region occupied by roughly 3
million people. Such an image should prompt us to consider how volcanic crises might be managed in the future.

Lahars: Mudflows on Active
and Inactive Cones
In addition to violent eruptions, large composite cones
may generate a type of fluid mudflow known by its
Indonesian name, lahar. These destructive flows occur
when volcanic debris becomes saturated with water and
rapidly moves down steep volcanic slopes, generally following stream valleys. Some lahars are triggered when
magma nears the surface of a glacially clad volcano,
causing large volumes of ice and snow to melt. Others
are generated when heavy rains saturate weathered
volcanic deposits. Thus, lahars may occur even when a
volcano is not erupting.

Figure 5.18
Eruption of Mount Vesuvius,
AD 79 In less than 24
hours, Pompeii and all of
its residents were buried
under a layer of volcanic
ash and pumice that fell
like rain. Today roughly 3
million people inhabit the
area around this potentially
hazardous volcano.
Olivier Goujon/Robert Harding

A. Pompeii was excavated nearly 17 centuries after the
eruption of AD 79.

Leonard von Matt/Science Source

B. Plaster casts of some of the victims of the eruption of
Mount Vesuvius.

161

5.7 Volcanic Hazards

Figure 5.19

Lahars are mudflows that originate on volcanic slopes.

Lahars, mudflows that
originate on volcanic
slopes A. This lahar raced
down the Toutle River,
which flows westward
from Mount St. Helens,
following the May 18,
1980, eruption. B. Note
the muddy consistency of
lahar deposits.

This lahar was generated
by the 1980 eruption of
Mount St. Helens and
carried this bridge down
the valley of the Toutle
River.
_TT17


Lahar deposits invade a storage shed.

USGS

B.

A.
Close-up view
of bridge.
USGS

When Mount St. Helens erupted in 1980, several
lahars were generated. These flows and accompanying
floodwaters raced down nearby river valleys at speeds
exceeding 30 kilometers (20 miles) per hour. These raging
rivers of mud destroyed or severely damaged nearly all the
homes and bridges along their paths (Figure 5.19). Fortunately, the area was not densely populated.
In 1985, deadly lahars were produced during a small
eruption of Nevado del Ruiz, a 5300-meter (17,400-foot)
volcano in the Andes Mountains of Colombia. Hot pyroclastic material melted ice and snow that capped the
mountain (nevado means “snow” in Spanish) and sent
torrents of ash and debris down three major river valleys
that flank the volcano. Reaching speeds of 100 kilometers

USGS

(60 miles) per hour, these mudflows tragically claimed
25,000 lives.
Many consider Mount Rainier, Washington, to be
America’s most dangerous volcano because, like Nevado
del Ruiz, it has a thick, year-round mantle of snow and glacial ice. Adding to the risk, more than 100,000 people live
in the valleys around Rainier, and many homes are built
on deposits left by lahars that flowed down the volcano
hundreds or thousands of years ago. A future eruption, or
perhaps just a period of heavier-than-average rainfall, may
produce lahars that could be similarly destructive.

Other Volcanic Hazards
Volcanoes can be hazardous to human health and property in other ways. Ash and other pyroclastic material
can collapse the roofs of buildings or can be drawn into
the lungs of humans and other animals or into aircraft
engines (Figure 5.20). Volcanic gases, most notably sulfur
Figure 5.20
Prevailing wind
Eruption cloud

Ash fall

Eruption column
AFLO/Nippon News/Corbis

Acid rain

Ash and other pyroclastic materials can collapse
roofs, or completely cover buildings.

Bombs

Collapse of flank

Pyroclastic flow

Lava dome
collapse

Emission of
sulfur dioxide
gases

USGS

Lava flows can destroy homes, roads, and other
structures in their paths.

Lava flow

Lahar
(mudflow)

Volcanic hazards In addition to generating destructive pyroclastic flows and
lahars, volcanoes can be
hazardous to human health
and property in many other
ways.

162

CHAPTER 5

Volcanoes and Volcanic Hazards

dioxide, pollute the air—and when mixed with rainwater,
can destroy vegetation and reduce the quality of groundwater. Despite the known risks, millions of people live in
close proximity to active volcanoes.

Volcano-Related Tsunamis One hazard associated
with volcanoes is their ability to generate tsunamis.
Although usually caused by strong earthquakes, these
destructive sea waves sometimes result from powerful
volcanic explosions or the sudden collapse of flanks of
volcanoes into the ocean. In 1883, a volcanic eruption on
the Indonesian island Krakatau literally tore the island
apart and generated a tsunami that claimed an estimated
36,000 lives.
Volcanic Ash and Aviation During the past 15 years,
at least 80 commercial jets have been damaged by inadvertently flying into clouds of volcanic ash. For example,
in 1989, a Boeing 747 carrying more than 300 passengers
encountered an ash cloud from Alaska’s Redoubt Volcano.
All four of the engines stalled when they became clogged
with ash. Fortunately, the pilots were able to restart the
engines and safely land the aircraft in Anchorage.
More recently, the 2010 eruption of Iceland’s Eyjafjallajökull volcano sent ash high into the atmosphere. The
thick plume of ash drifted over Europe, causing airlines
to cancel thousands of flights, leaving hundreds of thousands of travelers stranded. Several weeks passed before
air travel resumed its normal schedule.

Volcanic Gases and Respiratory Health One of the
most destructive volcanic events, called the Laki eruption, began along a large fissure in southern Iceland in
1783. An estimated 14 cubic kilometers (3.4 cubic miles)
of fluid basaltic lavas were released along with 130 million tons of sulfur dioxide and other poisonous gases.
When sulfur dioxide is inhaled, it reacts with moisture
in the lungs to produce sulfuric acid, a deadly toxin.
More than half of Iceland’s livestock died, and the
ensuing famine killed 25 percent of the island’s human
population.

5.8

This huge eruption also endangered people and
property all across Europe. Crop failure occurred in
parts of Western Europe, and thousands of residents
perished from lung-related diseases. A recent report estimated that a similar eruption today would cause more
than 140,000 cardiopulmonary fatalities in Europe, as
well as thousands of deaths elsewhere in the world.

Effects of Volcanic Ash and Gases on Weather
and Climate Volcanic eruptions can eject dust-sized
particles of volcanic ash and sulfur dioxide gas high into
the atmosphere. The ash particles reflect sunlight back
to space, producing temporary atmospheric cooling. The
1783 Laki eruption in Iceland appears to have affected
atmospheric circulation around the globe. Drought conditions prevailed in the Nile River Valley and India, while
the winter of 1784 brought the longest period of belowzero temperatures in New England’s history.
Other eruptions that have produced significant
effects on climate worldwide include the eruption of
Indonesia’s Mount Tambora in 1815, which produced
the “year without a summer” (1816), and the eruption
of El Chichón in Mexico in 1982. El Chichón’s eruption, although small, emitted an unusually large quantity of sulfur dioxide that reacted with water vapor
in the atmosphere to produce a dense cloud of tiny
sulfuric acid droplets. These particles, called aerosols,
take several years to settle out of the atmosphere.
Like fine ash, these aerosols lower the mean temperature of the atmosphere by reflecting solar radiation
back to space.

5.7

Concept Checks

1. Describe pyroclastic flows and explain why they
are capable of traveling great distances.
2. What is a lahar?
3. List at least three volcanic hazards besides
pyroclastic flows and lahars.

Other Volcanic Landforms
List volcanic landforms other than shield, cinder, and composite volcanoes and
describe their formation.

The most widely recognized volcanic structures are the cone-shaped edifices of composite volcanoes that dot Earth’s surface. However, volcanic activity produces other distinctive and important
landforms.

Calderas
Recall that calderas are large steep-sided depressions
with diameters exceeding 1 kilometer (0.6 miles) that
have a somewhat circular form. Similar depressions

less than 1 kilometer across are called collapse pits, or
craters. Most calderas are formed by one of the following processes: (1) the collapse of the summit of a large
composite volcano following an explosive eruption of

163

5.8 Other Volcanic Landforms

silica-rich pumice and ash fragments (Crater Lake–type calderas);
(2) the collapse of the top of a
shield volcano caused by subterranean drainage from
a central magma
chamber (Hawaiiantype calderas); and
(3) the collapse of a
large area, caused
1
by the discharge of
Magma chamber
colossal volumes of
silica-rich pumice
Newly formed caldera fills
and ash along ring
with rain and groundwater.
fractures (Yellowstone-type calderas).

SmartFigure 5.21
An explosive eruption
partially empties a shallow
magma chamber.

Summit of volcano
collapses,
enhancing the
eruption.

2

Subsequent eruptions produce
the cinder cone called Wizard Island.

Crater Lake–Type
Calderas Crater
Lake, Oregon, is
situated in a caldera
3
4
approximately 10
kilometers (6 miles)
wide and 1175
meters (more than
3800 feet) deep. This
caldera formed about
7000 years ago,
when a composite
cone named Mount
Mazama violently
Crater Lake
extruded 50 to 70
cubic kilometers of
pyroclastic material
(Figure 5.21). With the
loss of support, 1500
meters (nearly 1
mile) of the summit
Michael Collier
of this once-prominent cone collapsed, producing a caldera that eventually
Close-up view of
filled with rainwater. Later, volcanic activity built a small
Wizard Island.
cinder cone in the caldera. Today this cone, called Wizard Island, provides a mute reminder of past activity.

Wizard
Island

Wizard Island

Yellowstone-Type Calderas Historic and destructive
Hawaiian-Type Calderas Unlike Crater Lake–type
calderas, many calderas form gradually because of the
loss of lava from a shallow magma chamber underlying the volcano’s summit. For example, Hawaii’s active
shield volcanoes, Mauna Loa and Kilauea, both have
large calderas at their summits. Kilauea’s measures
3.3 by 4.4 kilometers (about 2 by 3 miles) and is 150
meters (500 feet) deep (Figure 5.22). The walls are
almost vertical, and as a result, the caldera looks like a
vast, nearly flat-bottomed pit. Kilauea’s caldera formed
by gradual subsidence as magma slowly drained laterally from the underlying magma chamber, leaving the
summit unsupported.

eruptions such as Mount St. Helens and Vesuvius pale in
comparison to what happened 630,000 years ago in the
region now occupied by Yellowstone National Park, when
approximately 1000 cubic kilometers of pyroclastic material erupted. This catastrophic eruption sent showers of
ash as far as the Gulf of Mexico and formed a caldera
70 kilometers (43 miles) across (Figure 5.23A). Vestiges of
this event are the many hot springs and geysers in the
Yellowstone region.
Based on the extraordinary volume of erupted
material, researchers have determined that the
magma chambers associated with Yellowstone-type
calderas must be similarly monstrous. As more and

Formation of Crater
Lake–type calderas About
7000 years ago, a violent
eruption partly emptied the
magma chamber of former
Mount Mazama, causing
its summit to collapse.
Rainfall and groundwater
contributed to forming Crater Lake, the deepest lake
in the United States—594
meters (1949 feet) deep—
and the ninth deepest in
the world. (Inset photo courtesy
of USGS) (https://goo.gl/FGvNQJ)

164

Volcanoes and Volcanic Hazards

CHAPTER 5

Lava lake in Halema‘uma‘u crater during a period of recent activity.

SmartFigure 5.22
Kilauea’s Summit Caldera
Kilauea’s caldera measures 3.3 by 4.4 kilometers
(about 2 by 3 miles) and
is 150 meters (500 feet)
deep. More recent flows
are dark, while the older
flows are pale because the
iron in the lava oxidizes into
“rust.” Halemáumáu, the
pit crater in the southwestern part of the caldera, was
active as recently as 2012.
(https://goo.gl/OcQxed)

Kilauea’s
summit
caldera.
USGS

NASA

more magma accumulates, the pressure within the
magma chamber begins to exceed the pressure
exerted by the weight of the overlying rocks (Figure
5.24). An eruption occurs when the gas-rich magma
raises the overlying crust enough to create vertical

E Y E ON E A R T H

fractures extending to the surface. Magma surges
upward along these cracks, forming a ring-shaped
eruption. With a loss of support, the roof of the
magma chamber collapses.
Caldera-forming eruptions are of colossal proportions,
ejecting huge volumes of pyroclastic materials, mainly in
the form of ash and pumice fragments. Typically, these
materials form pyroclastic flows that sweep across the

5.1

T

his image was obtained during the 1991
eruption of Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines.
This was the largest eruption to affect a
densely populated area in recent times. Timely
forecasts of the event by scientists were credited
with saving at least 5,000 lives. (Alberto Garcia/CORBIS)

QUESTION 1 What name is given to the ash- and
pumice-laden cloud that is racing toward the
photographer?
QUESTION 2 At what speeds can these fiery clouds
move down steep mountain slopes?

Jeep

A.

165

5.8 Other Volcanic Landforms

Yellowstone National Park

landscape, destroying most living things in their paths.
Upon coming to rest, the hot fragments of ash and
pumice fuse together, forming a welded tuff that closely
resembles a solidified lava flow. Despite the immense size
Resurgent
Resurgent
of these calderas, the eruptions that cause them are brief,
dome
dome
lasting hours to perhaps a few days.
Large calderas tend to exhibit a complex eruptive hisYellowstone
Caldera
tory. In the Yellowstone region, for example, three calderaOld
forming episodes are known to have occurred over the
Faithful
Yellowstone
past 2.1 million years (Figure 5.23B). The most recent event
Lake
r im
Ca
l d er a
(630,000 years ago) was followed by episodic outpourings
of degassed rhyolitic and basaltic lavas. Geologic evidence
suggests that a magma reservoir still exists beneath Yel0
5
10 Miles
Mount
0 5 10 Kilometers
lowstone; thus, another caldera-forming eruption is
St.Helens
likely—but not necessarily imminent.
ash 1980
▲
A distinctive characteristic of large
caldera-forming eruptions is a slow upheaval of
the floor of the caldera that produces a central
Yellowstone
elevated region called a resurgent dome (see
N.P.
Figure 5.23A). Unlike calderas associated with
Mesa Falls
shield volcanoes or composite cones, Yellowstoneash bed
(1.3 mya)
type depressions are so large and poorly defined
that many remained undetected until high-quality
Huckleberry Ridge
aerial
and satellite images became available. Other
B.
ash bed
(2.1 mya)
examples of large calderas located in the United States
Lava Creek
ash bed
are California’s Long Valley caldera; LaGarita caldera,
(0.64 mya)
located in the San Juan Mountains of southern Colorado;
and the Valles caldera, west of Los Alamos, New
Mexico. These and similar calderas found elsewhere
around the globe are among the largest
Figure 5.23
volcanic structures on Earth, hence the name
Super-eruptions at Yellowstone A. This map shows Yellowstone National
“supervolcanoes.” Volcanologists compare
Park and the location and size of the Yellowstone caldera. B. Three huge
eruptions, separated by relatively regular intervals of about 700,000 years, their destructive force to that of the impact of
a small asteroid. Fortunately, no Yellowstonewere responsible for the ash layers shown. The largest of these eruptions
was 6000 times greater than the 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens.
type eruptions have occurred in historic times.
Mammoth
Hot Springs
_TT18


1. The emplacement of silica-rich magma causes the layers of rock
above to bulge and crack, producing a set of ring fractures.
Ring
fractures

2. Massive amounts of magma erupt, producing fiery clouds of ash
and gases called pyroclastic flows that devastate the surrounding
landscape.

Magma chamber
3. With loss of support, the roof of the magma chamber collapses
forming a large caldera.
Pyroclastic deposits (welded tuff)

4. Following the eruption, the caldera floor experiences a long period
of slow upheaval that produces an elevated central region, called
a resurgent dome.
Resurgent dome

Lava flows
Caldera

Partially emptied magma chamber

Caldera

SmartFigure 5.24
Formation of a Yellowstone-type caldera
Several Yellowstone-type
calderas exist around the
globe. These large volcanic structures are capable
of rendering a large area
of Earth’s surface lifeless
in perhaps only a few
days, hence the name
“supervolcanoes.”
(https://goo.gl/6al3WM)

166

CHAPTER 5

Volcanoes and Volcanic Hazards

Fissure Eruptions and Basalt Plateaus
The greatest volume of volcanic material is extruded
from fractures in Earth’s crust called fissures (fissura
= to split). Rather than build cones, fissure eruptions
usually emit fluid basaltic lavas that blanket wide areas
(Figure 5.25). In some locations, extraordinary amounts
of lava have been extruded along fissures in a relatively
short time, geographically speaking. These voluminous
accumulations are commonly referred to as basalt
plateaus because most have a basaltic composition and
tend to be rather flat and broad. The Columbia Plateau
in the northwestern United States, which consists of the

Figure 5.25
Basaltic fissure eruptions Lava
fountaining from a fissure and formation of fluid lava flows called flood
basalts. The lower photo shows flood
basalt flows near Idaho Falls.

Columbia River basalts, is the product of this type of
activity (Figure 5.26). Numerous fissure eruptions have
buried the landscape, creating a lava plateau more than
1500 meters (1 mile) thick. Some of the lava remained
molten long enough to flow 300 kilometers (180 miles)
from its source. The term flood basalts appropriately
describes these extrusions.
Massive accumulations of basaltic lava, similar to
those of the Columbia Plateau, occur elsewhere in the
world. One of the largest is the Deccan Traps, a thick
sequence of flat-lying basalt flows covering nearly
500,000 square kilometers (195,000 square miles) of
west-central India. When the Deccan Traps formed
about 66 million years ago, nearly 2 million cubic kilometers of lava were extruded over a period of approximately 1 million years. Several other huge deposits of
flood basalts, including the Ontong Java Plateau, are
found on the ocean floor and are called large igneous
provinces (see Figure 5.32).

Lava Domes
USGS

Basaltic
lava flows
Lava
fountaining

Fissure

Basaltic
lava flows

John S. Shelton

In contrast to hot basaltic lavas, cool silica-rich rhyolitic
lavas are so viscous that they hardly flow at all. As the
thick lava is “squeezed” out of a vent, it often produces a
dome-shaped mass called a lava dome. Lava domes are
usually only a few tens of meters high, and they come in
a variety of shapes that range from pancake-like flows to
steep-sided plugs that were pushed upward like pistons.
Most lava domes grow over a period of several years,
following an explosive eruption of silica-rich magma. A
recent example is the dome that began to grow in the
crater of Mount St. Helens immediately following the
1980 eruption (Figure 5.27A).
The collapse of lava domes, particularly those
that form on the summit or along the steep flanks of
composite cones, often produce powerful pyroclastic
flows (Figure 5.27B). These flows result from highly
viscous magma slowly entering the dome, causing it to
expand and steepen its flanks. Over time, the cooler
outer layer of the dome may start to crumble, producing
relatively small pyroclastic flows consisting of dense
blocks of lava. Occasionally, the rapid removal of the
outer layer causes a significant decrease in pressure
on the hot gaseous magma in the interior of the dome.
Explosive degassing of the interior magma then triggers
a fiery pyroclastic flow that races down the flanks of the
volcano (see Figure 5.27B).
Since 1995, pyroclastic flows generated by the
collapse of several lava domes on Soufriére Hills volcano
have rendered more than half of the Caribbean island
of Montserrat uninhabitable. The capital city, Plymouth,
was destroyed, and two-thirds of the population has
evacuated. A few years earlier, a collapsed lava dome
at the summit of Japan’s Mount Unzen produced a
pyroclastic flow that claimed 42 lives. Many of the

167

5.8 Other Volcanic Landforms

Figure 5.26
Columbia River basalts A. The Columbia River basalts cover an
area of nearly 164,000 square kilometers (63,000 square miles)
that is commonly called the Columbia Plateau. Activity here
began about 17 million years ago, as lava began to pour out of
large fissures, eventually producing a basalt plateau with an
average thickness of more than 1.5 kilometers. B. Columbia
River basalt flows exposed in the Palouse River Canyon in
southwestern Washington State. (Photo by Williamborg)

WASHINGTON

MONTANA

Columbia
River
Basalts

Yellowstone
National Park

B.
KEY

Columbia River Basalts

Casca

de Ran
ge

The Palouse River in Washington
State has cut a canyon about
300 meters (1000 feet) deep
into the flood basalts of the
Columbia Plateau.

Sna
OREGON

ke

Other basaltic rocks

in
la
P
er
Riv

Large Cascade volcanoes

IDAHO

A.
Lava domes are produced when highly
viscous magma slowly rises over a
period of months or years.

Lava dome
When a growing lava dome becomes
over-steepened, it may collapse
producing a
blocky
Blocky
pyroclastic
pyroclastic
flow.
flow

Decompression of the interior
magma may produce
an explosive
eruption and
Fiery
pyroclastic
pyroclastic
flow.
flow

A.
B.

Figure 5.27
Lava domes can generate
pyroclastic flows A. This
lava dome began to develop in the vent of Mount
St. Helens following the
May 1980 eruption. B. The
collapse of a lava dome
often results in a powerful
pyroclastic flow. (Photo by Lyn
Topinka/U.S. Geological Survey)

168

CHAPTER 5

Volcanoes and Volcanic Hazards

SmartFigure 5.28
Volcanic neck Shiprock,
New Mexico, is a volcanic
neck that stands about 520
meters (1700 feet) high.
It consists of igneous rock
that crystallized in the vent
of a volcano that has long
since been eroded.

Dennis Tasa

1700 ft

(https://goo.gl/XSRxzc)

Shiprock, New Mexico is a volcanic neck composed
of igneous rock which solidified in the conduit of a volcano.

victims were journalists and film makers who ventured
too close to the volcano in order to obtain photographs
and document the event.

Volcanic Necks and Pipes
In most volcanic eruptions, lava is fed through short
conduits that connect shallow magma chambers to vents
located at the surface. When a volcano becomes inactive,
congealed magma often becomes preserved in the feeding conduit of the volcano as a crudely cylindrical mass.
However, all volcanoes succumb to forces of weathering
and erosion. As erosion progresses, the rock occupying
the volcanic conduit, which is highly resistant to weathering, may remain standing above the surrounding terrain
long after the cone has been worn away. Shiprock, New
Mexico, is a widely recognized and spectacular example
of these structures, which geologists call volcanic necks
(or plugs) (Figure 5.28). More than 510 meters (1700 feet)
high, Shiprock is taller than most skyscrapers and is
one of many such landforms that protrude conspicuously from the red desert landscapes of the American
Southwest.
One rare type of conduit, called a pipe, carries
magma that originated in the mantle at depths that may
exceed 150 kilometers (93 miles). The gas-laden magmas that migrate through pipes travel rapidly enough to
remain essentially unaltered during their ascent.

The best-known volcanic pipes are the diamondbearing kimberlite pipes of South Africa. The rocks
filling these pipes originated at great depths, where
pressure is sufficiently high to generate diamonds and
other minerals formed under high pressure. The process of transporting essentially unaltered magma
(along with diamond inclusions) through 150 kilometers
(100 miles) of solid rock is exceptional—and accounts
for the scarcity of natural diamonds. Geologists consider pipes to be “windows” into Earth that allow us to
view rocks that normally form only at great depths.

5.8

Concept Checks

1. Describe the formation of Crater Lake. Compare
it to the calderas found on shield volcanoes such
as Kilauea.
2. In addition to composite volcanoes, what other
volcanic landform can generate a pyroclastic flow?
3. How do the eruptions that created the Columbia
Plateau differ from eruptions that create large
composite volcanoes?
4. Contrast the composition of a typical lava dome
and a typical fissure eruption.
5. What type of volcanic structure is Shiprock, New
Mexico, and how did it form?

169

5.9 Plate Tectonics and Volcanic Activity

5.9

Plate Tectonics and Volcanic Activity
Explain how the global distribution of volcanic activity is related to plate tectonics.

Geologists have known for decades that the global distribution of most of Earth’s volcanoes is not
random. Most active volcanoes on land are located along the margins of the ocean basins—notably within the circum-Pacific belt known as the Ring of Fire (Figure 5.29). These volcanoes consist
mainly of composite cones that emit volatile-rich magma that has an andesitic (intermediate) composition and occasionally produce awe-inspiring eruptions.
Another group of volcanoes includes the innumerable
seamounts that form along the crest of the mid-ocean
ridges. At these depths (1 to 3 kilometers below sea level),
the pressures are so intense that the gases emitted quickly
dissolve in the seawater and never reach the surface.
There are some volcanic structures, however, that
appear to be somewhat randomly distributed around the
globe. These volcanic structures comprise most of the
islands of the deep-ocean basins, including the Hawaiian
Islands, the Galapagos Islands, and Easter Island.
Prior to the development of the theory of plate tectonics, geologists did not have an acceptable explanation
for the distribution of Earth’s volcanoes. Recall that most
magma originates in rocks from Earth’s upper mantle
that is essentially solid, not molten. The basic connection between plate tectonics and volcanism is that plate
motions provide the mechanisms by which mantle rocks
undergo partial melting to generate magma.

Volcanism at Convergent Plate
Boundaries
Recall from the previous chapter that along certain
convergent plate boundaries, two plates move toward
each other, and a slab of oceanic lithosphere descends

into the mantle, generating a deep-ocean trench. As
the slab sinks deeper into the mantle, the increases
in temperature and pressure drive water and carbon
dioxide from the subducting oceanic crust. These
mobile fluids migrate upward and reduce the melting
point of hot mantle rock sufficiently to trigger some
melting (Figure 5.30A). Recall that this partial melting of mantle rock (peridotite) generates magma with
a basaltic composition. After a sufficient quantity of
the rock has melted, blobs of buoyant magma slowly
migrate upward.
Volcanism at a convergent plate margin results
in the development of a slightly curved chain of volcanoes called a volcanic arc. These volcanic chains
develop roughly parallel to the associated trench—at
distances of 200 to 300 kilometers (120 to 180 miles).
Volcanic arcs can be constructed on oceanic as well
as continental lithosphere. Those that develop within
the ocean and grow large enough for their tops to rise
above the surface are labeled archipelagos in most
atlases. Geologists prefer the more descriptive term
volcanic island arcs, or simply island arcs (Figure
5.30A). Several young volcanic island arcs border the
western Pacific basin, including the Aleutians, the
Tongas, and the Marianas.
Figure 5.29
_TT19


Bezymianny
Fujiyama
Mt. Unzen
Pinatubo
Mt. Mayon

Hekla

Pavlof
Shishaldin

Augustine

Laki

Mt. St. Helens
Katmai
(“Valley of
Mariana Is. 10,000 Smokes”)
Kilauea

Popocatepetl
Canary Is.
Pelée

Galapagos Is.
Kilimanjaro

RING OF FIRE

Krakatau
Tambora

Etna

Azores

Parícutin

Mauna Loa

Vesuvius

Surtsey

Nevado del Ruiz
Cotopaxi

Misti

Tonga Is.
Easter Is.
South
Sandwich Is.

New Zealand
Deception Is.

Santorini

Ring of Fire Most of
Earth’s major volcanoes are
located in a zone around
the Pacific called the Ring
of Fire. Another large
group of active volcanoes
lie undiscovered along the
mid-ocean ridge system.

172

CHAPTER 5

Volcanoes and Volcanic Hazards

Volcanism associated with convergent plate boundaries may also develop where slabs of oceanic lithosphere
are subducted under continental lithosphere to produce a
continental volcanic arc (Figure 5.30E). The mechanisms
that generate these mantle-derived magmas are essentially
the same as those that create volcanic island arcs. The
most significant difference is that continental crust is much
thicker and is composed of rocks having higher silica content than oceanic crust. Hence, a mantle-derived magma
changes chemically as it rises by assimilating silica-rich
crustal rocks. At the same time, extensive magmatic differentiation occurs. (Recall from Chapter 4 that magmatic
differentiation is the formation of secondary magmas from
parent magma.) Stated another way, the magma generated
in the mantle may change from a fluid basaltic magma to
a silica-rich andesitic or rhyolitic magma as it moves up
through the continental crust.
The Ring of Fire, a belt of explosive volcanoes, surrounds the Pacific basin where oceanic lithosphere is
being subducted beneath most of the landmasses that surround the Pacific Ocean (see Figure 5.29). The volcanoes
of the Cascade Range in the northwestern United States,
including Mount Hood, Mount Rainier, and Mount
Shasta, are examples of volcanoes generated at a convergent plate boundary (Figure 5.31).
SmartFigure 5.31
Mount
Baker

C

Subduction-produced
Cascade Range
volcanoes Subduction of
the Juan de Fuca plate
along the Cascadia subduction zone produced the
Cascade volcanoes.

a

sc

Cas

duction Zon e

cade

Sub

Ran

ia

ge

ad
Juan de
Fuca Plate

(https://goo.gl/4To5ak)

WA

OR
CA

Mount
Rainier
Mount
St. Helens
Mount
Hood
Mount
Jefferson
Newberry
Volcano
Crater
Lake
Mount
Shasta
Lassen
Peak

A.

Juan de
Fuca Plate

Su Cas
bd c
uc ad
t i o ia
nZ
on
e

Cascade
Range

Sub
duc
tin

B.

go
ce
an
ic

Mantle rock
melts
pla

te

Water driven
from plate

Volcanism at Divergent Plate
Boundaries
The greatest volume of magma (perhaps 60 percent of
Earth’s total yearly output) is produced along the oceanic
ridge system in association with seafloor spreading
(Figure 5.30B). Below the ridge axis where lithospheric
plates are continually being pulled apart, the solid yet
mobile mantle responds by ascending to fill the rift. You
learned in Chapter 4 that as hot rock rises, it experiences
a decrease in confining pressure and undergoes decompression melting without the addition of heat.
Partial melting of mantle rock at spreading centers produces basaltic magma. Because this newly formed magma is
less dense than the mantle rock from which it was derived,
it rises and collects in reservoirs located just below the ridge
crest. This activity continuously adds new basaltic rock to
plate margins, temporarily welding them together, only to
have them break again as spreading continues. Along some
ridge segments, outpourings of pillow lavas build numerous
volcanic structures, the largest of which is Iceland.
Although most spreading centers are located along
the axis of an oceanic ridge, some are not. In particular,
the East African Rift is a site where continental lithosphere is being pulled apart (see Figure 5.30F and Figure
2.15, page 49). Vast outpourings of fluid basaltic lavas as
well as several active composite volcanoes are found in
this region of the globe.

Intraplate Volcanism
We know why igneous activity is initiated along plate
boundaries, but why do eruptions occur in the interiors
of plates? Hawaii’s Kilauea, considered one of the world’s
most active volcanoes, is situated thousands of kilometers
from the nearest plate boundary, in the middle of the
vast Pacific plate (Figure 5.30C).
Sites of intraplate volcanism (meaning “within
the plate”) include the large outpourings of fluid basaltic
lavas such as those that compose the Columbia River
basalts, the Siberian Traps in Russia, India’s Deccan
Traps, and several large oceanic plateaus, including the
Ontong Java Plateau in the western Pacific (Figure 5.32).
These massive structures are estimated to be 10 to 40
kilometers (6 to 25 miles) thick.
It is thought that most intraplate volcanism occurs
where a mass of hotter-than-normal mantle material called
a mantle plume ascends toward the surface (Figure 5.33).*
Although the depth at which mantle plumes originate is
a topic of debate, some are thought to form deep within
Earth, at the core–mantle boundary. These plumes of
solid yet mobile rock rise toward the surface in a manner
similar to the blobs that form within a lava lamp, which
contain two immiscible liquids in a glass container. As the
base of the lamp is heated, the denser liquid at the bottom
*Recent research on the nature of mantle plumes has caused some geologists
to question their role, if any, in the formation of at least some of the large basalt
plateaus.

North Atlantic basalts
(56–61 mya)

Deccan Emeishan
(65 mya) (259 mya)

Caribbean
(89 mya)

Galapagos

5.9 Plate Tectonics
and Volcanic Activity
Wrangellia
Siberian
(230–225 mya)
Traps
(250 mya)

Afar
(30 mya)

Parana
(133 mya)

Etendeka
(135 mya)

Shatsky
Rise
(145 mya)

Columbia
River basalts
(16 mya)

173
SmartFigure 5.32
Global distribution of large
basalt provinces
(https://goo.gl/NFTuK7)

Hawaiian

Karoo
(183 mya)

Broken
Ridge
(118 mya)
Réunion

Ontong
Java
(122 mya)

Manihiki
(120 mya)

Tristan
Louisville

Kerguelen
Plateau
(118 mya)

becomes buoyant and forms blobs that rise to the top. Like
the blobs in a lava lamp, a mantle plume has a bulbous head
that draws out a narrow stalk beneath it as it rises. The
surface manifestation of this activity is called a hot spot, an
area of volcanism and high heat flow.
Large mantle plumes, dubbed superplumes, are
thought to be responsible for the vast outpourings of
basaltic lava that created the large basalt plateaus. When
the head of the plume reaches the base of the lithosphere, decompression melting progresses rapidly. This
causes the burst of volcanism that emits voluminous
outpourings of lava over a period of 1 million or so years
(see Figure 5.33B). Due to the extreme nature of the
eruptions required to produce the large basalt plateaus,
some researchers believe these eruptions may have contributed to the extinction of many of Earth’s life-forms.
The comparatively short initial eruptive phase is
often followed by millions of years of less voluminous
activity, as the plume tail slowly rises to the surface.
Extending away from some large flood basalt plateaus is
a chain of volcanic structures, similar to the Hawaiian
chain (Figure 5.33C).
A rising mantle plume with a
large bulbous head is thought to
generate Earth’s large basalt
provinces.

Intraplate volcanism that involves mantle plumes is
also thought to be responsible for some massive eruptions
of felsic (rhyolitic) pyroclastic material that occurred in
a continental setting. The best know of these hot-spot
eruptions are the three caldera-forming eruptions that
occurred in the Yellowstone region.

5.9

1. Are volcanoes in the Ring of Fire generally
described as quiescent or violent? Name an
example that supports your answer.
2. How is magma generated along convergent plate
boundaries?
3. Volcanism at divergent plate boundaries is most
often associated with which rock type? What
causes rocks to melt in these settings?
4. What is the source of magma for most intraplate
volcanism?
5. Which type of plate boundary generates the
greatest quantity of magma?

Oceanic
lithosphere

Plate motion

Plate motion

Flood basalts

Large basaltic
province

Head

A.

Rising
plume
tail

Tail
B.

Figure 5.33
Mantle plumes and large
basalt provinces Model of
hot-spot volcanism thought
to explain the formation of
large basalt provinces and
the chains of volcanic islands associated with these
features.

Because of plate movement, volcanic
activity from the rising tail of the plume
generates a linear chain of smaller
volcanic structures.

Rapid decompression melting of
the plume head produces extensive outpourings of flood basalts
over a relatively short time span.

Plate motion

Rising
mantle
plume

Concept Checks

Oceanic
lithosphere

Partial
melting

C.

Hot spot
volcanic
activity
Volcanic trail

Rising
plume
tail

174

CHAPTER 5

Volcanoes and Volcanic Hazards

5.10

Monitoring Volcanic Activity
List and describe the techniques used to monitor potentially dangerous volcanoes.

Why monitor volcanoes? Volcano monitoring has two primary goals. It provides basic scientific data
that helps geologists understand the structure and dynamics of a specific volcano as well as volcanoes in general. Equally important, volcanic monitoring is critical for hazard assessment because
millions of people live and work on or near volcanoes. In this role, monitoring addresses questions
like, “When will an impending eruption occur?”
Figure 5.34
Monitoring volcanoes
using infrared cameras Remote-sensing
cameras on satellites have
greatly enhanced our ability to monitor volcanoes.
Infrared (heat) sensors
produce false-color images
of volcanoes that show hot
objects in warm colors and
cold objects in cool colors.
This image shows an eruption of Mount St. Augustine
volcano, Alaska, that occurred on March 27, 1986.

False color satellite image of Mount St. Augustine
that shows the hottest material, the volcanic crater,
as yellow. A recently erupted hot pyroclastic flow
on the north flank of the volcano appears bright red,
while the coldest snow covered areas of the cone
appear bright blue. A small lava flow (red) is shown
on the east flank of the cone and several lahars
(mudflows) are shown as dark lobes.

NASA

0

5 km

0

3 miles

Volcanologists utilize several volcano monitoring techniques, with most of the efforts aimed at detecting the
movement of magma from a subterranean reservoir (typically several kilometers deep) toward the surface. The
three most noticeable changes in a volcanic landscape
caused by the migration of magma are (1) changes in
the pattern of earthquakes produced by the movement
of magma; (2) magma entering a near-surface magma
chamber, which leads to inflation of the volcano; and

E Y E ON E A R T H

5.2

T

his image shows the Buddhist monastery
Taung Kalat, located in central Myanmar
(Burma). The monastery sits high on a sheersided rock made mainly of magmas that solidified in
the conduit of an ancient volcano. The volcano has
since been worn away. (Photo by Dreamstime)

QUESTION 1 Based on this information, what volcanic
structure do you think is shown in this photo?
QUESTION 2 Would this volcanic structure most likely
have been associated with a composite volcano or
cinder cone? Explain how you arrived at your answer.

(3) changes in the amount and/or composition of
gases released from a volcano.
Almost one-third of all volcanoes that have
erupted in historic times are now monitored using
seismographs, instruments that detect earthquake
tremors. In general, a sharp increase in seismic
unrest followed by a period of relative quiet has
been shown to be a precursor of many volcanic
eruptions. However, some large volcanic structures
have exhibited lengthy periods of seismic unrest.
For example, in 1981, a strong increase in seismicity
was recorded for Rabaul caldera in New Guinea.
The activity lasted 13 years and culminated with an
eruption in 1994. Occasionally, a large earthquake
triggers a volcanic eruption, or at least disturbs the
volcano’s plumbing. Hawaii’s Kilauea, for example,
began to erupt after the strong Kalapana earthN
quake (magnitude 7.2) of 1975.
The development of remote-sensing devices
has greatly enhanced our ability to monitor volcanoes. These instruments and techniques are particularly
useful for monitoring eruptions in progress. Photographic
images and infrared (heat) sensors can detect lava flows
and volcanic columns rising from a volcano (Figure 5.34).
Furthermore, satellites can detect ground deformation as
well as monitor sulfur dioxide emissions.
Because accessibility to many volcanoes is limited, remote-sensing devices, including lasers, Global

5.10 Monitoring Volcanic Activity

175

Figure 5.35

Mount Adams

GPS devices are used to monitor the inflation or
deflation of a volcano as magma moves within.
Inflation often precedes an eruption phase by a
few months, or longer.

Monitoring volcanoes A. A high-precision Global
Positioning System (GPS) antenna used to monitor
horizontal and vertical ground motions on Mount
St. Helens. B. Geologist monitoring gas emissions
from a fumarole. The analysis of volcanic gases is
used in the long-term study of volcanic systems.
(Photos courtesy of U.S. Geological Society)

An increase in sulfur dioxide (SO2)
gas emissions has been shown
to precede an eruption.

A.
B.

Positioning System (GPS) devices, and Earth-orbiting satellites, are often used to determine potential swelling of a
volcano (Figure 5.35A). For example, swelling occurs when
the roof of a volcano rises as new magma accumulates in
its interior—a phenomenon that precedes many volcanic
eruptions. The discovery of ground doming at Oregon’s
Three Sisters volcanoes in 2000 was first detected using
images obtained from satellites.
Volcanologists also frequently monitor volcanoes in
an effort to detect changes in the quantity and/or composition of the gases being released (Figure 5.35B). Some
volcanoes show an increase in sulfur dioxide emissions
months or years prior to an eruption.
The overriding goal of all monitoring is to discover
precursors that may warn of an impending or imminent
eruption. Volcanologists accomplish this by first diagnosing the current condition of a volcano and using the baseline data to predict its future behavior. A volcanologist
must observe a volcano over an extended period of time

in order to recognize significant changes from its “resting
state.”
Unfortunately, accurately predicting the timing and
the potential hazard of a volcanic eruption still eludes
scientists. This is perhaps best demonstrated by the
February 2015 eruption of Sinabung volcano in
Sumatra, Indonesia. This deadly eruption claimed at
least 16 lives and occurred just days after authorities
gave the “all-clear” for residents to return to their homes
on Sinabung’s slopes.

5.10

Concept Checks

1. What three factors do volcanologists monitor in
order to determine whether magma is migrating
toward Earth’s surface?
2. What is the overriding goal of volcano
monitoring?

6
Weathering
and Soils

Weathering processes helped shape the rock formations
in California’s Joshua Tree National Park. (Photo by Alan
Majchrowicz/AGE Fotostock)

E

arth’s surface

is constantly changing. Rock is disintegrated and decomposed,
moved to lower elevations by gravity, and carried away by water, wind, or ice. In this
manner, Earth’s physical landscape is sculpted. This chapter focuses on the first step
of this never-ending process—weathering. It looks at what causes solid rock to crumble
and why the type and rate of weathering vary from place to place. Soil, an important
product of the weathering process and a vital resource, is also examined.

6.1

SmartFigure 6.1
Arches National Park Both
mechanical and chemical
weathering contributed
greatly to the creation of
the arches and other rock
formations in Utah’s Arches
National Park. (Photo by
Whit Richardson/Aurora Open/
SuperStock) (https://goo.gl/dT0BdL)

Weathering
Define weathering and distinguish between the two main categories of weathering.

Weathering involves the physical breakdown (disintegration) and chemical alteration (decomposition) of rock at or near Earth’s surface. Weathering goes on all around us, but it seems like such
a slow and subtle process that it is easy to underestimate its importance. Yet weathering is a basic
part of the rock cycle and thus a key process in the Earth system. Weathering is also important to
humans—even to those of us who do not study geology. For example, many of the life-sustaining
minerals and elements found in soil, and ultimately in the food we eat, were freed from solid rock
by weathering processes. As the chapter-opening photo, Figure 6.1, and many other images throughout this book illustrate, weathering also contributes to the formation
of some of Earth’s most spectacular scenery. Of course,
these same processes are also responsible for
causing the deterioration of many of
the structures we build.

6.2 Mechanical Weathering
There are two basic categories of weathering. Mechanical weathering is accomplished by physical forces that
break rock into smaller and smaller pieces without changing the rock’s mineral composition. Chemical weathering involves a chemical transformation of rock into one or
more new compounds. These two concepts can be illustrated by a large log. The log disintegrates when it is split
into smaller and smaller pieces, whereas decomposition
occurs when the log is set afire and burned. GEOgraphics 6.1 provides other examples of weathering.
Why does rock weather? Simply, weathering is the
response of Earth materials to a changing environment.
For instance, after millions of years of uplift and erosion
(the removal and transport of weathered rock material by
water, wind, or ice), the rocks overlying a large, intrusive
igneous body may be removed, exposing it at the surface. This mass of crystalline rock—formed deep below
ground, where temperatures and pressures are high—is

6.2

183

now subjected to a very different and comparatively hostile surface environment. In response, this rock mass will
gradually change. This transformation of rock is what we
call weathering.
In the following sections we will examine the various
types of mechanical and chemical weathering. Although
we will consider these two categories separately, keep in
mind that mechanical and chemical weathering processes
usually work simultaneously in nature and reinforce each
other.

6.1

Concept Checks

1. What are the two basic categories of weathering?
2. How do the products of each category of
weathering differ?

Mechanical Weathering
List and describe four examples of mechanical weathering.

When a rock undergoes mechanical weathering, it is broken into smaller and smaller pieces, each
retaining the characteristics of the original material. The end result is many small pieces from a
single large one. Figure 6.2 shows that breaking a rock into smaller pieces increases the surface area
available for chemical attack. An analogous situation occurs when sugar is added to a liquid. A
sugar cube dissolves much more slowly than an equal volume of sugar granules because the cube
has much less surface area available for dissolution. Hence, by breaking rocks into smaller pieces,
mechanical weathering increases the amount of surface area available for chemical weathering.
In nature, four important physical processes lead to the
might also expect this same process to fracture rocks in
fragmentation of rock: frost wedging, salt crystal growth,
nature. This is, in fact, the basis for the traditional explasheeting, and biological activity. In addition, although
nation of frost wedging. After water works its way into
the work of erosional agents such as wind, waves, glacial
the cracks in rock, the freezing water enlarges the cracks,
ice, and running water is usually considered separately
and angular fragments eventually break off (Figure 6.4
from mechanical weathering, this work is nevertheless
and GEOgraphics 6.2).
related. As these mobile agents (discussed in detail
As mechanical weathering breaks rock into smaller pieces,
in later chapters) transport rock
more surface area is exposed to chemical weathering.
2
debris, particles continue to be
2
1
1
broken and abraded.
.5 .5

Frost Wedging

4 square
units

If you leave a glass bottle
of water in the freezer too
long, you will find the bottle
4 square units !
fractured, as in Figure 6.3. The
6 sides !
bottle breaks because liquid
1 cube "
water has the unique property of 24 square units
expanding about 9 percent upon
freezing. This is also the reason that poorly insulated or
exposed water pipes rupture during frigid weather. You

1
square
unit

SmartFigure 6.2
Mechanical weathering
increases surface area
Mechanical weathering
adds to the effectiveness
of chemical weathering
because chemical weathering can occur only on
exposed surfaces. (https://
goo.gl/XkBfd2)

1 square unit !
6 sides !
8 cubes "
48 square units

In c re a s e in

s u rf a c e a re

.25 square unit !
6 sides !
64 cubes "
96 square units

a

184

CHAPTER 6

Weathering and Soils

Figure 6.3

Salt Crystal Growth

Ice breaks bottle The
bottle broke because water
expands about 9 percent
when it freezes. (Photo by
Martyn F. Chillmaid/Science
Source)

For many years, the conventional wisdom was that
most frost wedging occurred in this way. However,
research has shown that frost wedging can also occur
in a different way.* It has long been known that when
moist soils freeze, they expand, or frost heave, due
to the growth of ice lenses. These masses of ice grow
larger because they are supplied with water migrating from unfrozen areas as thin liquid films. As more
water accumulates and freezes, the soil is heaved
upward. A similar process occurs within the cracks
and pore spaces of rocks. Lenses of ice grow larger as
they attract liquid water from surrounding pores. The
growth of these ice masses gradually weakens the rock,
causing it to fracture.

SmartFigure 6.4
Ice breaks rock In mountainous areas, frost wedging creates angular rock
fragments that accumulate
to form piles of debris
called talus slopes. (Photo by
Marli Miller) (https://goo.gl/5uqnS1)

Another expansive force that can split rocks is created
by the growth of salt crystals. Rocky shorelines and
arid regions are common settings for this process. It
begins when sea spray from breaking waves or salty
groundwater penetrates crevices and pore spaces in
rock. As this water evaporates, salt crystals form. As
these crystals gradually grow larger, they weaken
the rock by pushing apart the surrounding grains or
enlarging tiny cracks.
This same process can also contribute to the crumbling of roadways where salt is spread to melt snow and
ice in winter. The salt dissolves in water and seeps into
cracks that quite likely originated from frost action.
When the water evaporates, the growth of salt crystals
further breaks the pavement.

Sheeting

When large masses of igneous rock, particularly granite, are exposed at Earth’s surface by erosion, concentric slabs begin to break loose. The process that
generates these onion-like layers is called sheeting. It
takes place, at least in part, due to the great reduction
in pressure that occurs as the overlying rock is eroded
away, a process called unloading. Figure 6.5 illustrates
what happens: As the overburden is removed, the outer
parts of the granitic mass expand more than the rock
below and separate from the rock body. Continued
weathering eventually causes the slabs to separate and
*Bernard Hallet, “Why Do Freezing Rocks Break?” Science 314(17):
1092–1093, November 2006.
peel off, creating an exfoliation dome (ex = off, folium
= leaf). Excellent examples of exfoliation domes are
Stone Mountain, Georgia, and Half Dome and Liberty
Frost wedging
Cap in Yosemite National Park.
A process analogous to sheeting can also occur
when human activities
reduce the confining pressure, similar to what occurs
during unloading. For
example, in deep mines,
large rock slabs have been
known to explode off the
Slightly tilted
sedimentary beds
walls of newly cut tunnels.
Falling
In quarries, fractures occur
rock
debris
parallel to the floor when
Falling
large blocks of rock are
rock
Patches
debris
removed.
of snow
Although many fracTalus slope composed of
tures are created by expanangular rock fragments
sion, others are produced
by contraction during the
crystallization of magma,
and still others are produced by tectonic forces
during mountain building.

6.2 Mechanical Weathering

h

Uta
lly,
a
V
ab

Parallel joints produced
by bending of
sandstone layer

Mo

Erosion
along
fractures
carved
sandstone
into fins

Entrada
sandstone

Figure 6.6

Plant roots can extend
into joints and grow in
diameter and length.
This process enlarges
fractures and breaks
rock.

Joints aid weathering Aerial view of nearly parallel joints near
Moab, Utah. (Photo by Michael Collier)

Fractures produced by these activities generally form a
definite pattern and are called joints (Figure 6.6). Joints
are important rock structures that allow water to penetrate to depth and start the process of weathering long
before the rock is exposed.

Biological Activity
Weathering can be accomplished by the activities of
organisms, including plants, burrowing animals, and
humans. Plant roots in search of nutrients and water
grow into fractures, and as the roots grow, they wedge
apart the rock (Figure 6.7). Burrowing animals further
break down rock by moving fresh material to the surface, where physical and chemical processes can more
effectively attack it. Decaying organisms also produce
acids that contribute to chemical weathering. Where
rock has been blasted in search of minerals or for road
construction, the impact of humans is particularly
noticeable.

Figure 6.7
Plants can break rock Root wedging near Boulder, Colorado.
(Photo by Kristin Piljay)

6.2

Concept Checks

1. When a rock is mechanically weathered, how
does its surface area change? How does this
influence chemical weathering?
2. Explain how water can cause mechanical
weathering.
3. Describe how an exfoliation dome forms.
4. How do joints promote weathering?
5. How does biological activity contribute to
weathering?

187

188

CHAPTER 6

Weathering and Soils

E Y E ON E A R T H

6.1

T

his is a close-up view of a massive
granite feature in the Sierra Nevada
of California. (Photo by Marli Miller)

QUESTION 1 Relatively thin slabs of
granite are separating from this rock
mass. Describe the process that caused
this to occur.
QUESTION 2 What term is applied to this
process? What term describes the domelike feature that results?

6.3

Chemical Weathering
Discuss the role of water in each of three chemical weathering processes.

In the preceding discussion of mechanical weathering, you learned that breaking rock into smaller
pieces aids chemical weathering by increasing the surface area available for chemical attack. It
should also be pointed out that chemical weathering contributes to mechanical weathering by
weakening the outer portions of some rocks, which, in turn, makes them more susceptible to being
broken by mechanical weathering processes.
Chemical weathering involves the complex processes
that break down rock components and internal structures of minerals. Such processes convert the constituents to new minerals or release them to the surrounding
environment. During this transformation, the original
rock decomposes into substances that are stable in the
surface environment. Consequently, the products of
chemical weathering will remain essentially unchanged
as long as they remain in an environment similar to the
one in which they formed.
Water is by far the most important agent of chemical weathering. Pure water alone is a good solvent, and
small amounts of dissolved materials result in increased
chemical activity for weathering solutions. The major
processes of chemical weathering are dissolution, oxidation, and hydrolysis. Water plays a leading role in each.

Dissolution
Perhaps the easiest type of decomposition to envision
is the process of dissolution. Just as sugar dissolves
in water, so too do certain minerals. One of the most
water-soluble minerals is halite (common salt), which,

as you may recall, is composed of sodium and chloride
ions. Halite readily dissolves in water because, although
this compound maintains overall electrical neutrality, the
individual ions retain their respective charges.
Moreover, the surrounding water molecules are
polar—that is, the oxygen end of the molecule has a
small residual negative charge; the hydrogen end has a
small positive charge. As the water molecules come in
contact with halite, their negative ends approach sodium
ions, and their positive ends cluster about chloride ions.
This disrupts the attractive forces in the halite crystal
and releases the ions to the water solution (Figure 6.8).
Although most minerals are, for all practical purposes, insoluble in pure water, the presence of even a
small amount of acid dramatically increases the corrosive force of water—thus causing dissolution. (An acidic
solution contains the reactive hydrogen ion, H1.) In
nature, acids are produced by a number of processes. For
example, carbonic acid is created when carbon dioxide in
the atmosphere dissolves in raindrops. As acidic rainwater soaks into the ground, carbon dioxide in the soil may
increase the acidity of the weathering solution. Various
organic acids are also released into the soil as organisms

6.3 Chemical Weathering
Water molecules are polar because both hydrogen atoms
bond to the same side of an oxygen atom. Thus, the
hydrogen side of the molecule is slightly positive, and the
oxygen side is slightly negative.
H+
O–

H+

Na +

Cl –

H+
H+

Everyone has seen iron and steel objects that have rusted
when exposed to water. The same thing can happen to
iron-rich minerals. The process of rusting occurs when
oxygen combines with iron to form iron oxide, as follows:

+
H+ H

H

Na +

+

O

–

H

O–

H+

Na +

+

O–

The soluble ions from reactions of this type are
retained in our underground water supply. These dissolved ions are responsible for the so-called hard water
found in many locales. Hard water is considered undesirable because the active ions react with soap to produce
an insoluble material that renders soap nearly useless in
removing dirt. To solve this problem, a water softener
can be used to remove these ions, generally by replacing
them with others that do not chemically react with soap.

Oxidation

O–

Halite crystals consist of
ions that are attracted to polar
water molecules.

H

+

O–

O

–

4Fe 1 3O2 h 2Fe2O3
iron

oxygen

iron oxide (hematite)

H+

This type of chemical reaction, called oxidation,*
occurs
when electrons are lost from one element durDissolved
+
ion
ing
the
reaction. In this case, we say that iron was oxiH
H+ O –
O – H+
Cl – H +
–
dized
because
it lost electrons to oxygen. Although the
O
H+
H+
oxidation
of
iron
progresses
very slowly in a dry environCl –
+
+
ment,
the
addition
of
water
greatly
speeds the reaction.
H
H
Water molecules remove
–
+
–
+
Oxidation
is
important
in
decomposing
such ferroO
sodium and chlorine ions from H O
H
the crystal face.
magnesian minerals as olivine, pyroxene, hornblende, and
biotite. Oxygen readily combines with the iron in these
Figure 6.8
minerals to form the reddish-brown iron oxide called
Water can dissolve some rocks Dissolution is chemical
hematite (Fe2O3), or in other cases a yellowish-colored rust
weathering in which minerals dissolve in water. Halite readily
called limonite [FeO(OH)]. These products are responsible
H+
_TT20


H+

H+

dissolves in pure water. Other minerals, such as calcite, readily dissolve only in water that is acidic.

decay, and sulfuric acid is produced by the weathering of
pyrite and other sulfide minerals.
Regardless of the source of the acid, this highly
reactive substance readily decomposes most rocks and
produces certain products that are water soluble. For
example, the mineral calcite, CaCO3, which composes
the common building stones marble and limestone, is
easily attacked by even a weakly acidic solution.
The overall reaction by which calcite dissolves in
water containing carbon dioxide is:
CaCO3 1 (H1 1 HCO32) h Ca 21 1 2HCO32
calcite

carbonic acid

189

calcium ion

bicarbonate ion

During this process, the insoluble calcium carbonate
is transformed into soluble products. In nature, over periods of thousands of years, large quantities of limestone
are dissolved and carried away by underground water.
This activity is largely responsible for the formation of
limestone caverns (Figure 6.9). Monuments and buildings
made of limestone or marble are also subjected to the
corrosive work of acids, particularly in urban and industrial areas that have smoggy, polluted air.

*Note that oxidation is a term that refers to any chemical reaction in which a
compound or radical loses electrons. The element oxygen is not necessarily
present.

Figure 6.9
Acidic waters create
caves The dissolving
power of carbonic acid
plays an important role in
creating limestone caverns.
This image shows the
Chinese Theater area in
New Mexico’s Carlsbad
Caverns. (Photo by Dennis
MacDonald/AGE Fotostock)

190

CHAPTER 6

Weathering and Soils

Figure 6.10

hazard, particularly in humid
areas where abundant rainfall
infiltrates spoil banks (waste
material left after coal or other
minerals are removed). This socalled acid mine drainage eventually makes its way to streams,
killing aquatic organisms and
degrading aquatic habitats
(Figure 6.11).

Iron oxides add color Many
sedimentary rocks are very
colorful. The most important “pigments” are small
amounts of iron oxide. Just
as iron oxide colors the rusty
barrels in A, this product
of chemical weathering is
also responsible for the reds
and oranges seen in the
rocks composing the Supai
Formation in the Grand
Canyon in B. (Photo A by

Hydrolysis

Vladimir Melnik/Shutterstock; photo
B by Cedric Weber/Shutterstock)

A.

for the rusty color on the surfaces of dark igneous rocks,
such as basalt, as they begin to weather. Hematite and
limonite are also important cementing and coloring agents
in many sedimentary rocks (Figure 6.10). However, oxidation can occur only after iron is freed from the silicate
structure by another process, called hydrolysis.
Another important oxidation reaction occurs when
sulfide minerals such as pyrite decompose. Sulfide
minerals are major constituents of many metallic ores,
and pyrite is frequently associated with coal deposits
as well. In a moist environment, chemical weathering of pyrite (FeS2) yields sulfuric acid (H 2 SO 4) and
iron oxide [FeO(OH)]. In many mining locales, this
weathering process creates a serious environmental
Figure 6.11
Acid mine drainage The
water seeping from an
abandoned mine in Clarion
County, Pennsylvania, is
an example of acid mine
drainage. Acid mine drainage is water with a high
concentration of sulfuric
acid (H2SO4) produced
by the oxidation of sulfide
minerals such as pyrite.
When such acid-rich water
migrates from its source, it
may pollute surface waters
and groundwater and
cause significant ecological
damage. (Photo by Joel Bosch)

The most common mineral group,
the silicates, is decomposed primarily by the process of hydrolysis
(hydro 5 water, lysis 5 a loosening), which basically is the
reaction of any substance with water. Ideally, the hydrolysis
of a mineral could take place in pure water as some of the
water molecules dissociate to form the very reactive hydrogen (H1) and hydroxyl (OH2) ions. The hydrogen ion attacks
and replaces other positive ions found in the crystal lattice.
With the introduction of hydrogen ions into the crystalline structure, the original orderly arrangement of atoms is
destroyed, and the mineral decomposes.
B.

Hydrolysis in the Presence of Acids In nature,
water usually contains other substances that contribute
additional hydrogen ions, thereby greatly accelerating
hydrolysis. The most common of these substances is carbon dioxide, CO2, which dissolves in water to form carbonic acid, H2CO3. Rain dissolves some carbon dioxide
in the atmosphere, and additional amounts, released by
decaying organic matter, are acquired as the water percolates down through the soil.
In water, carbonic acid dissociates to form hydrogen
ions (H1) and bicarbonate ions (HCO32). To illustrate how a
rock undergoes hydrolysis in the presence of carbonic acid,
let’s examine the chemical weathering of granite, a common continental rock. Recall that granite consists mainly
of quartz and potassium feldspar. The weathering of the
potassium feldspar component of granite is as follows:
2KAlSi3O8 1 2(H1 1 HCO32) 1 H2O →

Acid mine
drainage

potassium
feldspar

carbonic acid

water

Al2Si2O5(OH)4 1 2K1 1 2HCO32 1 4SiO2
kaolinite
(residual clay)

potassium bicarbonate
silica
ion
ion
(''''+++)'+'++++*
in solution

In this reaction, the hydrogen ions (H1) attack
and replace potassium ions (K1) in the feldspar structure, thereby disrupting the crystalline network. Once
removed, the potassium is available as a nutrient for
plants or becomes the soluble salt potassium bicarbonate
(KHCO3), which may be incorporated into other minerals or carried to the ocean.

6.3 Chemical Weathering

Products of Silicate-Mineral Weathering The most
abundant product of the chemical breakdown of potassium feldspar is the clay mineral kaolinite. Clay minerals
are the end products of weathering and are very stable
under surface conditions. Consequently, clay minerals
make up a high percentage of the inorganic material in
soils. Moreover, the most abundant sedimentary rock,
shale, contains a high proportion of clay minerals.
In addition to the formation of clay minerals during the weathering of potassium feldspar, some silica is
removed from the feldspar structure and carried away
by groundwater. This dissolved silica will eventually precipitate to produce nodules of chert or flint, or it will fill
in the pore spaces between grains of sediment, or it will
be carried to the ocean, where microscopic animals will
remove it from the water to build hard silica shells. To
summarize, the weathering of potassium feldspar generates a residual clay mineral, a soluble salt (potassium
bicarbonate), and some silica, which enters into solution.
Quartz, the other main component of granite, is very
resistant to chemical weathering and remains substantially unaltered when attacked by weak acidic solutions.
As a result, when granite weathers, the feldspar crystals
dull and slowly turn to clay, releasing the once-interlocked
quartz grains, which still retain their fresh, glassy
appearance. Although some of the quartz remains in the
soil, much is eventually transported to the sea or to other
sites of deposition, where it becomes the main constituent of such features as sandy beaches and sand dunes.
In time these quartz grains may be lithified to form the
sedimentary rock sandstone.
Table 6.1 lists the weathered products of some of the
most common silicate minerals. Remember that silicate
Water penetrates extensively
jointed rock

TABLE 6.1

Weathering attacks
a face on one side

Products of Chemical Weathering

Mineral

Residual Products

Material in Solution

Quartz

Quartz grains

Silica

Feldspars

Clay minerals

Silica, K1, Na1, Ca21

Clay minerals

Silica, Ca21, Mg21

Amphibole
(hornblende)

Limonite
Hematite

Olivine

Limonite

Silica

Hematite

Mg21

minerals make up most of Earth’s crust and that these
minerals are essentially composed of only eight elements.
When chemically weathered, these silicate minerals
yield sodium, calcium, potassium, and magnesium ions
that form soluble products, which may be removed from
groundwater. The element iron combines with oxygen,
producing relatively insoluble iron oxides, most notably
hematite and limonite, which give soil a reddish-brown or
yellowish color. Under most conditions, the three remaining elements—aluminum, silicon, and oxygen—join
with water to produce residual clay minerals. However,
even the highly insoluble clay minerals are very slowly
removed by subsurface water.

Spheroidal Weathering
Many rock outcrops have a rounded appearance. This
occurs because chemical weathering works inward
from exposed surfaces. Figure 6.12 illustrates how
angular masses of jointed rock change through time.
The process is aptly called spheroidal weathering.

Chemical weathering decomposes
minerals and enlarges joints

Weathering attacks
an edge on two sides

191

Rocks are attacked more on
corners and edges and take on
a spherical shape

T I M
E

Weathering attacks
a corner on three sides

SmartFigure 6.12
The formation of rounded
boulders Spheroidal
weathering of extensively
jointed rock. (Photo by E. J.
Tarbuck) (https://goo.gl/GkxWQd)

Spheroidal weathering in Joshua
Tree National Park, California

192

Weathering and Soils

CHAPTER 6

E Y E ON E A R T H

Because weathering attacks edges from two sides and
corners from three sides, these areas wear down faster
than a single flat surface. Gradually, sharp edges and
corners become smooth and rounded. Eventually
an angular block may evolve into a nearly spherical
boulder. Once this occurs, the boulder’s shape does
not change, but the spherical mass continues to get
smaller.

6.2

T

his sample of granite
is rich in potassium
feldspar and quartz.
There are minor quantities
of biotite and hornblende.

6.3

QUESTION 1 If this rock
were to undergo chemical
weathering, how would
its minerals change?
Describe the products you
would expect to result from
each of the minerals in the
sample.

Concept Checks

1. How is carbonic acid formed in nature?
2. What occurs when carbonic acid reacts with
calcite-rich rocks such as limestone?
3. What products result when carbonic acid reacts
with potassium feldspar?
4. List several minerals that are especially
susceptible to oxidation and list two common
products of oxidation.

Dennis Tasa

QUESTION 2 Would all of the
minerals decompose? If not, which
mineral would likely be most resistant
and remain relatively intact?

6.4

5. Explain how angular masses of rock often
become spherical boulders.

Rates of Weathering
Summarize the factors that influence the type and rate of rock weathering.

We have already seen how mechanical weathering affects the rate of weathering. When rock is
broken into smaller pieces, the amount of surface area exposed to chemical weathering increases.
Other important factors that influence the type and rate of rock weathering include rock characteristics and climate.

Rock Characteristics

SmartFigure 6.13
Rock type influences
weathering An examination
of headstones in the same
cemetery shows that the
rate of chemical weathering
is influenced by rock type.
(Photos by E. J. Tarbuck) (https://
goo.gl/NkVbSs)

This granite headstone was erected in 1868.
The inscription is still fresh looking.

Rock characteristics encompass all of
the chemical traits of rocks, including
mineral composition and solubility. In
addition, any physical features, such
as joints, can be important because
they influence the ability of water to
penetrate rock.
The variations in weathering
rates due to the mineral constituents
can be demonstrated by comparing
old headstones made from different
rock types. Headstones of granite,
which is composed of silicate
minerals, are relatively resistant
to chemical weathering. In
This monument is composed of marble,
contrast, marble headstones
a calcite-rich metamorphic rock. The
show signs of extensive chemiheadstone was erected in 1872, four
cal alteration over a relatively
years after the granite stone. The
inscription is nearly illegible.
short period. We can see this by

6.4 Rates of Weathering
Figure 6.14

examining the inscriptions on the headstones shown in Figure 6.13. Marble is
composed of calcite (calcium carbonate),
which readily dissolves even in a weakly
acidic solution.
The silicates, the most abundant
mineral group, chemically weather in
essentially the same order in which
they crystallize. By examining Bowen’s
reaction series (see Figure 4.21 page
125), you can see that olivine crystallizes first and is therefore least resistant to chemical weathering, whereas
quartz, which crystallizes last, is the
most resistant.

Acid rain accelerates the
chemical weathering of
stone monuments and
structures As a result of
burning large quantities of
coal and petroleum, more
than 20 million tons of
sulfur and nitrogen oxides
are released into the atmosphere each year in the
United States. Through a
series of complex chemical
reactions, some of these
pollutants are converted
into acids that then fall
to Earth’s surface as rain
or snow. This decomposing building facade is in
Leipzig, Germany. (Photo by

Climate
Climatic factors, particularly temperature and precipitation, are crucial to the
rate of rock weathering. For example,
the frequency of freeze–thaw cycles
greatly affects the amount of frost
wedging, an important type of mechanical weathering.
Temperature and moisture also exert a strong influence on rates of chemical weathering and determine
the kind and amount of vegetation present. Regions
with lush vegetation often have a thick mantle of soil
rich in decayed organic matter from which chemically
active fluids such as carbonic acid and humic acids are
derived.
The optimum environment for chemical weathering is a combination of warm temperatures and
abundant moisture. In polar regions, chemical weathering is ineffective because frigid temperatures keep
the available moisture
locked up as ice, whereas
in arid regions, there is
insufficient moisture to
promote rapid chemical
weathering.
Human activities often
produce pollutants that
alter the composition of the
atmosphere. Such changes
can, in turn, influence the
rate of chemical weathering. One well-known example is acid rain (Figure 6.14).

Differential
Weathering
Masses of rock do not
weather uniformly. Take
a moment to look back at

193

Doug Plummer/Science Source)

the photo of Shiprock, New Mexico, in Figure 5.28 (page
168). The durable volcanic neck protrudes high above
the surrounding terrain. A glance at the chapter-opening
photo of Joshua Tree National Park shows an additional
example of this phenomenon, called differential weathering. The results vary in scale from the rough, uneven
surface of the marble headstone in Figure 6.13 to the
boldly sculpted exposures of bedrock in New Mexico’s
Bisti Badlands (Figure 6.15).
Differential weathering and subsequent erosion are
responsible for creating many unusual, often spectacular
rock formations and landforms. Many factors influence
SmartFigure 6.15
Monuments to weathering
This example of differential
weathering is in New Mexico’s
Bisti Badlands. When
weathering accentuates
differences in rocks,
spectacular landforms are
sometimes created. (Photo by
Michael Collier) (http://goo.gl/MGqs7b)

194

CHAPTER 6

Weathering and Soils

the different rates of rock weathering. Among the most
important are variations in rock composition. More resistant rock protrudes as ridges or pinnacles, or as steeper
cliffs on an irregular hillside (see Figure 7.5, page 216).
The number and spacing of joints can also be a significant factor (see Figure 6.12).

6.5

6.4

Concept Checks

1. Explain why the headstones in Figure 6.13 have
weathered so differently.
2. How does climate influence weathering?

Soil
Define soil and explain why soil is referred to as an interface.

Weathering is a key process in the formation of soil. Along with air and water, soil is one of our
most indispensable resources. Also like air and water, soil is often taken for granted. The following
quote helps put this vital layer in perspective:
Science, in recent years, has focused more and
more on the Earth as a planet, one that for all we
know is unique—where a thin blanket of air, a
thinner film of water, and the thinnest veneer of
soil combine to support a web of life of wondrous
diversity in continuous change.*
Soil has accurately been called “the bridge between
life and the inanimate world.” All life—the entire
biosphere—owes its existence to a dozen or so elements
that must ultimately come from Earth’s crust. Once
weathering and other processes create soil, plants carry
out the intermediary role of assimilating the necessary
elements and making them available to animals, including humans.

An Interface in the Earth System
When Earth is viewed as a system, as discussed in
Chapter 1, soil is considered an interface—a common
boundary where different parts of a system interact.
This is an appropriate designation because soil forms
*Jack Eddy, “A Fragile Seam of Dark Blue Light,” in Proceedings of the Global
Change Research Forum. U.S. Geological Survey Circular 1086, 1993, p. 15.

E Y E ON E A R T H

T

he rounded boulders in this image
gradually formed in place from a rock
mass that had many fractures. Initially
the rocks had sharp corners and edges.

(Photo by Mike Brine/Alamy Images)

QUESTION 1 Explain the process that
transformed angular blocks of bedrock into
rounded boulders.
QUESTION 2 What term is applied to this process?

6.3

where the geosphere, the atmosphere, the hydrosphere,
and the biosphere meet. Soil is a material that develops in response to complex environmental interactions
among different parts of the Earth system. Over time,
soil gradually evolves to a state of equilibrium, or balance, with the environment. Soil is dynamic and sensitive to almost every aspect of its surroundings. Thus,
when environmental changes occur, such as changes in
climate, vegetative cover, and animal (including human)
activity, the soil responds. Any such change gradually
alters soil characteristics until a new balance is reached.
Although thinly distributed over the land surface, soil
functions as a fundamental interface, providing an
excellent example of the integration among many parts
of the Earth system.

What Is Soil?
With few exceptions, Earth’s land surface is covered by
regolith, a layer of rock and mineral fragments produced
by weathering. Some would call this material soil, but soil
is more than an accumulation of weathered debris. Soil
is a combination of mineral and organic matter, water,
and air—the portion of the regolith that supports the
growth of plants. Although the proportions of the major

6.5 Soil
Figure 6.16

What is soil? The pie chart
depicts the composition (by
volume) of a soil in good
condition for plant growth.
Although percentages vary,
each soil is composed of
mineral and organic matter,
water, and air. (Photo by i love
images/gardening/Alamy Images)

25% air
45%
mineral
matter

5% organic matter

and spheroidal. Soil structure is important because it
influences how easily a soil can be cultivated as well as
how susceptible a soil is to erosion. Soil structure also
affects a soil’s porosity and permeability (the ease with
which water can penetrate). This in turn influences the
movement of nutrients to plant roots. Prismatic and
blocky peds usually allow for moderate water infiltration,
whereas platy and spheroidal structures are characterized by slower infiltration rates.

Soil Texture and Structure

6.5

Concept Checks

1. Explain why soil is considered an interface in the
Earth system.
2. How is regolith different from soil?
3. Why is texture an important soil property?
4. Using the soil texture diagram in Figure 6.17,
name the soil that consists of 60 percent sand,
30 percent silt, and 10 percent clay.

Figure 6.17

0

100

30

80

40

60

50

A
Silty clay
loam

Clay loam
30

80

Sandy clay
loam

20

Loam

ys

Silt

an

d

0

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

0

Percent sand

0

Sand

Silty loam

Sandy loam

am

10

Lo

90

10

60

Silty
clay

70

nt
rce
Pe
40

Agriculture)

silt

Sandy
clay

nt

rce

cla

Clay
Pe

y

70

50

Soil texture diagram The
texture of any soil can be
represented by a point on
this diagram. Soil texture is
one of the factors used to
estimate agricultural potential and engineering characteristics. (U.S. Department of

20

90

10

Most soils are far from uniform and contain particles of
different sizes. Soil texture refers to the proportions of
different particle sizes. Texture is a basic soil property
because it strongly influences the soil’s ability to retain
and transmit water and air, both of which are essential to
plant growth. Sandy soils may drain too rapidly and dry
out quickly. At the opposite extreme, the pore spaces of
clay-rich soils may be so small that they inhibit drainage,
and long-lasting puddles result. Moreover, when the clay
and silt content is very high, plant roots may have difficulty penetrating the soil.
Because soils rarely consist of particles of only one
size, textural categories have been established based on
the varying proportions of clay, silt, and sand. The standard system of classes used by the U.S. Department of
Agriculture is shown in Figure 6.17. For example, point
A on this triangular diagram (left center) represents a
soil composed of 10 percent silt, 40 percent clay, and 50
percent sand. Such a soil is called a sandy clay. The soils
called loam, which occupy the central portion of the
diagram, are those in which no single particle size predominates over the other two. Loam soils are best suited
to support plant life because they generally hold moisture
and nutrients better than do soils composed predominantly of clay or coarse sand.
Soil particles are seldom completely independent
of one another. Rather, they usually form clumps called
peds that give soils a particular structure. Four basic
soil structures are recognized: platy, prismatic, blocky,

25%
water

10

components in soil vary, the same four components are
always present to some extent (Figure 6.16). About onehalf of the total volume of good-quality surface soil is a
mixture of disintegrated and decomposed rock (mineral
matter) and humus, the decayed remains of animal and
plant life (organic matter). The remaining half consists of
pore spaces among the solid particles where air and water
circulate.
Although the mineral portion of the soil is usually
much greater than the organic portion, humus is an
essential component. In addition to being an important
source of plant nutrients, humus enhances the soil’s ability to retain water. Because plants require air and water
to live and grow, the portion of the soil consisting of pore
spaces that allow these fluids to circulate is as vital as the
solid soil constituents.
Soil water is far from “pure” water; instead, it is a
complex solution that contains many soluble nutrients.
Soil water not only provides the necessary moisture for
the chemical reactions that sustain life, it also supplies
plants with nutrients in a form they can use. The pore
spaces that are not filled with water contain air. This
air is the source of necessary oxygen and carbon dioxide for most microorganisms and plants that live in the
soil.

195

196

CHAPTER 6

Weathering and Soils

6.6

Controls of Soil Formation
List and briefly discuss five controls of soil formation.

Soil is the product of the complex interplay of several factors, including parent material, climate,
plants and animals, time, and topography. Although all these factors are interdependent, their roles
will be examined separately.

Parent Material
The source of the weathered mineral matter from which
soils develop is called the parent material and is a
major factor influencing newly forming soil. Gradually
this weathered matter undergoes physical and chemical
changes as soil formation progresses. Parent material can
either be the underlying bedrock or a layer of unconsolidated deposits. When the parent material is bedrock,
the soils are termed residual soils, while soils developed
on unconsolidated sediment are called transported soils
(Figure 6.18). It should be pointed out that transported
soils form in place on parent materials that have been
carried from elsewhere and deposited by gravity, water,
wind, or ice.
Parent material influences soils in two ways. First,
the type of parent material influences the rate of weathering and thus the rate of soil formation. Also, because
unconsolidated deposits are already partly weathered,
soil development on such material will likely progress
more rapidly than when bedrock is the parent material.
Second, the chemical makeup of the parent material will
affect the soil’s fertility. This influences the character of
the natural vegetation the soil can support.
At one time, the parent material was thought to
be the primary factor causing differences among soils.
Figure 6.18
Slopes and soil development The parent material for residual soils is
the underlying bedrock.
Transported soils form on
unconsolidated deposits.
Also note that as slopes
become steeper, soil
becomes thinner. (Left and

No soil development
because of very steep slope

However, soil scientists have come to understand that
other factors, especially climate, are more important.
In fact, similar soils often develop from different parent
materials, and dissimilar soils can develop from the same
parent material. Such discoveries reinforce the importance of other soil-forming factors.
_TT21


Climate
Climate is considered to be the most influential control of
soil formation. Temperature and precipitation are the elements that exert the strongest impact. As noted earlier in
this chapter, variations in temperature and precipitation
determine whether chemical or mechanical weathering
will predominate and also greatly influence the rate and
depth of weathering. For instance, a hot, wet climate may
produce a thick layer of chemically weathered soil in the
same amount of time that a cold, dry climate produces a
thin mantle of mechanically weathered debris. Also, the
amount of precipitation influences the degree to which
various materials are removed from the soil by percolating
water (a process called leaching), thereby affecting soil fertility. Finally, climatic conditions are an important control
on the types and numbers of plant and animal life present.

Plants and Animals
Transported soil
developed on unconsolidated
stream deposits

center photos by E. J. Tarbuck;
right photo by Lucarelli Temistocle/
Shutterstock)

Unconsolidated deposits

Plants and animals play a vital role in soil formation. The
types and abundance of organisms strongly influence the
physical and chemical properties
Residual soil
of a soil (Figure 6.19). In fact, for
is developed on bedrock
well-developed soils in many
regions, the significance of
natural vegetation on soil type
is frequently implied in the
names used by soil scientists,
such as prairie soil, forest soil,
and tundra soil.
Plants and animals furnish organic matter to the
Thicker soil
soil. Certain bog soils are
develops on flat terrain
composed almost entirely
of organic matter, whereas
desert soils might contain as
Bedrock
little as a small fraction of 1
percent. Although the quantity of organic matter varies
Thinner soil
on steep slope
substantially among soils, it is a rare soil
because of erosion that completely lacks it.

6.6 Controls of Soil Formation
Meager desert rainfall means reduced rates of weathering and
relatively meager vegetation. Desert soils are typically thin and
lack much organic matter.

197

Figure 6.19
Plants influence soil The nature of the
vegetation in an area can have a significant
influence on soil formation. (Photos by Bill
Brooks/Alamy Images, Nickolay Stanev/Shutterstock, and
Elizabeth C. Doemer/Shutterstock)

In the northern coniferous forest, the organic litter
is high in acid resin, which contributes to an
accumulation of acid in the soil. As a result, acid
leaching is an important soil-forming process.

The primary source of organic matter in soil is
plants, although animals and an infinite number of
microorganisms also contribute. Decomposed organic
matter supplies important nutrients to plants, as well
as to animals and microorganisms living in the soil.
Consequently, soil fertility is in part related to the
amount of organic matter present. Furthermore, the
decay of plant and animal remains causes the formation
of various organic acids. These complex acids hasten
the weathering process. Organic matter also has a high
water-holding ability and thus aids water retention in a
soil.
Microorganisms, including fungi, bacteria, and
single-celled protozoa, play an active role in the decay of
plant and animal remains. The end product is humus, a
material that no longer resembles the plants and animals
from which it is formed. In addition, certain microorganisms aid soil fertility by converting atmospheric nitrogen
into soil nitrogen.
Earthworms and other burrowing animals mix the
mineral and organic portions of a soil. Earthworms, for
example, feed on organic matter and thoroughly mix soils
in which they live, often moving and enriching many tons
per acre each year. Burrows and holes also aid the passage of water and air through the soil.

Time
Time is an important component of every geologic
process, including soil formation. The nature of soil is
strongly influenced by the length of time processes have
been operating. If weathering has been going on for a
comparatively short time, the character of the parent

Soils that develop in well-drained prairie regions typically have a
humus-rich surface horizon that is rich in calcium and magnesium.
Fertility is usually excellent.

material strongly influences soil characteristics. As
weathering processes continue, the influence of parent
material on soil is overshadowed by other soil-forming
factors, especially climate. The time required for various
soils to evolve cannot be listed because the soil-forming
processes act at varying rates under different circumstances. However, as a rule, the longer a soil has been
forming, the thicker it becomes and the less it resembles
the parent material.

Topography
The lay of the land can vary greatly over short distances.
Variations in topography can lead to the development of
a variety of localized soil types. Many of the differences
exist because the length and steepness of slopes significantly affect the amount of erosion and the water content
of soil.
On steep slopes, soils are often poorly developed.
Due to rapid runoff, the quantity of water soaking in is
slight; as a result, the soil’s moisture content may not be
sufficient for vigorous plant growth. Further, because of
accelerated erosion on steep slopes, the soils are thin or
in some cases nonexistent (see Figure 6.18).
In contrast, poorly drained and waterlogged soils
found in bottomlands have a much different character.
Such soils are usually thick and dark. The dark color
results from the large quantity of organic matter that
accumulates because saturated conditions retard the
decay of vegetation. The optimum terrain for soil development is a flat-to-undulating upland surface. Here we
find good drainage, minimum erosion, and sufficient
infiltration of water into the soil.

198

CHAPTER 6

Weathering and Soils

Slope orientation, or the direction a slope is facing, is
another consideration. In the midlatitudes of the Northern Hemisphere, a south-facing slope receives a great
deal more sunlight than a north-facing slope. In fact, a
steep north-facing slope may receive no direct sunlight
at all. The difference in the amount of solar radiation
received causes differences in soil temperature and moisture, which in turn influence the nature of the vegetation
and the character of the soil.
Although this section deals separately with each
of the soil-forming factors, remember that all of
them work together to form soil. No single factor is

6.7

responsible for a soil’s character; rather, it is the combined influence of parent material, climate, plants and
animals, time, and topography that determines this
character.

6.6

Concept Checks

1. List the five basic controls of soil formation.
Which factor is most influential in soil formation?
2. How might the direction a slope is facing
influence soil formation?

Describing and Classifying Soils
Sketch, label, and describe an idealized soil profile. Explain the need for classifying
soils.

The factors controlling soil formation vary greatly from place to place and from time to time,
leading to an amazing variety of soil types.

The Soil Profile
Because soil-forming processes operate from the surface downward, soil composition, texture, structure,
and color gradually evolve differently at varying depths.
SmartFigure 6.20
Soil horizons Idealized soil
profile from a humid climate
in the middle latitudes.
(https://goo.gl/dgNbWj)

Topsoil

Loose and
partly decayed
organic matter

A horizon
Mineral matter
mixed with
some humus

E horizon
Zone of
eluviation
and leaching

Subsoil

Solum, or “true soil”

O horizon

B horizon
Accumulation of
clay transported
from above

C horizon
Partially altered
parent material

Unweathered
parent material

These vertical differences, which usually become more
pronounced as time passes, divide the soil into zones or
layers known as horizons. If you were to dig a pit in soil,
you would see that its walls are layered. Such a vertical
section through all of the soil horizons constitutes the soil
profile.
Figure 6.20 presents an idealized view of a welldeveloped soil profile in which five horizons are identified. From the surface downward, they are designated
as O, A, E, B, and C. These five horizons are common
to soils in temperate regions; not all soils have these five
layers. The characteristics and extent of horizon development vary in different environments. Thus, different
localities exhibit soil profiles that can contrast greatly
with one another:
r The O soil horizon consists largely of organic material, in contrast to the layers beneath it, which
consist mainly of mineral matter. The upper portion
of the O horizon is primarily plant litter, such as
loose leaves and other organic debris that are still
recognizable. By contrast, the lower portion of the
O horizon is made up of partly decomposed organic
matter (humus) in which plant structures can no longer be identified. In addition to plants, the O horizon
is teeming with microscopic life, including bacteria,
fungi, algae, and insects. All these organisms contribute oxygen, carbon dioxide, and organic acids to
the developing soil.
r The A horizon is largely mineral matter, yet biological activity is high, and humus is generally present—
up to 30 percent in some instances. Together the O
and A horizons make up what is commonly called
the topsoil.
r The E horizon is a light-colored layer that contains
little organic material. As water percolates downward
through this zone, finer particles are carried away.

6.7 Describing and Classifying Soils
This washing out of fine soil components is termed
eluviation. Water percolating downward also dissolves soluble inorganic soil components and carries
them to deeper zones. This depletion of soluble materials from the upper soil is termed leaching.
r The B horizon, or subsoil, is where much of the material removed from the E horizon by eluviation is
deposited. Thus, the B horizon is often referred to
as the zone of accumulation. The accumulation of
the fine clay particles enhances this horizon’s ability
to hold water. In extreme cases, clay accumulation
can form a very compact, impermeable layer called
hardpan.
r The O, A, E, and B horizons together constitute the
solum, or “true soil.” It is in the solum that soilforming processes are active and that living roots
and other plant and animal life are largely confined.
r The C horizon is characterized by partially altered
parent material. Whereas the parent material is difficult to see in the O, A, E, and B horizons, it is easily
identifiable in the C horizon. Although this material
is undergoing changes that will eventually transform
it into soil, it has not yet crossed the threshold that
separates regolith from soil.
The characteristics and extent of development can
vary greatly among soils in different environments (Figure
6.21). The boundaries between soil horizons may be sharp,
or the horizons may blend gradually from one to another.
Consequently, a well-developed soil profile indicates that
environmental conditions have been relatively stable over
an extended time span and that the soil is mature. By
contrast, some soils lack horizons altogether. Such soils are
called immature because soil building has been going on
for only a short time. Immature soils are also characteristic of steep slopes, where erosion continually strips away
the soil, preventing full development.

E Y E ON E A R T H

6.4

T

his thick red soil is exposed somewhere in the
United States and is either a gelisol, a mollisol, or
an oxisol. (Photo by Sandra A. Dunlap/Shutterstock)

QUESTION 1 Refer to the descriptions in Table 6.2 and
determine the likely soil order shown in this image.
Explain your choice.
QUESTION 2 Which one of these states is the most likely
location of the soil—Alaska, Illinois, or Hawaii?

199
Figure 6.21
Contrasting soil
profiles Soil characteristics and development
vary greatly in different
environments. (Left photo by
USDA; right photo courtesy of E. J.
Tarbuck)

Horizons are indistinct in
this soil in Puerto Rico,
giving it a relatively uniform
appearance.

This profile shows a soil in
southeastern South Dakota
with well-developed
horizons.

Classifying Soils
The great variety of soils on Earth makes it essential
to devise some means of classifying the vast array of
soil data. Establishing categories of items having certain important characteristics in common introduces
order and simplicity, which not only aids comprehension and understanding but also facilitates analysis and
explanation.
Soil scientists in the United States have devised a
system for classifying soils known as the Soil Taxonomy.
It emphasizes the physical and chemical properties of the
soil profile and is organized on the basis of observable

200

CHAPTER 6

Weathering and Soils

TABLE 6.2 Basic Soil Orders
Soil Order

Description

Percentage*
_TT22


Alfisol

Moderately weathered soils formed under boreal forests or broadleaf deciduous forests, rich in iron and aluminum. Clay particles accumulate
in a subsurface layer due to leaching in moist environments. Fertile, productive soils because they are neither too wet nor too dry.

9.65

Andisol

Young soils in which the parent material is volcanic ash and cinders, deposited by recent volcanic activity.

Aridosol

Soils that develop in dry places with insufficient water to remove soluble minerals; may have calcium carbonate, gypsum, or salt accumulation
in subsoil; low organic content.

12.02

0.7

Entisol

Young soils with limited development and exhibiting properties of the parent material. Productivity ranges from very high for some forming on
recent river deposits to very low for those forming on shifting sand or rocky slopes.

16.16

Gelisol

Young soils with little profile development, found in regions with permafrost. Low temperatures and frozen conditions for much of the year;
slow soil-forming processes.

8.61

Histosol

Organic soils found in any climate where organic debris accumulates to form a bog soil. Dark, partially decomposed organic material commonly
referred to as peat.

1.17

Inceptisol

Weakly developed young soils showing the beginning (inception) of profile development. Most common in humid climates but found from the
arctic to the tropics. Native vegetation is most often forest.

9.81

Mollisol

Dark, soft soils developed under grass vegetation, generally found in prairie areas. Humus-rich surface horizon that is rich in calcium and magnesium; excellent fertility. Also found in hardwood forests with significant earthworm activity. Climatic range is boreal or alpine to tropical. Dry
seasons are normal.

6.89

Oxisol

Soils formed on old land surfaces unless parent materials were strongly weathered before they were deposited. Generally found in the tropics
and subtropical regions. Rich in iron and aluminum oxides, oxisols are heavily leached and hence are poor soils for cultivation.

7.5

Spodosol

Soils found only in humid regions on sandy material. Common in northern coniferous forests and cool humid forests. Beneath the dark upper
horizon of weathered organic material lies a light-colored leached horizon, the distinctive property of this soil.

2.56

Ultisol

Soils representing the products of long periods of weathering. Percolating water concentrates clay particles in the lower horizons. Restricted to
humid climates in the temperate regions and the tropics, where the growing season is long. Abundant water and a long frost-free period contribute to extensive leaching and poor fertility.

8.45

Vertisol

Soils containing large amounts of clay, which shrink when dry and swell with the addition of water. Found in subhumid to arid climates if sufficient water is available to saturate the soil after periods of drought. Soil expansion and contraction exert stresses on human structures.

2.24

*Percentages refer to the world’s ice-free surface.

Figure 6.22
Global soil regions Worldwide distribution of the Soil Taxonomy’s 12 soil orders. Points A and B are references for a Give It Some Thought item at the end of
the chapter. (Natural Resources Conservation Service/USDA)



Soil orders
Alfisols
Andisols
Aridisols
Entisols
Gelisols
Histosols
Inceptisols
Mollisols
Oxisols
Spodosols
Ultisols
Vertisols
Rocky land
Shifting sand
Ice/glacier



6.8 The Impact of Human Activities on Soil
soil characteristics. There are 6 hierarchical categories of
classification, ranging from order, the broadest category,
to series, the most specific category. The system recognizes 12 soil orders and more than 19,000 soil series.
The names of the classification units are mostly
combinations of Latin or Greek descriptive terms. For
example, soils of the order aridosol (from the Latin aridus 5 dry and solum 5 soil) are characteristically dry
soils in arid regions. Soils in the order inceptisol (from
Latin inceptum 5 beginning and solum 5 soil) are
soils with only the beginning, or inception, of profile
development.
Brief descriptions of the 12 basic soil orders are
provided in Table 6.2. Figure 6.22 shows the complex
worldwide distribution pattern of the Soil Taxonomy’s
12 soil orders. Like many other classification systems,
the Soil Taxonomy is not suitable for every purpose.
It is especially useful for agricultural and related

6.8

land-use purposes, but it is not a useful system for
engineers who are preparing evaluations of potential
construction sites.

6.7

Concept Checks

1. Sketch and label the main soil horizons in a welldeveloped soil profile.
2. Describe the following features or processes:
eluviation, leaching, zone of accumulation, and
hardpan.
3. Why are soils classified?
4. Refer to Figure 6.22 and identify three particularly
extensive soil orders that occur in the contiguous
48 United States. Describe two soil orders in
Alaska.

The Impact of Human Activities on Soil
Explain the detrimental impact of human activities on soil and list several ways to
combat soil erosion.

Soils are just a tiny fraction of all Earth materials, yet they are vital. Soils are necessary for the
growth of rooted plants and thus are a basic foundation of the human life-support system. Because
soil forms very slowly, it must be considered a nonrenewable resource. Just as human ingenuity can
increase the agricultural productivity of soils through fertilization and irrigation, soils can be damaged or destroyed by careless activities. Despite their role in providing food, fiber, and other basic
materials, soils are among our most abused resources.

Clearing the Tropical Rain Forest: A
Case Study of Human Impact on Soil
Over the past few decades, the destruction of tropical
forests has become a serious environmental issue. Each
year millions of acres are cleared for agriculture and logging (Figure 6.23). This clearing results in soil degradation,
loss of biodiversity, and climate change.
Thick red-orange soils (oxisols) are common in the
wet tropics and subtropics (see Figure 6.22). They are the
end product of extreme chemical weathering. Because
lush tropical rain forests are associated with these soils,
many people assume that they are fertile and have great
potential for agriculture. However, just the opposite is
true: Oxisols are among the poorest soils for farming.
How can this be?
Rain forest soils develop under conditions of high
temperature and heavy rainfall and are therefore severely
leached. Not only does leaching remove the soluble materials such as calcium carbonate, but the great quantities
of percolating rainwater also remove much of the silica,
and as a result, insoluble oxides of iron and aluminum
become concentrated in the soil. Iron oxides give the

soil its distinctive color. Because bacterial activity is high
in the wet tropics, organic matter quickly breaks down,
and rain forest soils contain very little humus. Moreover,
leaching destroys fertility because most plant nutrients in
the soil are removed by the large volume of downwardpercolating water. Despite the dense and luxuriant rain
forest vegetation, the soil itself contains few available
nutrients.
Most nutrients that support the rain forest are
locked up in the trees themselves. As vegetation dies and
decomposes, the roots of the rain forest trees quickly
absorb the nutrients before they are leached from the
soil. The nutrients are continuously recycled as trees die
and decompose. Therefore, when forests are cleared to
provide land for farming or to harvest timber, most of the
nutrients are removed as well. What remains is a soil that
contains little to nourish planted crops.
Rain forest clearing not only removes plant nutrients
but also accelerates soil erosion. The roots of rain forest
vegetation anchor the soil, and leaves and branches provide a canopy that protects the ground by deflecting the
full force of the frequent heavy rains. When the protective vegetation is gone, soil erosion increases.

201

202

CHAPTER 6

Weathering and Soils

Figure 6.23
Tropical deforestation Clearing the Amazon
rain forest in Surinam. The
thick soils (oxisols) are
highly leached. Clearing
of the tropical rain forest
is a serious environmental
problem. (Photo by Wesley
Bocxe/Science Source)

The removal of vegetation also exposes the ground
to strong direct sunlight. When baked by the Sun, these
tropical soils can harden to a bricklike consistency and
become practically impenetrable to water and crop roots.
In just a few years, a freshly cleared area may no longer
be cultivable.

Soil Erosion: Losing a Vital Resource
Many people do not realize that soil erosion—the
removal of topsoil—is a serious environmental problem.
Perhaps this is the case because a substantial amount of
soil seems to remain even where soil erosion is serious.
Figure 6.24
Raindrop impact Soil
dislodged by raindrop
impact is more easily
moved by sheet erosion.
(Photo courtesy U.S. Department
of the Navy/Soil Conservation
Service/USDA)

Raindrops may strike the surface at velocities approaching
35 km per hour. When a drop strikes an exposed surface, soil
particles may splash as high as one meter and land more than
a meter away from the point of raindrop impact.

Nevertheless, although the loss of fertile topsoil may not
be obvious to the untrained eye, it is a significant and
growing problem as human activities expand and disturb
more and more of Earth’s surface.
Soil erosion is a natural process; it is part of the
constant recycling of Earth materials that we call the
rock cycle. Once soil forms, erosional forces, especially
water and wind, move soil components from one place
to another. Every time it rains, raindrops strike the land
with surprising force (Figure 6.24). Each drop acts like
a tiny bomb, blasting movable soil particles out of their
positions in the soil mass. Then, water flowing across the
surface carries away the dislodged soil particles. Because
the soil is moved by thin sheets of water, this process is
termed sheet erosion.
After the water flows as a thin, unconfined sheet for
a relatively short distance, threads of current typically
develop, and tiny channels called rills begin to form. Still
deeper cuts in the soil, known as gullies, are created as
rills enlarge (Figure 6.25). When normal farm cultivation
cannot eliminate the channels, we know the rills have
grown large enough to be called gullies. Although most
dislodged soil particles move only a short distance during
each rainfall, substantial quantities eventually leave the
fields and make their way downslope to a stream. Once
in the stream channel, these soil particles, which can
now be called sediment, are transported downstream and
eventually deposited.

Rates of Erosion We know that soil erosion is the
ultimate fate of practically all soils. In the past, erosion

6.8 The Impact of Human Activities on Soil

203
Figure 6.25

Severe sheet and rill erosion on an Iowa farm
following heavy rains.

Gully erosion on unprotected soil on a Wisconsin farm.
Just one millimeter of soil from a single acre amounts
to about 5 tons.

Soil erosion on unprotected soils A. Sheetflow
and rills. B. Rills can grow
into deep gullies. (Photo A by
Lynn Betts/NRCS; photo B by D. P.
Burnside/Science Source)

A.

B.

occurred at slower rates than it does today because more eroding faster than it forms on more than one-third of
of the land surface was covered and protected by trees,
the world’s croplands. The results are lower productivity,
shrubs, grasses, and other plants. However, human activ- poorer crop quality, reduced agricultural income, and an
ities such as farming, logging, and construction, which
ominous future.
remove or disrupt the natural vegetation, have greatly
accelerated the rate of soil erosion. Without the stabilizControlling Soil Erosion On every continent, unnecing effect of plants, the soil is more easily swept away by
essary soil loss is occurring because appropriate conserthe wind or carried downslope by sheet wash (see GEO- vation measures are not being taken. Although we recoggraphics 6.3).
nize that soil erosion can never be completely eliminated,
Natural rates of soil erosion vary greatly from one
soil conservation programs can substantially reduce the
place to another and depend on soil characteristics as
loss of this basic resource.
well as factors such as climate, slope, and type of vegetaSteepness of slope is an important factor in soil erotion. Over a broad area, erosion caused by surface runoff sion. The steeper the slope, the faster the water runs off
may be estimated by determining how much sediment
and the greater the erosion. It is best to leave steep slopes
is carried by the streams that drain the region. Studies
undisturbed, but when such slopes are farmed, terraces
of this kind made on a global scale indicate that prior to
can be constructed. These nearly flat, steplike surfaces
the appearance of humans, sediment transport by rivslow runoff and thus decrease soil loss while allowing
ers to the ocean amounted to just over 9 billion metric
more water to soak into the ground.
tons per year. In contrast, the
The man is pointing to where the ground surface was when the grasses began to grow.
amount of material currently
Wind erosion lowered the land surface to the level of his feet.
transported to the sea by rivers is about 24 billion metric
tons per year, or more than
Clumps of anchored soil
two and a half times the earlier rate.
It is estimated that flowing water is responsible for
Unanchored soil
about two-thirds of the soil
erosion in the United States.
Much of the remainder is
Sand dune
caused by wind. When dry
1.2 meters
conditions prevail, strong
winds can remove large quantities of soil from unprotected
fields (Figure 6.26). At present,
it is estimated that topsoil is
_TT23


Figure 6.26
Wind erosion When the
land is dry and largely
unprotected by anchoring
vegetation, soil erosion by
wind can be significant.
(Photo courtesy Natural Resources
Conservation Service/USDA)

6.8 The Impact of Human Activities on Soil

205

Figure 6.27
Soil conservation Crops on a farm
in northeastern Iowa are planted to
decrease water erosion. (Photo courtesy of

Crops planted in strips
along contours of hillside

Erwin C. Cole/USDA/NRCS)

Corn
Grass planted
along drainage
Hay

Corn and hay have been planted in strips that follow the contours of the hillside.
This pattern reduces soil loss because it slows the rate of water runoff.

Soil erosion by water also occurs on gentle slopes.
Figure 6.27 illustrates one conservation method in which

crops are planted parallel to the contours of the slope.
This pattern reduces soil loss by slowing runoff. Strips of
grass or cover crops such as hay slow runoff even more
and act to promote water infiltration and trap sediment.
Creating grassed waterways is another common practice (Figure 6.28). Natural drainageways are shaped to form
smooth, shallow channels and then planted with grass.
The grass prevents the formation of gullies and traps soil
washed from cropland. Frequently crop residues are also
left on fields. This debris protects the surface from both

water and wind erosion. To protect fields from excessive
wind erosion, rows of trees and shrubs are planted as windbreaks to slow the wind and deflect it upward (Figure 6.29).

6.8

Concept Checks

1. Why are soils in tropical rain forests not well
suited for farming?
2. Place these phenomena related to soil erosion
in the proper sequence: sheet erosion, gullies,
raindrop impact, rills, stream.
3. Explain how human activities have affected the
rate of soil erosion.
4. What are two detrimental effects of soil erosion,
aside from the loss of topsoil?
5. Briefly describe three ways to control soil erosion.

The grassed waterway prevents
the formation of gullies and traps
soil washed from cropland.

Figure 6.28
Reducing erosion by water Grassed waterway on a
Pennsylvania farm. (Photo courtesy Bob Nichols/NRCS/USDA)

Figure 6.29

These flat expanses are susceptible to wind erosion, especially
when the fields are bare. The rows of trees slow and deflect the
wind, which decreases the loss of top soil.

Reducing wind
erosion Windbreaks
protect wheat fields in
North Dakota. (Photo courtesy
Natural Resources Conservation
Service/USDA)

7
Sedimentary
Rocks

These eroded sedimentary rocks are exposed in South
Dakota’s Badlands National Park. (Photo by Dennis MacDonald/
Fotostock)

C

hapter 6

provides the background you need to understand the origin of sedimentary rocks. Recall that weathering of existing rocks begins the process. Next, gravity
and agents of erosion such as running water, wind, and glacial ice remove the products
of weathering and carry them to a new location, where they are deposited. Usually the
particles are broken down further during this transport phase. Following deposition, this
material, which is now called sediment, becomes lithified (turned to rock). It is from
sedimentary rocks that geologists reconstruct many details of Earth’s history. Because
sediments are deposited in a variety of settings at the surface, the rock layers that they
eventually form hold many clues about past surface environments. A layer may represent a desert sand dune, the muddy floor of a swamp, or a tropical coral reef. There are
many possibilities. Many sedimentary rocks are associated with important energy and
mineral resources and are therefore important economically as well.

7.1

An Introduction to Sedimentary Rocks
Explain the importance of sedimentary rocks and summarize the part of the rock
cycle that pertains to sediments and sedimentary rocks. List the three categories of
sedimentary rocks.

Most of the solid Earth consists of igneous and metamorphic rocks. Geologists estimate that these
two categories represent 90 to 95 percent of the outer 16 kilometers (10 miles) of the crust. Nevertheless, most of Earth’s solid surface consists of either sediment or sedimentary rock.

Importance
About 75 percent of land areas are covered by sediments
and sedimentary rocks. Across the ocean floor, which
represents about 70 percent of Earth’s solid surface, virtually everything is covered by sediment. Igneous rocks are
exposed only at the crests of mid-ocean ridges and in some
Figure 7.1
Sedimentary rocks record
change Because they
contain fossils and other
clues about the geologic
past, sedimentary rocks
are important in the study
of Earth history. Vertical
changes in rock types
represent environmental
changes through time.
These strata are exposed
at Karijini National Park,
Western Australia. (Photo by
S. Sailer/A. Sailer/AGE Fotostock)

volcanic areas. Thus, while sediment and sedimentary
rocks make up only a small percentage of Earth’s crust,
they are concentrated at or near the surface—the interface among the geosphere, hydrosphere, atmosphere, and
biosphere. Because of this unique position, sediments and
the rock layers that they eventually form contain evidence
of past conditions and events at the surface.
Based on the compositions, textures, structures, and fossils in sedimentary rocks,
experienced geologists can decipher clues
that provide insights into past climates,
ecosystems, and ocean environments. Furthermore, by studying sedimentary rocks,
geologists can reconstruct the configuration of ancient landmasses and the locations and compositions of long-vanished
mountain systems. In short, this group of
rocks provides geologists with much of the
basic information needed to reconstruct the
details of Earth history (Figure 7.1).
The study of sedimentary rocks has
economic significance as well. Coal,
which provides a significant portion of
our electrical energy, is classified as a
sedimentary rock. Moreover, other major
energy sources—including oil, natural gas,

213

7.1 An Introduction to Sedimentary Rocks

Bob Gibbons/Alamy Images

Glaciers, rivers, and
wind transport
sediment.

E. J. Tarbuck

Gravity moves
solid particles
downslope.

Premium Stock Photography GmbH/Alamy

Wind

Deposition of solid particles produces
many different features—glacial
ridges, dunes, floodplains, deltas.
Ultimately much sediment reaches
the ocean floor.

Dunes

Landslide
Glacier
River

Ocean

Lake

Chemical and
mechanical
weathering
decompose and
disintegrate rock.

Reef
Soluble products of
chemical weathering
become dissolved in
groundwater and
streams.

and uranium—are derived from sedimentary rocks. So
are major sources of iron, aluminum, manganese, and
phosphate fertilizer, plus numerous materials that are
essential to the construction industry, such as cement
and aggregate. Sediments and sedimentary rocks are also
the primary reservoir of groundwater. Thus, having an
understanding of this group of rocks and the processes
that form and modify them is basic to locating and maintaining supplies of many important resources.

Origins
Like other rocks, the sedimentary rocks that we see
around us and use in so many different ways have their
origin in the rock cycle. Figure 7.2 illustrates the portion
of the rock cycle that occurs near Earth’s surface—the
part that pertains to sediments and sedimentary rocks.
A brief overview of these processes provides a useful
perspective:

When material dissolved
in water precipitates, it is
the source of such
features as reefs and
deposits rich in shells.

r Weathering begins the process. It involves the physical disintegration and chemical decomposition of
preexisting igneous, metamorphic, and sedimentary
rocks. Weathering generates a variety of products
subject to erosion, including various solid particles
and ions in solution. These are the raw materials for
sedimentary rocks.
r Soluble constituents are dissolved and carried
away by runoff and groundwater. Solid particles
are frequently moved downslope by gravity, a process termed mass wasting, before running water,
groundwater, wave activity, wind, and glacial ice
remove them. These agents of transport, covered in
detail in later chapters, move these materials from
the sites where they originated to locations where
they accumulate. The transport of sediment is usually intermittent. For example, during a flood, a

As sediments are
buried, they become
compacted and
cemented into solid
rock.

SmartFigure 7.2
The big picture This is
an outline of the portion
of the rock cycle that
pertains to the formation of
sedimentary rocks. (https://
goo.gl/2296bj)

214

CHAPTER 7

Sedimentary Rocks

rapidly moving river moves large quantities of sand
and gravel. As the floodwaters recede, particles are
temporarily deposited, only to be moved again by a
subsequent flood.
r Deposition of solid particles occurs when wind and
water currents slow down and as glacial ice melts.
The word sedimentary actually refers to this process. It is derived from the Latin sedimentum, which
means “to settle,” a reference to solid material settling out of a fluid (water or air). The mud on the
floor of a lake, a delta at the mouth of a river, a gravel
bar in a stream bed, the particles in a desert sand
dune, and even household dust are examples.
r The deposition of material dissolved in water is not
related to the strength of water currents. Rather,
ions in solution are removed when chemical or temperature changes cause material to crystallize and
precipitate (solidify out of a liquid solution) or when
organisms remove dissolved material to build hard
parts such as shells.
r As deposition continues, older sediments are buried
beneath younger layers and gradually converted
to sedimentary rock (lithified) by compaction and
cementation. This and other changes are referred
to as diagenesis (dia = change; genesis = origin), a
collective term for all the changes (short of metamorphism, discussed in Chapter 8) that take place in
texture, composition, and other physical properties
after sediments are deposited.
Because there are a variety of ways that the products
of weathering are transported, deposited, and transformed into solid rock, geologists recognize three categories of sedimentary rocks. As this overview reminds
us, sediment has two principal sources. First, it may be

7.2

an accumulation of material that originates and is transported as solid particles derived from both mechanical and chemical weathering. Deposits of this type are
termed detrital, and the sedimentary rocks they form are
called detrital sedimentary rocks.
The second major source of sediment is soluble
material produced largely by chemical weathering. When
these ions in solution are precipitated by either inorganic
or biological processes, the material is known as chemical
sediment, and the rocks formed from it are called chemical sedimentary rocks.
The third category is organic sedimentary rocks,
which form from the carbon-rich remains of organisms.
The primary example is coal. This black combustible rock
consists of organic carbon from the remains of plants that
died and accumulated on the floor of a swamp. The bits
and pieces of undecayed plant material that constitute
the “sediments” in coal are quite unlike the weathering
products that make up detrital and chemical sedimentary
rocks.

7.1

Concept Checks

1. How does the volume of sedimentary rocks in
Earth’s crust compare to the volume of igneous
and metamorphic rocks?
2. List two ways in which sedimentary rocks are
important.
3. Outline the steps that would transform an
exposure of granite in the mountains into various
sedimentary rocks.
4. List and briefly describe the differences among
the three basic sedimentary rock categories.

Detrital Sedimentary Rocks
Discuss the primary basis for distinguishing among detrital rocks and describe how
the origin and history of such rocks might be determined.

Though a wide variety of minerals and rock fragments (clasts) may be found in detrital rocks, clay
minerals and quartz are the chief constituents of most sedimentary rocks in this category. Recall
from Chapter 6 that clay minerals are the most abundant product of the chemical weathering of
silicate minerals, especially the feldspars. Clays are fine-grained minerals with sheetlike crystalline structures similar to the micas. The other common mineral, quartz, is abundant because it is
extremely durable and very resistant to chemical weathering. Thus, when igneous rocks such as
granite are attacked by weathering processes, individual quartz grains are freed.
Other common minerals in detrital rocks are feldspars
and micas. Because chemical weathering rapidly transforms these minerals into new substances, their presence
in sedimentary rocks indicates that erosion and deposition occurred fast enough to preserve some of the primary minerals from the source rock before they could be
decomposed.

Particle size is the primary basis for distinguishing among various detrital sedimentary rocks. Figure 7.3
presents the size categories for particles making up detrital rocks. Particle size is not only a convenient method
of dividing detrital rocks; the sizes of the component
grains also provide useful information about environments of deposition. Currents of water or air sort the

215

7.2 Detrital Sedimentary Rocks

particles by size; the stronger the current, the larger the particle size that
can be carried. Gravels, for example,
are moved by swiftly flowing rivers
as well as by landslides and glaciers.
Less energy is required to transport
sand; thus, it is common to such features as windblown dunes and some
river deposits and beaches. Very little
energy is needed to transport clay, so
it settles very slowly. Accumulation of
these tiny particles is generally associated with the quiet water of a lake,
lagoon, swamp, or certain marine
environments.
In order of increasing particle size,
common detrital sedimentary rocks
include shale, sandstone, and conglomerate or breccia. We will now look at
each type and how it forms.

Size Range Particle
(millimeters) Name

>256

Boulder

Figure 7.3

Common
Name

Detrital Rock

Particle size categories
Particle size is the primary
basis for distinguishing
among various detrital sedimentary rocks. (Breccia photo

Gravel

by E. J. Tarbuck; all other photos
by Dennis Tasa)

64–256

Cobble

4–64

Pebble

2–4

Granule

1/16–2

Sand

Sand

1/256–1/16

Silt

Mud

<1/256

Clay

Breccia

Conglomerate

Sandstone

Shale
Shale is a sedimentary rock consisting
of silt- and clay-size particles (Figure
7.4). These fine-grained detrital rocks
account for well over half of all sedimentary rocks. The particles in these
rocks are so small that they cannot be
readily identified without great magnification, and this makes shale more
difficult to study and analyze than
most other sedimentary rocks.

Shale
0

How Does Shale Form? Much of what can be learned
about the process that forms shale is related to particle
size. The tiny grains in shale indicate that deposition
occurs as a result of gradual settling from relatively quiet,
nonturbulent currents. Such environments include lakes,
river floodplains, lagoons, and portions of the deepocean basins. Even in these “quiet” environments, there
is usually enough turbulence to keep clay-size particles
suspended almost indefinitely. Consequently, much of
the clay is deposited only after the individual particles
coalesce to form larger aggregates.
Sometimes the chemical composition of the rock
provides additional information. One example is black
shale, which is black because it contains abundant
organic matter (carbon). When such a rock is found, it
strongly implies that deposition occurred in an oxygenpoor environment such as a swamp, where organic materials do not readily oxidize and decay.
Thin Layers As silt and clay accumulate, they tend
to form thin layers, which are commonly referred to
as laminae (lamin = thin sheet). Initially the particles
in the laminae are oriented randomly. This disordered

10

20

30

40

50

60

Mudstone
or Siltstone
70 mm

Figure 7.4
Shale—the most abundant
sedimentary rock Dark
shale containing fossilized
plant remains is relatively
common. (Photo by E. J.
Tarbuck)

216

CHAPTER 7

Figure 7.5
Shale crumbles easily
This image was taken in
the Grand Canyon. Hikers
soon notice that the trail is
usually gentler when layers
of shale are encountered.

Sedimentary Rocks

by shale beds that effectively prevent oil and gas from
escaping to the surface.*

Beds of resistant
sandstone and
limestone produce
bold cliffs

Shale, Mudstone, or Siltstone? It is common to
apply the term shale to all fine-grained sedimentary
rocks, especially in a nontechnical context. However,
be aware that there is a more restricted use of the
term. In this narrower usage, shale must exhibit the
ability to split into thin layers along well-developed,
closely spaced planes. This property is termed fissility (fissilis = that which can be cleft or split). If the
rock breaks into chunks or blocks, the name mudstone
is applied. Another fine-grained sedimentary rock
that, like mudstone, is often grouped with shale but
lacks fissility is siltstone (see Figure 7.3). As its name
implies, siltstone is composed largely of silt-size particles and contains less clay-size material than shale
and mudstone.

Weak, poorly cemented
shale crumbles
and produces gentler
slopes of weathered
debris

(Photo by Dennis Tasa)

arrangement leaves a high percentage of open space
(called pore space) that is filled with water. However,
this situation usually changes over time as additional
layers of sediment pile up and compact the sediment
below.
During this phase, the clay and silt particles take
on a more nearly parallel alignment and become tightly
packed. This rearrangement of grains reduces the size of
the pore spaces and forces out much of the water. Once
the grains are pressed closely together, the tiny spaces
between particles do not readily permit solutions containing cementing material to circulate. Therefore, geologists often describe shales as being weak because they
are poorly cemented and therefore not well lithified.
The inability of water to penetrate shale’s microscopic pore spaces explains why this rock often forms
barriers to the subsurface movement of water and petroleum. Indeed, rock layers that contain groundwater are
commonly underlain by shale beds that block further
downward movement. The opposite is true for underground reservoirs of petroleum. They are often capped

Gentle Slopes Although shale is far more common than other sedimentary rocks, it does not usually
attract as much notice as other, less abundant, members of this group. The reason is that shale does not
form prominent outcrops, as sandstone and limestone
often do. Rather, shale crumbles easily and usually
forms a cover of soil that hides the unweathered rock
below. This is illustrated nicely in the Grand Canyon,
where the gentler slopes of weathered shale are quite
inconspicuous and overgrown with vegetation, in sharp
contrast with the bold cliffs produced by more durable
rocks (Figure 7.5).
Although shale beds may not form striking cliffs and
prominent outcrops, some deposits have economic value.
Certain shales are quarried to obtain raw material for
pottery, brick, tile, and china. Moreover, when mixed
with limestone, shale is used to make Portland cement.
In the future, one type of shale, called oil shale, may
become a valuable energy resource. Oil shale potential is
discussed in Chapter 23.

Figure 7.6
Quartz sandstone After
shale, sandstone is the
next most abundant sedimentary rock. (Photos by

Sandstone
Sandstone is the name given to rocks in which sand-size
grains predominate (Figure 7.6). After shale, sandstone is
the next most abundant sedimentary rock, accounting for
approximately 20 percent of the entire group. Sandstones
form in a variety of environments and often contain significant clues about their origin, including sorting, particle shape, and composition.

Dennis Tasa)

Sorting All the particles in sandstone are not necessarily identical in size. Sorting refers to the degree of
similarity in particle size in a sedimentary rock. For
example, if all the grains in a sample of sandstone are
Close up

* The relationship between impermeable beds and the occurrence and movement of groundwater is examined in Chapter 17. Shale beds can be cap rocks
in oil traps and are discussed in Chapter 23.

217

7.2 Detrital Sedimentary Rocks

about the same size, the
Sorting
sand is considered well
Very poorly sorted
Poorly sorted
Well sorted
Very well sorted
sorted. Conversely, if the
rock contains mixed large
and small particles, the
sand is said to be poorly
sorted (Figure 7.7). By studying the degree of sorting,
we can learn much about
Rocks with particles
Sediments are “very
the depositing current.
that are nearly all
poorly sorted” when
Deposits of wind-blown
the same size are
there is a wide range of
sand are usually better
“well sorted.”
different sizes.
sorted than deposits sorted
by wave activity (Figure 7.8).
Angularity and Sphericity
Particles washed by waves
Angular
Subangular
Subrounded
Rounded
are commonly better sorted
than materials deposited
by streams. Sediment accumulations that exhibit poor
sorting usually result when
High sphericity
particles are transported for
only a relatively short time
and then rapidly deposLow sphericity
Transportation reduces the size and angularity of
ited. For example, when
particles but does not change their general shape.
a turbulent stream reaches the gentler slopes
at the base of a steep mountain, its velocity is
Very angular grains, on the other hand, imply two
quickly reduced, and poorly sorted sands and gravels are
things: that the rock materials were transported only a
deposited.
short distance before they were deposited or that some
other medium may have transported them. For example,
Particle Shape The shapes of sand grains can also
when glaciers move sediment, the particles are usually
help decipher the history of a sandstone (see Figure 7.7).
made more irregular by the crushing and grinding action
When streams, winds, or waves move sand and other
of the ice.
larger sedimentary particles, the grains lose their sharp
edges and corners and become more rounded as they collide with other particles during transport. Thus, rounded Transport Affects Mineral Composition In addition
to affecting the degree of rounding and the amount of
grains likely have been airborne or waterborne. Further,
sorting that particles undergo, the length of transport
the degree of rounding indicates the distance or time
by turbulent air and water currents also influences the
involved in the transportation of sediment by currents of
mineral composition of a sedimentary deposit. Substanair or water. Highly rounded grains indicate that a great
tial weathering and long transport lead to the gradual
deal of abrasion and hence a great
deal of transport has occurred. destruction of weaker and less stable minerals, including

A. The orange and yellow cliffs of Utah’s Zion National Park expose thousands
of feet of Jurassic-age Navajo Sandstone.

SmartFigure 7.7
Sorting and particle
shape Sorting refers to the
range of particle sizes present in a rock. Geologists
describe a particle’s shape
in terms of its angularity
(the degree to which edges
and corners are rounded)
and sphericity (how close
the shape is to a sphere).
(https://goo.gl/hcKMT3)

Figure 7.8
Sand dunes consist of
well-sorted sediment
A. The Navajo Sandstone
represents a vast area of
ancient sand dunes that
once covered an area
the size of California. B.
These modern dunes are
among the highest in North
America. (Photo A by Dennis
Tasa; photo B by George H. H.
Huey/Alamy Images)

B. The quartz grains composing the Navajo Sandstone were deposited by wind
as dunes similar to these in Colorado’s Great Sand Dunes National Park. The
sand is well sorted because all of the particles are practically the same size.

218

CHAPTER 7

Sedimentary Rocks

Figure 7.9

weathering and transport and was probably deposited close
to the source area of the rock particles.

Conglomerate The gravelsize particles in this rock
are rounded. (Photo by E. J.

Varieties of Sandstone Due to its durability, quartz

Tarbuck)

the feldspars and ferromagnesians. Because quartz is
very durable, it is usually the mineral that survives a long
trip in a turbulent environment.
To summarize, the origin and history of sandstone can
often be deduced by examining the sorting, roundness, and
mineral composition of its constituent grains. Knowing this
information allows us to infer that a well-sorted, quartzrich sandstone consisting of highly rounded grains must be
the result of a great deal of transport. Such a rock, in fact,
may represent several cycles of weathering, transport, and
deposition. We may also conclude that a sandstone containing significant amounts of feldspar and angular grains
of ferromagnesian minerals underwent little chemical

is the predominant mineral in most sandstones. Such
rock is often simply called quartz sandstone (see Figure
7.6). When a sandstone contains appreciable quantities of
feldspar (25 percent or more), the rock is called arkose. In
addition to feldspar, arkose usually contains quartz and
sparkling bits of mica. The mineral composition of arkose
indicates that the grains were derived from granitic
source rocks. The particles are generally poorly sorted and
angular, which suggests short-distance transport, minimal
chemical weathering in a relatively dry climate, and rapid
deposition and burial.
A third variety of sandstone is known as graywacke.
Along with quartz and feldspar, this dark-colored rock
contains abundant rock fragments and matrix—finergrained material in which the fragments are embedded.
More than 15 percent of graywacke’s volume is matrix.
The poor sorting and angular grains characteristic of
graywacke suggest that the particles were transported
only a relatively short distance from their source area and
were then rapidly deposited. Before the sediment could
be reworked and sorted further, it was buried by additional layers of material. Graywacke is frequently associated with submarine deposits made by dense sedimentchoked torrents called turbidity currents.

Figure 7.10

Conglomerate and Breccia

Poorly sorted sediments
Gravel deposits along Carbon
Creek in Grand Canyon
National Park are poorly
sorted. (Photo by Michael Collier)

Conglomerate consists largely of rounded gravel-size
particles (Figure 7.9). As Figure 7.3 indicates, these particles
can range in size from large boulders to particles as small as
peas. The particles are often large enough to be identified as
distinctive rock types; thus, they can be valuable in identifying the source areas of sediments. More often than not, conglomerates are poorly sorted because the openings between
the large gravel particles contain sand or mud (Figure 7.10).
Gravels accumulate in a variety of environments and
usually indicate the existence of steep slopes or very turbulent currents. The coarse particles in a conglomerate

E Y E ON E A R T H

7.1

T

his detrital rock consists of angular grains and is rich
in potassium feldspar and quartz. (Photo by E. J. Tarbuck)

QUESTION 1 What do the angular grains indicate
about the distance the sediment was transported?

QUESTION 2 The source of the sediment in this rock was
an igneous mass. Name the likely rock type.
QUESTION 3 Did the sediment in this sample undergo a
great deal of chemical weathering? Explain.

219

7.3 Chemical Sedimentary Rocks

may reflect the action of energetic mountain streams or
result from strong wave activity along a rapidly eroding
coast. Some glacial and landslide deposits also contain
plentiful gravel.
If the large particles are angular rather than
rounded, the rock is called breccia (Figure 7.11). Because

large particles abrade and become rounded very rapidly
during transport, the pebbles and cobbles in a breccia
indicate that they did not travel far from their source
area before they were deposited. Thus, as with many
other sedimentary rocks, conglomerates and breccias
contain clues to their history. Their particle sizes reveal
the strength of the currents that transported them,
whereas the degree of rounding indicates how far the
particles traveled. The fragments within a sample identify
the source rocks that supplied them.

7.2

Concept Checks

1. What minerals are most abundant in detrital
sedimentary rocks? In which rocks do these
minerals predominate?
2. What is the primary basis for distinguishing
among detrital rocks?
3. Describe how sediments become sorted. What
would cause sediments to be poorly sorted?

Figure 7.11
Breccia The gravel-size sediments in this rock are sharp and
angular. (Photo by E. J. Tarbuck)

7.3

4. Distinguish between conglomerate and breccia.

Chemical Sedimentary Rocks
Explain the processes involved in the formation of chemical sedimentary rocks and
describe several examples.

In contrast to detrital rocks, which form from the solid products of weathering, chemical sediments
derive from ions that are carried in solution to lakes and seas. This material does not remain dissolved in the water indefinitely, however. Some of it precipitates to form chemical sediments. These
become rocks such as limestone, chert, and rock salt.
This precipitation of material occurs in two ways. Inorganic (in = not, organicus = life) processes such as
evaporation and chemical activity can produce chemical
sediments. Organic (life) processes of water-dwelling
organisms also form chemical sediments, said to be of
biochemical origin.
One example of a deposit resulting from inorganic
chemical processes is the dripstone that decorates many
caves (Figure 7.12). Another is the salt left behind as a body
of seawater evaporates. In contrast, many water-dwelling
animals and plants extract dissolved mineral matter to
form shells and other hard parts. After the organisms die,
their skeletons collect by the millions on the floor of a
lake or an ocean as biochemical sediment (Figure 7.13).

Limestone
Representing about 10 percent of the total volume of
all sedimentary rocks, limestone is the most abundant
chemical sedimentary rock, and it has economic significance as well (see GEOgraphics 7.1). It is composed

Delicate calcite crystals forming in a drop of water at the tip
of soda straw stalactite. The formation of crystals is triggered
when some carbon dioxide escapes from the water drop.

Figure 7.12
Cave deposits An example
of a chemical sedimentary
rock with an inorganic
origin. (Photo by Guillen
Photography/Alamy Images; inset
photo by Dante Fenolio/Science
Source)

221

7.3 Chemical Sedimentary Rocks

Figure 7.13

chiefly of the mineral calcite (CaCO3) and forms either
by inorganic means or as a result of biochemical processes. Regardless of origin, the mineral composition of
all limestone is similar, yet many different types exist.
This is true because limestones are produced under a
variety of conditions. Forms that have a marine biochemical origin are by far the most common.

Coquina This variety of
limestone consists of shell
fragments; therefore, it has
a biochemical origin. (Rock
sample photo by E. J. Tarbuck;
beach photo by Donald R. Frazier
Photolibrary, Inc./Alamy Images)
_TT24


Carbonate Reefs Corals are one important example
of organisms that are capable of creating large quantities
of marine limestone. These relatively simple invertebrate
animals secrete a calcareous (calcium carbonate) external
skeleton. Although they are small, corals are capable of
creating massive structures called reefs (Figure
7.14). Reefs consist of coral colonies made
up of great numbers of individuals that live
side by side on a calcite structure secreted
by the animals. In addition, calcium carbonate–secreting algae live with the corals and help cement the entire structure
into a solid mass. A wide variety of other
organisms also live in and near the reefs.
Certainly the best-known modern reef
is Australia’s 2600-kilometer-long (1600-milelong) Great Barrier Reef, but many lesser reefs also
exist. They develop in the shallow, warm waters of the
tropics and subtropics equatorward of about 30 degrees
latitude. Striking examples exist in The Bahamas, Hawaii,
and the Florida Keys.
Modern corals were not the first reef builders.
Earth’s first reef-building organisms were photosynthesizing bacteria that lived during Precambrian time,
more than 2 billion years ago. From fossil remains, it is

Close up

known that a variety of organisms have constructed reefs,
including bivalves (clams and oysters), bryozoans (corallike animals), and sponges. Corals have been found in
fossil reefs as ancient as 500 million years old, but corals
Figure 7.14

Great
Barrier
Reef

Carbonate reefs Large
quantities of biochemical
limestone are created by
reef-building organisms.

Australia

(Photos by JC Photo/Shutterstock
and Michael Collier)

This image in Guadalupe Mountains National Park, Texas,
shows a small portion of an ancient (Permian-age) reef
complex that once formed a 600-kilometer loop around the
margin of the Delaware Basin.

Aerial view showing a small portion of Australia’s Great Barrier Reef. Located off the coast
of Queensland, it extends for 2600 kilometers and consists of more than 2900 individual
reefs.

222

CHAPTER 7

Sedimentary Rocks

Figure 7.15
The White Cliffs of
Dover This prominent
deposit underlies large
portions of southern
England as well as parts of
northern France. (Photos by

The massive White Chalk Cliffs.
Chalk is a biochemical limestone
made up almost entirely of the
tiny hard parts of microscopic
marine organisms, mainly
plankton.

David Wall/Alamy Images)

View of a group of plankton called
coccolithophores from a scanning electron
microscope. Individual plates shaped like
hubcaps are only three one-thousandths of a
millimeter in diameter; so tiny they could
pass through the eye of a needle.

similar to the modern colonial varieties have constructed
reefs only during the past 60 million years.
In the United States, reefs of Silurian age (416 to
444 million years ago) are prominent features in Wisconsin, Illinois, and Indiana. In western Texas and adjacent southeastern New Mexico, a massive reef complex
Figure 7.16
Oolitic limestone Oolitic limestone is an inorganic
limestone composed of ooids. Note the dime coin
for scale. (Photos by Marli Miller)

that formed during the Permian
period (251 to 299 million years
ago) is strikingly exposed in Guadalupe Mountains National Park
(see Figure 7.14).

Coquina and Chalk Although
a great deal of limestone is produced by biological processes,
this origin is not always evident
because shells and skeletons
may undergo considerable
change before becoming lithified into rock. However, one
easily identified biochemical
limestone is coquina, a coarse
rock composed of poorly
cemented shells and shell
fragments (see Figure 7.13).
Another less obvious but nevertheless familiar example
is chalk, a soft, porous rock
made up almost entirely of
the hard parts of microscopic
marine organisms. Among the
most famous chalk deposits are those exposed along
the southeast coast of England (Figure 7.15).
Inorganic Limestones Limestones having an inorganic origin form when chemical changes or high
water temperatures increase the water’s concentration
of calcium carbonate to the point that it precipitates.
Travertine, the type of limestone commonly seen in
caves, is an example (see Figure 7.12). When travertine
is deposited in caves, groundwater is the source of the
calcium carbonate. As water droplets become exposed
to the air in a cavern, some of the carbon dioxide dissolved in the water escapes, causing calcium carbonate
to precipitate.
Another variety of inorganic limestone is oolitic
limestone, a rock composed of small spherical grains
called ooids. Ooids form in shallow marine waters as
tiny “seed” particles (commonly small shell fragments)
are moved back and forth with currents. As the grains
are rolled about in the warm water, which is supersaturated with calcium carbonate, they become coated with
layer upon layer of the chemical precipitate (Figure 7.16).

Dolostone

Small spherical grains called ooids are formed by chemical
precipitation of calcium carbonate around a tiny nucleus and
are the raw material for oolitic limestone.

Closely related to limestone is dolostone, a rock composed of the calcium-magnesium carbonate mineral dolomite [CaMg(CO3)2]. Although dolostone and limestone
sometimes closely resemble one another, they can be
easily distinguished by observing their reaction to dilute
hydrochloric acid. When a drop of acid is placed on limestone, the reaction (fizzing) is obvious. However, unless
dolostone is powdered, it does not visibly react to the acid.

7.3 Chemical Sedimentary Rocks

223

Figure 7.17
Colorful chert Chert is the name
applied to a number of dense, hard
chemical sedimentary rocks made
of microcrystalline quartz. (Petrified
wood photo by gracious_tiger/Shutterstock;
flint and jasper photos by E. J. Tarbuck;
arrowhead photo by Daniel Sambraus/Science
Source)

Flint

Jasper

Chert arrowhead

Dolostone’s origins remain a subject of discussion
among geologists. No marine organisms produce hard
parts of dolomite, and the chemical precipitation of
dolomite from seawater occurs only under conditions
of unusual water chemistry in certain near-shore sites.
Yet dolostone is abundant in many ancient sedimentary
rock successions. It appears that significant quantities of
dolostone are produced when magnesium-rich waters circulate through limestone and convert calcite to dolomite
when some calcium ions are replaced by magnesium ions
(a process called dolomitization). However, not all dolostones appear to be formed by such a process, and their
origin remains uncertain.

Chert
Chert is a name used for a number of very compact
and hard rocks made of microcrystalline quartz (SiO2).
It can vary in color from nearly white to black; chert
often appears gray, brown, or brownish gray and can
even appear red or greenish. Color variations are
related to trace elements present in the rock. Figure 7.17
shows some varieties. One well-known form is flint,
whose dark color results from the organic matter it

E Y E ON E A R T H

Petrified wood

contains. Jasper, a red variety, gets its bright color from
iron oxide. Petrified wood is chert that is made when
silica-rich material such as volcanic ash buries trees.
Groundwater rich in dissolved silica from the ash penetrates the wood. As the dissolved silica precipitates, it
gradually replaces the wood. The shape and structures
such as growth rings are often preserved. Like glass,
most chert has a conchoidal fracture. Its hardness, ease
of chipping, and ability to hold a sharp edge made chert
a favorite of Native Americans for fashioning points for
spears and arrows. Because of chert’s durability and
extensive use, arrowheads are found in many parts of
North America.
Chert deposits are commonly found in one of two
situations: as layered deposits referred to as bedded
cherts and as somewhat spherical masses called nodules,
which vary in diameter from a few millimeters (pea size)
to a few centimeters. Most water-dwelling organisms
that produce hard parts make them of calcium carbonate. But some, such as diatoms and radiolarians, produce
glasslike silica skeletons. These tiny organisms are able
to extract silica even though seawater contains only tiny
quantities. It is from their remains that most bedded
cherts are believed to originate. Some bedded cherts
occur in association with lava flows and layers of volcanic

7.2

T

his is a mass of chemical sedimentary rock in Yellowstone
National Park. It was formed by the following process:
Rainwater became acidic when it absorbed carbon dioxide
in the air. As the water seeped beneath the surface, it dissolved
calcite in the limestone bedrock. Eventually, Yellowstone’s
underground plumbing returned the water, now saturated with
calcium carbonate, to the surface as a hot spring. When the
water emerged, some carbon dioxide escaped into the air,
triggering the deposition of the rock seen here. (Photo by Ross

Davidson/Alamy Images)

QUESTION 1 Did this rock have a biochemical origin or an
inorganic origin?
QUESTION 2 Is the rock most likely chert or limestone? Explain.
QUESTION 3 Name the particular variety of this rock. What figure
in this chapter provides another example?

224

CHAPTER 7

Sedimentary Rocks

Figure 7.18
Solar salt Seawater is
one important source
of common salt. In this
process, seawater is held
in shallow ponds, while
solar energy evaporates
the water. The nearly pure
salt deposits that eventually form are essentially
artificial evaporite deposits.
(Photo by Geof Krib/Alamy Images)

ash. For these occurrences, it is probable that the silica
was derived from the decomposition of the volcanic ash
and not from biochemical sources. Chert nodules are
sometimes referred to as secondary cherts or replacement cherts, and they most often occur within beds of
limestone. They form when silica, originally deposited in
one place, dissolves, migrates, and then chemically precipitates elsewhere, replacing older material.

Evaporites
In the geologic past, many areas that are now dry land
were basins, submerged under shallow arms of a sea that
had only narrow connections to the open ocean. Under
these conditions, seawater continually moved into the
bay to replace water lost by evaporation. Eventually the
waters of the bay became saturated, and salt deposition
began. Such deposits are called evaporites.
Minerals commonly precipitated in this fashion
include halite (sodium chloride, NaCl), which is the
chief component of rock salt, and gypsum (hydrous calcium sulfate, CaSO4 ∙ 2H2O), which is the main ingredient in rock gypsum (Figure 7.18). Both have significant
importance. Halite is familiar to everyone as the common
salt used in cooking and seasoning foods. Of course it has
many other uses, from melting ice on roads to making

hydrochloric acid, and it has been considered important
enough that people have sought, traded, and fought over
it for much of human history. Gypsum is the basic ingredient in plaster of Paris. This material is used most extensively in the construction industry for wallboard (drywall)
and interior plaster.
When a body of seawater evaporates, the minerals
that precipitate do so in a sequence that is determined
by their solubility. Less soluble minerals precipitate
first, and more soluble minerals precipitate later, as
salinity increases. For example, gypsum precipitates
when about 80 percent of the seawater has evaporated,
and halite crystallizes when 90 percent of the water has
been removed. During the last stages of this process,
potassium and magnesium salts precipitate. One of
these last-formed salts, the mineral sylvite, is mined as a
significant source of potassium (“potash”) for fertilizer.
On a smaller scale, evaporite deposits can be seen
in such places as Death Valley, California, and Utah’s
Bonneville Salt Flats. Following rains or periods of
snowmelt in the mountains, streams flow from the
surrounding mountains into an enclosed basin. As the
water evaporates, salt flats form when dissolved materials are precipitated as a white crust on the ground
(Figure 7.19).

7.3

Concept Checks

1. Explain how the formation of biochemical
sediments differs from the formation of sediments
by inorganic processes. Use examples as part of
your explanation.
2. Distinguish among limestone, dolostone, and
chert. Describe several varieties of each.
3. How do evaporites form? What are some
examples?

SmartFigure 7.19
Bonneville Salt Flats This
well-known Utah site was
once a large salt lake. (Photo

Great
Salt
Lake

by Jupiterimages/Getty Images;
satellite image by NASA) (https://
goo.gl/mhgwN3)

Bonneville
Salt Flats

Salt Lake
City

This extensive evaporite deposit is a
30,000-acre expanse of hard white salt
that in places is nearly 2 meters thick.

225

7.4 Coal: An Organic Sedimentary Rock

7.4

Coal: An Organic Sedimentary Rock
Outline the successive stages in the formation of coal.

Coal is different from other sedimentary rocks. Unlike limestone and chert, which are calcite and
silica rich, coal is made of organic matter. Close examination of coal under a magnifying glass often
reveals plant structures such as leaves, bark, and wood that have been chemically altered but are
still identifiable. This supports the conclusion that coal is the end product of large amounts of plant
material, buried for millions of years (Figure 7.20). The formation of coal involves these stages:
1. Accumulation of plant remains. The
initial stage in coal formation is the accumulation of large quantities of plant
remains. Such accumulations result from
special conditions because dead plants
readily decompose when exposed to the
atmosphere or other oxygen-rich environments. One important environment that
allows for the buildup of plant material is
a swamp. Stagnant swamp water is oxygen
deficient, so complete decay (oxidation) of
the plant material is not possible. Instead,
the plants are attacked by certain bacteria
that partly decompose the organic material
and liberate oxygen and hydrogen. As these
elements escape, the percentage of carbon
in the plant matter gradually increases.
The bacteria are not able to finish the job
of decomposition because their growth is
impeded by acids liberated from the plants.
2. Formation of peat and lignite. The
partial decomposition of plant remains in
an oxygen-poor swamp creates a layer of
peat, a soft brown material in which plant
structures are still easily recognized. With
shallow burial, peat slowly changes to lignite, a soft brown coal. Burial increases the
temperature of sediments as well as the
pressure on them.
3. Formation of bituminous coal. The
higher temperatures bring about chemical
reactions within the plant materials and
yield water and organic gases (volatiles).
As the load increases from more sediment
on top of the developing coal, the water
and volatiles are pressed out, and the
proportion of fixed carbon (the remaining
solid combustible material) increases. The
greater the carbon content, the greater
the coal’s energy ranking as a fuel. During burial, the coal also becomes increasingly compact. For example, deeper burial
transforms lignite into a harder, more compacted black rock called bituminous coal.
A bed of bituminous coal may be only onetenth as thick as the peat bed from which it
formed.

SmartFigure 7.20

SWAMP ENVIRONMENT

From plants to coal
Successive stages in the
formation of coal. (Photos by
E. J. Tarbuck) (https://goo.gl/
EHKyKU)

PEAT
(Partially altered plant
material)

Burial

Compaction

Greater burial
LIGNITE
(Soft brown coal)

Compaction

BITUMINOUS
(Soft black coal)

Metamorphism

Stress
ANTHRACITE
(Hard black coal)

226

CHAPTER 7

Sedimentary Rocks

4. Formation of anthracite coal. Lignite and bituminous coals are sedimentary rocks. However, when
sedimentary layers are subjected to the folding and
deformation associated with mountain building, the
heat and pressure cause a further loss of volatiles
and water, thus increasing the concentration of fixed
carbon. This metamorphoses bituminous coal into
anthracite, a very hard, shiny, black metamorphic
rock (see Chapter 8). Although anthracite is a cleanburning fuel, only a relatively small amount is mined.
Anthracite is not widespread and is more difficult
and expensive to extract than the relatively flat-lying
layers of bituminous coal.

7.5

Coal is a major energy resource. Its role as a fuel and
some of the problems associated with burning coal are
discussed in Chapter 23.

7.4

Concept Checks

1. What is the “raw material” for coal? Under what
circumstances does it accumulate?
2. Outline the successive stages in the formation of
coal.

Turning Sediment into Sedimentary Rock: Diagenesis
and Lithification Describe the processes that convert sediment into
sedimentary rock and other changes associated with burial.

A great deal of change can occur to sediment from the time it is deposited until it becomes a sedimentary rock and is subsequently subjected to the temperatures and pressures that convert it to
metamorphic rock. The term diagenesis (dia = change, genesis = origin) is a collective term for
all the chemical, physical, and biological changes that take place after sediments are deposited and
during and after lithification.

Diagenesis
Burial promotes diagenesis because as sediments are
buried, they are subjected to increasingly higher temperatures and pressures. Diagenesis occurs within the
Figure 7.21
Compaction and
cementation

C O MPA C T IO N
Water filled
pore spaces

Pressure

Compacted
sediment
(sedimentary rock)

Loosely packed
clay size particles
(magnified)

C E ME NTAT IO N
Circulation of mineralbearing groundwater

Cement

upper few kilometers of Earth’s crust at temperatures
that are generally less than 150° to 200°C (300° to
400°F). Beyond this somewhat arbitrary temperature
threshold, metamorphism is said to occur.
One example of diagenetic change is recrystallization, the development of more stable minerals from
less stable ones. For example, the mineral aragonite
is the less stable form of calcium carbonate (CaCO3).
Aragonite is secreted by many marine organisms to
form shells and other hard parts, such as the skeletal
structures produced by corals. In some environments,
large quantities of these solid materials accumulate as
sediment. As burial takes place, aragonite recrystallizes to the more stable form of calcium carbonate,
calcite, the main constituent in the sedimentary rock
limestone.
Another example of diagenesis is provided in the
preceding discussion of coal. It involves the chemical
alteration of organic matter in an oxygen-poor environment. Instead of completely decaying, as would occur
in the presence of oxygen, the organic matter is slowly
transformed into solid carbon.

Lithification
Loosely packed
sand or gravel
size particles
(magnified)

Gradually the cementing
material fills much of the
pore space and “glues”
the grains together

Diagenesis includes lithification, the processes by which
unconsolidated sediments are transformed into solid
sedimentary rocks (lithos = stone, fic = making). Basic
lithification processes include compaction and cementation (Figure 7.21).

7.6 Classification of Sedimentary Rocks

Compaction The most common physical diagenetic
change is compaction. As described earlier, as sediment
accumulates, the weight of overlying material compresses
the deeper sediments. The deeper a sediment is buried,
the more it is compacted and the firmer it becomes. As
the grains are pressed closer and closer, there is considerable reduction in pore space. For example, when clays are
buried beneath several thousand meters of material, the
volume of the clay layer may be reduced by as much as
40 percent. As pore space decreases, much of the water
that was trapped in the sediments is driven out. Because
sands and other coarse sediments are less compressible,
compaction is most significant as a lithification process in
fine-grained sedimentary rocks like shale.

Cementation The most important process by which
sediments are converted to sedimentary rock is cementation. This change involves the crystallization of minerals among the individual sediment grains. Groundwater
carries ions in solution. Gradually, the crystallization of
new minerals from these ions takes place in the pore
spaces, cementing the clasts together. Just as the amount
of pore space is reduced during compaction, the addition
of cement to a sedimentary deposit reduces its porosity
as well.
Calcite, silica, and iron oxide are the most common
cements. It is often a relatively simple matter to identify
the cementing material. Calcite cement will effervesce in
contact with dilute hydrochloric acid. Silica is the hardest

7.6

cement and thus produces the hardest sedimentary rocks.
An orange or dark-red color in a sedimentary rock means
that iron oxide is present.
Most sedimentary rocks are lithified by means of
compaction and/or cementation. However, some, like the
evaporites, initially form as solid masses of intergrown
crystals rather than beginning as accumulations of separate particles that later become solid. Other crystalline
sedimentary rocks do not begin that way but are transformed into masses of interlocking crystals sometime
after the sediment is deposited.
For example, with time and burial, loose sediment
consisting of delicate calcium carbonate–rich skeletal
debris may be recrystallized into a relatively dense crystalline limestone. Because crystals grow until they fill all
the available space, crystalline sedimentary rocks often
lack pore spaces. Unless the rocks later develop joints and
fractures, they will be relatively impermeable to fluids
such as water and oil.

7.5

Concept Checks

1. What is diagenesis?
2. Compaction is most important as a lithification
process with which sediment size?
3. List three common cements. How might each be
identified?

Classification of Sedimentary Rocks
Summarize the criteria used to classify sedimentary rocks.

The classification scheme in Figure 7.22 divides sedimentary rocks into major groups: detrital on the
left side and chemical/organic on the right. Further, we can see that the main criterion for subdividing the detrital rocks is particle size, whereas the primary basis for distinguishing among different rocks in the chemical group is their mineral composition.
As is the case with many (perhaps most) classifications
of natural phenomena, the categories presented in Figure 7.22 are more rigid than the actual state of nature.
In reality, many of the sedimentary rocks classified into
the chemical group also contain at least small quantities of detrital sediment. Many limestones, for example,
contain varying amounts of mud or sand, giving them a
“sandy” or “shaly” quality. Conversely, because practically
all detrital rocks are cemented with material that was
originally dissolved in water, they too are far from being
“pure.”
As was the case with the igneous rocks examined
in Chapter 5, texture is a part of sedimentary rock classification. There are two major textures used in the

classification of sedimentary rocks: clastic and nonclastic.
The term clastic is taken from a Greek word meaning
“broken.” Rocks that display a clastic texture consist of
discrete fragments and particles that are cemented and
compacted together. Although cement is present in the
spaces between particles, these openings are rarely filled
completely. All detrital rocks have a clastic texture. In
addition, some chemical sedimentary rocks exhibit this
texture. For example, coquina, the limestone composed
of shells and shell fragments, is obviously as clastic as a
conglomerate or sandstone. The same applies for some
varieties of oolitic limestone.
Some chemical sedimentary rocks have a nonclastic, or crystalline texture, in which the minerals

227

228

CHAPTER 7

Sedimentary Rocks

Figure 7.22
Identification of sedimentary rocks The main
criterion for naming detrital
rocks is particle size. The
primary basis for naming
chemical and organic
sedimentary rocks is their
composition.

Detrital Sedimentary Rocks
ClasticTexture
(particle size)

Coarse
(over 2 mm)

Medium
(1/16 to 2 mm)

Fine
(1/16 to
1/256 mm)
Very fine
(less than
1/256 mm)

Chemical and Organic Sedimentary Rocks

Sediment Name

Rock Name

Gravel
(Rounded particles)

Conglomerate

Gravel
(Angular particles)

Breccia

Sand

Mud

Mud

Sandstone
(Arkose)*

E. J. Tarbuck)

Calcite, CaCO3

Rock Name
Crystalline
Limestone
Travertine

Clastic: Visible
shells and shell
fragments loosely
cemented

Coquina

Clastic: Various size
shells and shell
fragments cemented
with calcite cement

Fossiliferous
Limestone

Clastic: Microscopic
shells and clay

Chalk

Shale or
Mudstone

form a pattern of interlocking crystals. The crystals may
be microscopically small or large enough to be visible
without magnification. Common examples of rocks with
nonclastic textures are those deposited when saline water
evaporates (Figure 7.23). The materials that make up many
other nonclastic rocks may actually have originated as
detrital deposits. In these instances, the particles probably consisted of shell fragments and other hard parts rich
in calcium carbonate or silica. The clastic nature of the
grains was subsequently obliterated or obscured because
Rock salt Like other
evaporites, rock salt has a
nonclastic texture because
it is composed of intergrown crystals. (Photos by

Texture

Nonclastic:
Fine to coarse
crystalline

Siltstone

*If abundant feldspar is present the rock is called Arkose.

Figure 7.23

Composition

B
i
o
c
h
e
m
i
c
a
l

Quartz, SiO2

Nonclastic: Very
fine crystalline

Chert (light colored)
Flint (dark colored)
Jasper (red)
Agate (banded)

Gypsum
CaSO452O

Nonclastic: Fine to
coarse crystalline

Rock Gypsum

&$.  &

Nonclastic: Fine to
coarse crystalline

Rock Salt

Altered plant
fragments

Nonclastic:
Fine-grained
organic matter

Bituminous Coal

the particles recrystallized when they were consolidated
into limestone or chert.
Nonclastic rocks consist of intergrown crystals,
and some may resemble igneous rocks, which are also
crystalline. The two rock types are usually easy to distinguish because the minerals contained in nonclastic
sedimentary rocks are quite unlike those found in most
igneous rocks. For example, rock salt, rock gypsum, and
some forms of limestone consist of intergrown crystals,
but the minerals within these rocks (halite, gypsum, and
calcite) are seldom associated with igneous rocks.

7.6

Concept Checks

1. What is the primary basis for distinguishing
(naming) different chemical sedimentary rocks?
How is the naming of detrital rocks different?
2. Distinguish between clastic and nonclastic.
Which texture is associated with all detrital
rocks?
Close up

L
i
m
e
s
t
o
n
e

7.7 Sedimentary Rocks Represent Past Environments

7.7

Sedimentary Rocks Represent Past Environments
Distinguish among three broad categories of sedimentary environments and provide
an example of each. List several sedimentary structures and explain why these
features are useful to geologists.

Sedimentary rocks are important to interpreting Earth’s history (Figure 7.24). By understanding the
conditions under which sedimentary rocks form, geologists can often deduce the history of a rock,
including information about the origin of its component particles, the method of sediment transport, and the nature of the place where the grains eventually came to rest—that is, the environment of deposition.
An environment of deposition, or sedimentary environment, is a geographic setting
where sediment is accumulating. Each site is
characterized by a particular combination of
geologic processes and environmental conditions. Some sediments, such as the chemical sediments that precipitate in water bodies, are solely
products of their sedimentary environment.
That is, their component minerals originated
and were deposited in the same place. Other
sediments originate far from the site where they
accumulate. These materials are transported
great distances from their source by some combination of gravity, water, wind, and ice.
At any given time, the geographic setting
and environmental conditions of a sedimentary environment determine the nature of the
sediments that accumulate. Geologists carefully study
the sediments in present-day depositional environments
because the features they find can also be observed in
ancient sedimentary rocks.
Geologists apply a thorough knowledge of presentday conditions to reconstruct the ancient environments
and geographic relationships of an area at the time a
particular set of sedimentary layers were deposited. This
process is an excellent example of applying a fundamental principle of modern geology: “The present is the key
to the past.”* Such analyses often lead to the creation of
maps depicting the past geographic distribution of land
and sea, mountains and river valleys, deserts and glaciers,
and other environments of deposition.

Types of Sedimentary Environments
Sedimentary environments are commonly placed into one
of three broad categories: continental, marine, or transitional (shoreline). Each category includes many specific
subenvironments. Figure 7.25 is an idealized diagram illustrating a number of important sedimentary environments
associated with each category. Realize that this is just a
sampling of the great diversity of depositional environments.
Chapters 16 through 20 examine many of these environments in greater detail. Each of these three categories is an
*For more on this idea, see Section 1.2 in Chapter 1.

SmartFigure 7.24
Utah’s Capitol Reef National
Park These tilted sedimentary strata are part of the
Waterpocket Fold at Halls
Creek. The strata here record
changing environments during
the Mesozoic era. (Photo by
Michael Collier) (http://goo.gl/eeryMM)

area where sediment accumulates and where organisms live
and die. Each produces a characteristic sedimentary rock or
assemblage that reflects prevailing conditions.

Continental Environments Continental environments
are dominated by the erosion and deposition associated
with streams. In some cold regions, moving masses of
glacial ice replace running water as the dominant process. In arid regions (as well as some coastal settings),
wind takes on greater importance. Clearly, the nature of
the sediments deposited in continental environments is
strongly influenced by climate.
Streams are the dominant agent of landscape alteration, eroding more land and transporting and depositing more sediment than any other process. In addition
to channel deposits, large quantities of sediment are
dropped when floodwaters periodically inundate broad,
flat valley floors (called floodplains). Where rapid
streams emerge from a mountainous area onto a flatter
surface, a distinctive cone-shaped accumulation of sediment known as an alluvial fan forms.
In frigid, high-latitude or high-altitude settings,
glaciers pick up and transport huge volumes of sediment. Materials deposited directly from ice are typically
unsorted mixtures of particles that range in size from
fine clay to huge boulders. Water from melting glaciers
transports and redeposits some of this glacial sediment,
creating stratified, sorted accumulations.

229

230

CHAPTER 7

Sedimentary Rocks
Sand dunes consist of well-sorted sand grains
deposited by the wind.

Caves that develop in limestone are sites where
calcium carbonate is deposited as dripstone.
Beaches that form where wave activity is strong,
consist mainly of pebbles and cobbles.

Michael Collier

Dennis Tasa

Salt
flat

Michael Collier

Lake

Estuary
PixAchi/Shutterstock

Beaches, bars, and spits along low-lying coasts
and in sheltered coves are typically composed
of well-sorted sand and/or shell fragments.

Deep-sea
fans

Turbidity current

Barrett & MacKay/Glow Images

Tidal flats and lagoons are areas where fine
clay particles or carbonate-rich muds
accumulate.

Figure 7.25
Sedimentary environments Each environment
is characterized by certain physical, chemical,
and biological conditions. Because sediments
contain clues about the environment in which
they were deposited, sedimentary rocks are
important in the interpretation of Earth history.
A number of important examples are represented in this idealized diagram.

Marli Miller

Deep marine environments adjacent to the
continental slope often contain material that
was transported by dense underwater currents
of suspended sediment. Each layer has
coarser particles at the bottom and finer
material on top.

E.J. Tarbuck

Shallow marine environments are sites where
sand, clay, and carbonate-rich muds are often
deposited. Ripple marks caused by wave
activity may be present.

231

7.7 Sedimentary Rocks Represent Past Environments
Inland seas and lakes in arid environments
where evaporation exceeds precipitation,
produce evaporite deposits such as rock salt
and gypsum.

Alluvial fans consist of coarse sediments that
are deposited when mountain streams reach
flat lowlands.

Glacial deposits often consist of a poorly-sorted
mixture of many different sediment sizes
ranging from clay to boulders.

Marli Miller
USGS

Alluvial fans

Salt
flat

Michael Collier

Inland lake

Masonjar/Shutterstock

Swamp
_TT25


Swamps and bogs are quiet-water environments
where mud and decayed plant material
accumulate.

Delta

Alan Majchrowicz/AGE Fotostock

Streams in mountainous areas erode and
deposit a wide variety of sediment, while those
in lowlands transport and deposit mostly mud
(silt and clay) and sand.

Dave Wald/USGS
Radius/Superstock

Coral reefs are massive limestone structures
that form in warm, shallow clear seas and
consist of material secreted by corals and other
marine life.

Landslides produce an unsorted jumble of
many sediment sizes.

232

CHAPTER 7

Sedimentary Rocks

The work of wind and its resulting deposits are
referred to as eolian, after Aeolus, the Greek god of
wind. Unlike glacial deposits, eolian sediments are well
sorted. Wind can lift fine dust high into the atmosphere
and transport it great distances. Where winds are strong
and the surface is not anchored by vegetation, sand is
transported closer to the ground, where it accumulates in
dunes. Deserts and coasts are common sites for this type
of deposition.
In addition to being areas where dunes sometimes
develop, desert basins are sites where shallow playa lakes
occasionally form following heavy rains or periods of snowmelt in adjacent mountains. They rapidly dry up, sometimes
leaving behind evaporites and other characteristic deposits.
Figures 19.9 and 19.10 on page 581 illustrate such an environment. In humid regions, lakes are more enduring features, and their quiet waters are excellent sediment traps.
Small deltas, beaches, and bars form along the lakeshore,
with finer sediments coming to rest on the lake floor.

extending as far as 1500 kilometers (more than 900 miles)
in other locations. On average this zone is about 80 kilometers (50 miles) wide. The kind of sediment deposited
here depends on several factors, including distance from
shore, elevation of the adjacent land area, water depth,
water temperature, and climate.
Due to the ongoing erosion of the adjacent continent, the shallow marine environment receives huge
quantities of land-derived sediment. Where the influx of
such sediment is small and the seas are relatively warm,
carbonate-rich muds may be the predominant sediment.
Most of this material consists of the skeletal debris of
carbonate-secreting organisms mixed with inorganic
precipitates. Coral reefs are also associated with warm,
shallow marine environments. In hot regions where the
sea occupies a basin with restricted circulation, evaporation triggers the precipitation of soluble materials and the
formation of marine evaporite deposits.
Deep marine environments include all the floors
of the deep ocean. Far from landmasses, tiny particles
from many sources remain adrift for long spans. Gradually these small grains “rain” down on the ocean floor,
where they accumulate very slowly. Significant exceptions are thick deposits of relatively coarse sediment that
occur at the base of the continental slope. These materials move down from the continental shelf as turbidity
currents—dense gravity-driven masses of sediment and
water (see Figure 7.29).

Marine Environments Marine depositional environments are divided according to depth. The shallow
marine environment reaches to depths of about 200
meters (nearly 700 feet) and extends from the shore to
the outer edge of the continental shelf. The deep marine
environment lies seaward of the continental shelf in
waters deeper than 200 meters.
The shallow marine environment borders all of the
world’s continents. Its width varies greatly, from practically nonexistent in some places to broad expanses

E Y E ON E A R T H

Transitional Environments The shoreline is the
transition zone between marine and continental

7.3

T

his is an aerial view of North Carolina’s Hatteras
Island (looking toward the south). To the left (east)
of the island is the Atlantic Ocean. The sheltered
waters of Pamlico Sound are on the right, the side of the
island facing the mainland. Assume that the sediments
accumulating in the area are primarily detrital. (Photo by

NORTH CAROLINA

nd

o
mlic

Sou

Pa

Hatteras
Island
Hatteras
Island

Michael Collier)

QUESTION 1 If you were to sample the sediments at
points A and B, which would likely have the coarser
particles?

ATLANTIC OCEAN

A

QUESTION 2 Explain why the sediments at these two
sites would probably be different.

Pamlico Sound

B

Road

QUESTION 3 Which one of the three broad categories of
sedimentary environments is represented in this image?
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
Dunes

233

7.7 Sedimentary Rocks Represent Past Environments

SmartFigure 7.26

Limestone
facies

Shale
facies

Sandstone
facies

environments. Here we find the familiar deposits of sand
or gravel called beaches. Mud-covered tidal flats are
alternately covered with shallow sheets of water and then
exposed to air as tides rise and fall. Along and near the
shore, the work of waves and currents distributes sand,
creating spits, bars, and barrier islands. Offshore bars
and reefs create lagoons. The quieter waters in these
sheltered areas are another site of deposition in the transition zone.
Deltas are among the most significant deposits associated with transitional environments. The complex accumulations of sediment build outward into the sea when
rivers experience an abrupt loss of velocity and deposit
their load of detrital material.

Sedimentary Facies
When we study a series of sedimentary layers, we can see
the successive changes in environmental conditions that
occurred at a particular place with the passage of time.
Changes in past environments may also be seen when a
single layer of sedimentary rock is traced laterally. This is
true because at any one time, many different depositional
environments can exist over a broad area. For example,
when sand is accumulating in a beach environment,
finer muds are often being deposited in quieter offshore
waters. Still farther out, perhaps in a zone where biological activity is high and land-derived sediments are scarce,
the deposits consist largely of the calcite-rich remains of
small organisms. In this example, different sediments are
accumulating adjacent to one another at the same time.
Different parts of each layer possess a distinctive set of
characteristics that reflect the conditions in a particular
environment. The term facies is used to describe such
sets of sediments. When a sedimentary layer is examined
in cross section from one end to the other, each facies
grades laterally into another that formed at the same
time but that exhibits different characteristics (Figure 7.26).
The merging of adjacent facies tends to be a gradual transition rather than a sharp boundary, but abrupt changes
do sometimes occur.

Sedimentary Structures
In addition to variations in grain size, mineral composition, and texture, sediments exhibit a variety of structures
that are often preserved when they change to sedimentary rock. Some, such as graded beds, are created when

Lateral change When a sedimentary layer is traced laterally, we may
find that it is made up of several different rock types. This occurs
because many sedimentary environments can exist at the same time
over a broad area. The term facies is
used to describe such sets of sedimentary rocks. Each facies grades
laterally into another that formed at
the same time but in a different
environment. (https://goo.gl/HOJsQ8)

sediments are accumulating and are a reflection of the
transporting medium. Others, such as mud cracks, form
after the materials have been deposited and result from
processes occurring in the environment. When present,
sedimentary structures provide additional information
that can be useful in interpreting Earth’s history.
Sedimentary rocks form as layer upon layer of sediment accumulates in various depositional environments.
These layers, called strata, or beds, are probably the
single most common and characteristic feature of sedimentary rocks. Each stratum is unique. It may be a
coarse sandstone, a fossil-rich limestone, a black shale,
and so on. When you look at Figure 7.27, or look back at
the chapter-opening photo and at Figures 7.1 and 7.5,
Figure 7.27
Layers are called
strata This outcrop of sedimentary strata illustrates
the characteristic layering
of this group of rocks. This
exposure of sedimentary
strata is in New York’s
Shawangunk Mountains.
(Photo by Colin D. Young/
Shutterstock)

234

CHAPTER 7

Sedimentary Rocks

Figure 7.28

Weathered
bedding planes
within unit

Cross-bedding Sand
dunes typically exhibit thin
layers inclined at an angle
to the main bedding.

Cross-bedding
unit

John S. Shelton/ University

The cutaway
of Washington Libraries
section of this
sand dune shows
the characteristic
cross-bedding

The cross-bedding in
this sandstone indicates
it was once a sand dune

Principal bedding
surfaces

0

1

2

Steep
truncated
cross-beds

3

meters

Dennis Tasa

you see many such layers, each different from the others.
The variations in texture, composition, and thickness
reflect the different conditions under which each layer
was deposited.
Beds range from microscopically thin to tens of
meters thick. Separating these strata are bedding
planes, relatively flat surfaces along which rocks tend
to separate or break. Changes in the grain size or in the
composition of the sediment being deposited can create bedding planes. Pauses in deposition can also lead to
layering because chances are slight that newly deposited

material will be exactly the same as previously deposited
sediment. Generally, each bedding plane marks the end
of one episode of sedimentation and the beginning of
another.
Because sediments usually accumulate as particles
that settle from a fluid, most strata are originally deposited as horizontal layers. There are circumstances, however, when sediments do not accumulate in horizontal
beds. Sometimes when a bed of sedimentary rock is
examined, we see layers within it that are inclined to the
horizontal. This is called cross-bedding, and it is most

Figure 7.29
Graded bedding A graded
bed is characterized by a
decrease in sediment size
from bottom to top. Graded
beds are associated with
submarine currents known
as turbidity currents. (Photo

Beds deposited by turbidity
currents are called turbidites.
Each event produces a single
bed characterized by a
decrease in sediment size
from bottom to top, a feature
known as graded bedding

Turbidity
current

Turbidite deposits

Turbidity currents are downslope movements of
dense, sediment-laden water. They are created
when sand and mud on the continental shelf and/or
slope are dislodged and thrown into suspension.
Because the mud-choked water is denser than
normal seawater, it flows downslope, eroding and
accumulating more sediment

by Marli Miller)

Submarine
canyons

Fine particles
settle out last
Graded
beds
Coarse particles
settle out first

Turbidity
current
Deep-sea
fans

7.7 Sedimentary Rocks Represent Past Environments

characteristic of sand dunes, river
deltas, and certain stream channel
deposits (see Figure 7.8 and Figure
7.28).
Graded beds are another
special type of bedding. In this
case, the particles within a single
sedimentary layer gradually
change from coarse at the bottom to fine at the top. Graded
beds are most characteristic of
rapid deposition from water containing sediment of varying sizes.
When a current experiences a
rapid energy loss, the largest
particles settle first, followed
by successively smaller grains.
The deposition of a graded bed
is most often associated with a
turbidity current, a mass of sediment-choked water that
is denser than clear water and that moves downslope
along the bottom of a lake or an ocean (Figure 7.29).
As geologists examine sedimentary rocks, they can
deduce quite a bit. A conglomerate, for example, may
indicate a high-energy environment such as a surf zone
or rushing stream, where only coarse materials remain
and finer particles are kept suspended. An arkose may
signify a dry climate, where little chemical alteration of
feldspar is possible. Carbonaceous shale is a sign of a
low-energy, organic-rich environment, such as a swamp
or lagoon.
Other features found in some sedimentary rocks
also give clues to past environments. Ripple marks are
such a feature. Ripple marks are small waves of sand
that develop on the surface of a sediment layer through
the action of moving water or air (Figure 7.30A). The
ridges form at right angles to the direction of motion. If
the ripple marks were formed by air or water moving in
essentially one direction, their form will be asymmetrical.
These current ripple marks will have steeper sides in the
downcurrent direction and more gradual slopes on the
upcurrent side. Ripple marks produced by a stream flowing across a sandy channel and by wind blowing over a
sand dune are two common examples of current ripples.
When present in solid rock, they may be used to determine the direction of movement of ancient wind or water
currents. Other ripple marks have a symmetrical form.
These features, called oscillation ripple marks, result
from the back-and-forth movement of surface waves in a
shallow near-shore environment.
Mud cracks (Figure 7.30B) indicate that the sediment in which they were formed was alternately wet
and dry. When exposed to air, wet mud dries out and
shrinks, producing cracks. Mud cracks are associated
with environments such as tidal flats, shallow lakes, and
desert basins.
_TT26


235

Figure 7.30
Frozen in stone A. These current
ripple marks formed in sandy sediment and are now preserved in
rock. (Photo by Tim Graham/Alamy Images)
B. When muddy sediments dry
out, they shrink and create cracks.
When the sediment is turned into
rock, the mud cracks are preserved.
(Photo by Marli Miller)

A.

Fossils, the remains or
traces of prehistoric life, are
important inclusions in sediment
and sedimentary rocks. They are
important tools for interpreting the geologic past. Knowing
the nature of the life-forms that
existed at a particular time helps
researchers understand past
environmental conditions. In
addition, fossils are important
time indicators and play a key
role in correlating rocks of similar ages that are from different
places. Fossils are discussed further in Chapter 9.

7.7

B.

Concept Checks

1. What are the three broad categories of
sedimentary environments? List a specific
example associated with each category (see
Figure 7.25).
2. Why might a single layer exhibit different types
of sedimentary rock? What term applies to the
different parts of such a layer?
3. What is the single most characteristic feature of
sedimentary rocks?
4. What is the difference between cross-bedding
and graded bedding?
5. How might mud cracks and ripple marks be
useful clues about the geologic past?

236

CHAPTER 7

Sedimentary Rocks

7.8

The Carbon Cycle and Sedimentary Rocks
Relate weathering processes and sedimentary rocks to the carbon cycle.

To illustrate the movement of material and energy among the spheres of the Earth system, let us
take a brief look at the carbon cycle (Figure 7.31). Most carbon is bonded chemically to other elements to form compounds such as carbon dioxide, calcium carbonate, and the hydrocarbons found
in coal and petroleum. Carbon is also the basic building block of life, as it readily combines with
hydrogen and oxygen to form the fundamental organic compounds that compose living things.

Figure 7.31
Carbon cycle This simplified diagram emphasizes
the flow of carbon between
the atmosphere and the
hydrosphere, geosphere,
and biosphere. The arrows
show whether the flow of
carbon is into or out of the
atmosphere.

Certainly one of the most active parts of the carbon cycle
is the movement of carbon from the atmosphere to the
biosphere and back again. In the atmosphere, carbon
is found mainly as carbon dioxide (CO2). Atmospheric
carbon dioxide is significant because it is a greenhouse
gas, which means it is an efficient absorber of energy
emitted by Earth and thus influences the heating of
the atmosphere, a process described in more detail in
Chapter 21. Because many of the processes that operate
on Earth involve carbon dioxide, this gas is constantly
moving into and out of the atmosphere. Through the
process of photosynthesis, plants absorb carbon dioxide
from the atmosphere to produce the essential organic
compounds needed for growth. Animals that consume
these plants (or consume other animals that eat plants)
use these organic compounds as a source of energy and,
through the process of respiration, return carbon dioxide
to the atmosphere. (Plants also return some CO2 to the
atmosphere via respiration.) Further, when plants die and
decay or are burned, this biomass is oxidized, and carbon
dioxide is returned to the atmosphere.
Not all dead plant material decays immediately back
to carbon dioxide. A small percentage is deposited as

Weathering
of carbonate
Photosynthesis rock
Burning and
decay of
biomass

Volcanic
activity

Weathering
of
granite

by vegetation
Respiration
by land
organisms
Burning
of fossil
fuels
Burial of
biomass

Photosynthesis
and respiration
of marine
organisms

Deposition
of carbonate
sediments

CO2
dissolves
in seawater

Geosphere

sediment. Over long spans of geologic time, considerable
biomass is buried with sediment. Under the right conditions, some of these carbon-rich deposits are converted to
fossil fuels—coal, petroleum, or natural gas. Some of the
fuels are eventually recovered (mined or pumped from a
well) and burned to generate electricity and fuel our transportation system. One result of fossil-fuel combustion is
the release of huge quantities of carbon dioxide back into
the atmosphere. Carbon also moves from the geosphere
and hydrosphere to the atmosphere and back again.
For example, volcanic activity early in Earth’s history is
thought to be the source of much of our atmospheric carbon dioxide. One way that carbon dioxide makes its way
back to the hydrosphere and then to the solid Earth is by
first combining with water to form carbonic acid (H2CO3),
which then attacks the rocks that compose Earth’s crust.
One product of this chemical weathering of solid rock is
the soluble bicarbonate ion (HCO32) which is carried by
groundwater and streams to the ocean. Water-dwelling
organisms extract this dissolved material to produce hard
parts of calcium carbonate (CaCO3). When the organisms
die, these skeletal remains settle to the ocean floor as
biochemical sediment and become sedimentary rock. In
fact, the crust is by far Earth’s largest depository of carbon, where it is a constituent of a variety of rocks, the most
abundant being limestone. Eventually the limestone may
be exposed at Earth’s surface, where chemical weathering
will cause the carbon stored in the rock to be released to
the atmosphere as carbon dioxide.
In summary, carbon moves among all four of Earth’s
major spheres. It is essential to every living thing in
the biosphere. In the atmosphere, carbon dioxide is an
important greenhouse gas. In the hydrosphere, carbon
dioxide is dissolved in lakes, rivers, and the ocean. In the
geosphere, carbon is contained in carbonate sediments
and sedimentary rocks and is stored as organic matter
dispersed through sedimentary rocks and as deposits of
coal and petroleum.

7.8
Sediment and
sedimentary rock

CO2 entering the
atmosphere
CO2 leaving the
atmosphere

Concept Checks

1. Describe how chemical weathering and the
formation of biochemical sediment remove
carbon from the atmosphere and store it in the
geosphere.
2. Provide an example by which carbon moves from
the geosphere to the atmosphere.

8
Metamorphism
and
Metamorphic
Rocks

Metamorphic rocks of Pemaquid Point, Bristol, Maine.
(Photo by George Oze Photography/SuperStock)

T

he folded and metamorphosed rocks shown in the chapter opening photo were once flat-lying sedimentary strata. Compressional forces of unimaginable
magnitude, combined with temperatures hundreds of degrees above surface conditions,
prevailed for perhaps thousands or millions of years to produce the deformation displayed by these rocks. Under such extreme conditions, solid rock responds by folding,
fracturing, and often flowing. This chapter looks at the tectonic forces that forge metamorphic rocks and how these rocks change in appearance, mineralogy, and sometimes
overall chemical composition.

8.1

What Is Metamorphism?
Compare and contrast the environments that produce metamorphic, sedimentary,
and igneous rocks.

Unlike some igneous and sedimentary processes that occur in surface or near-surface environments,
metamorphism most often occurs deep within Earth, beyond our direct observation. Notwithstanding
this significant obstacle, geologists have developed techniques that allow them to learn about the conditions under which metamorphic rocks form. In turn, the study of metamorphic rocks provides important insights into how tectonic processes operate to alter the structure and composition of Earth’s crust.
Figure 8.1

A.

Metamorphic grade A.
Low-grade metamorphism
illustrated by the transformation of the common
sedimentary rock shale to
the more compact metamorphic rock slate.
B. High-grade metamorphic environments obliterate the existing texture and
often change the mineralogy of the parent rock.
High-grade metamorphism
occurs at temperatures that
approach those at which
rocks melt. (Photos by Dennis

Parent rock
(Shale)

Metamorphic rock
(Slate)

Low-grade
metamorphism
Low temperatures
and pressures

Tightly
packed
chlorite and
mica minerals

Loosely
packed
clay
minerals

Tasa)

B.

Parent rock
(Granodiorite)

Metamorphic rock
(Folded gneiss)
High-grade
metamorphism
Strong
compressional
forces, high
temperatures
and pressures

Randomly
oriented
minerals

Deformed
layers of
segregated
minerals

Recall from the discussion
of the rock cycle in Chapter
1 that metamorphism is the
transformation of one rock
type into another rock type.
Metamorphic rocks are
produced from preexisting
sedimentary and igneous
rocks, as well as from other
metamorphic rocks. Thus,
every metamorphic rock has
a parent rock—the rock
from which it was formed.
Metamorphism,
which means to “change
form,” is a process that
transforms the mineralogy,
texture, and sometimes the
chemical composition of the
parent rock. The mineralogy (mineral constituents
of a rock) changes because
the rock is subjected to new
conditions, usually elevated
temperatures and pressures,
which are significantly different from those in which it
initially formed. For example, clay minerals, which are
the most common minerals
in sedimentary rocks, are

243

8.2 What Drives Metamorphism?

8.1

Complete melting

Partial melting

stable only at Earth’s surface.
Metamorphic Versus Sedimentary and Igneous Environments
(Kaolinite is one example
Sedimentary
Metamorphic
Igneous
of a clay mineral; refer to
environments
environments
environments
Figure 3.37, page 97.) When
clay minerals are buried to
Surface conditions
200°C
700°C
1200°C
a depth where temperatures
exceed 200°C (nearly 400°F),
they are transformed into
Sediment
converted to
the minerals chlorite and/or
sedimentary
muscovite mica. (Chlorite is
rock
Increasing temperature
a mica-like mineral formed
and pressure
by the metamorphism of
dark iron- and magnesiumrich silicate minerals.) Under
more extreme conditions,
chlorite becomes biotite mica. Metamorphism also alters
Metamorphism occurs over a range of temperatures
a rock’s texture, producing larger crystals and sometimes
that lie between those experienced during the formaa distinct layered or banded appearance.
tion of sedimentary rocks (up to about 200°C [400°F])
The degree to which a parent rock changes during
and temperatures approaching those at which rocks
metamorphism is called its metamorphic grade, and it
begin to melt (about 700°C [1300°F]). However, durvaries from low grade (low temperatures and pressures)
ing metamorphism, the rock remains essentially solid.
to high grade (high temperatures and pressures). For
If complete melting occurs, the rock has entered the
example, in low-grade metamorphic environments, the
realm of igneous activity, as discussed in Chapter 4.
common sedimentary rock shale becomes the more comPressure also plays an important role in metamorpact metamorphic rock slate. During this transformation, phism. Although confining pressure acts to compact
the clay minerals in shale are transformed into tiny chlosediment to form sedimentary rocks, the pressures
rite and muscovite mica flakes. Hand samples of these
involved in metamorphism are even greater—sufficient
rocks are sometimes difficult to distinguish from one
to convert mineral matter into denser forms having
another, illustrating that the transition from sedimentary
more compact crystalline structures. Thus, metamorto metamorphic rock is often gradual and the change
phism involves the formation of new minerals from
subtle (Figure 8.1A).
preexisting ones.
In environments where temperatures and pressures
are more extreme, metamorphism causes a transformation so complete that the identity of the parent rock cannot be easily determined. In high-grade metamorphism,
such features as bedding planes, fossils, and vesicles that
1. Metamorphism means to “change form.” Describe
existed in the parent rock are obliterated. Further, when
how a rock may change during metamorphism.
rocks deep in the crust are subjected to compressional
2. What is meant by the statement “Every
stress (like being placed in a giant vise), the entire mass
metamorphic rock has a parent rock”?
may be deformed, usually by folding (Figure 8.1B).
3. Define metamorphic grade.
Figure 8.2 illustrates the relationships among metamorphic, sedimentary, and igneous environments.

Concept Checks

Drives Metamorphism?
8.2 What
List and distinguish among the four agents that drive metamorphism.
The agents of metamorphism include heat, pressure, directional stress, and chemically active fluids.
During metamorphism, rocks may be subjected to all four metamorphic agents simultaneously.
However, the degree of metamorphism and the contribution of each agent vary greatly from one
environment to another.

Heat as a Metamorphic Agent
The most important factor driving metamorphism is heat
because it provides the energy needed to produce the
chemical reactions that result in the recrystallization of

existing minerals. Recall from the discussion of igneous
rocks in Chapter 4 that an increase in temperature causes
the atoms within a mineral to vibrate more rapidly. Even
in a crystalline solid, where atoms are strongly bonded,

Figure 8.2
Metamorphic environments Metamorphism
occurs over a range of
temperatures that lie between those experienced in
sedimentary environments
and temperatures that
approach those at which
rocks melt. Pressure, which
includes confining pressure and differential stress,
also plays a major role in
metamorphism.

244

CHAPTER 8

Metamorphism and Metamorphic Rocks

this elevated level of activity allows individual atoms
to migrate more freely between sites in the crystalline
structure.

Changes Caused by Heat The formation of new mineral
grains that tend to be larger than the original grains is
called recrystallization. During this process, the mineralogy of the rock may or may not change. For example,
when quartz sandstone is metamorphosed to form quartzite, the mineralogy does not change; the quartz grains
remain quartz. By contrast, when shale is metamorphosed
to slate, the clay minerals are recrystallized and become
new minerals—usually chlorite and muscovite.
Although the mineralogy changes in the transition
from shale to slate, the overall chemical composition
remains essentially unchanged. Instead, the existing
atoms are rearranged into new crystalline structures that
are more stable in the new environment. (In some environments, ions may actually migrate into or out of a rock,
thereby changing its overall chemical composition.)
What Is the Source of Heat? There are two primary
sources of heat within Earth. One is the increasing temperature that occurs as we travel deeper into Earth’s
interior. The second is heat being released to the surrounding rocks as a magma body cools.
Earth’s interior is extremely hot, mainly because
of heat released from the repeated collision of asteroidsize bodies during the formation of our planet as well as
from energy being continually released by the decay of
radioactive elements. The rate of increase in temperature
with depth is known as the geothermal gradient. In
the upper crust, this increase in temperature averages
about 25°C (77°F) per kilometer (Figure 8.3). Thus, rocks
that formed at Earth’s surface will experience a gradual
SmartFigure 8.3
Sources of heat for metamorphism The two main
sources of heat for metamorphism are the increasing temperature that occurs
as we travel deeper into
Earth’s interior and heat
released to the surrounding
rocks when a magma body
cools. (https://goo.gl/JzqfLx)

increase in temperature if they are transported to greater
depths. As described earlier, clay minerals tend to become
unstable when buried to a depth of about 8 kilometers (5
miles), where temperatures are about 200°C (400°F). The
clay minerals begin to recrystallize into new minerals,
such as chlorite and muscovite, both of which are stable in
this new environment. However, many silicate minerals,
particularly those found in crystalline igneous rocks—
such as quartz and feldspar—remain stable at these
temperatures. Thus, metamorphic changes in quartz and
feldspar generally occur at higher temperatures.
Figure 8.3 provides several examples of conditions in
which heat drives metamorphism. Environments where
rocks may be carried to great depths and heated include
convergent plate boundaries where slabs of sedimentladen oceanic crust are being subducted. Rocks may also
become deeply buried in large basins where gradual subsidence results in thick accumulations of sediment. These
basins, exemplified by the Gulf of Mexico, are known
to develop low-grade metamorphic conditions near the
base of the pile. In addition, continental collisions, which
result in mountain building, cause some rocks to be
uplifted while others are thrust downward, where elevated temperatures and pressures trigger metamorphism.
Heat may also be transported from the mantle into
the shallowest layers of the crust. Rising mantle plumes,
upwelling at mid-ocean ridges, and magma generated
by partial melting of mantle rock at subduction zones
are three such examples (see Figure 8.3). When magma
intrudes rocks at shallow depths, the magma cools and
releases heat, which “bakes” the surrounding host rock.

Confining Pressure

Pressure, like temperature, increases with depth because
the thickness of the overlyShallow crustal rocks are
ing rock increases. Buried
Rocks buried in a large
Subducting sediments
metamorphosed by heat
rocks are subjected to consedimentary basin may
are metamorphosed due
emanating from a nearby
fining
pressure, which is
encounter low-grade
to increase in pressure
magma body.
analogous to water presmetamorphic conditions
and temperature.
near the bottom of the pile.
sure, in which the forces
are applied equally in all
Subsiding
Igneous
directions (Figure 8.4A). For
basin
intrusions
example, the deeper scuba
divers go, the greater the
300°C
300°C
confining pressure.
600°C
600°C
Confining pressure
S
ub
900°C
du
causes
the spaces between
900°C
1200°C
cti
ng
mineral
grains to close, pro1200°C
oc
ea
Idealized
ducing more compact rocks
ni
c
Rising magma transports heat to
geothermal
lith
that have greater densities.
os
Earth’s upper crust causing an
gradient
ph
If the pressure becomes
er
increase in the geothermal
e
extreme enough, it can
gradient.
cause the atoms in a minLow geothermal gradients are observed
eral to pack more closely
in subduction zones because cold
together to produce a new,
oceanic crust and overlying sediments
are descending into the mantle.
denser mineral. Recall from

245

8.2 What Drives Metamorphism?

Chapter 3 that the transformation of one mineral (polymorph) to another is called a phase change. Confining
pressure does not, however, fold or fracture rocks.

Undeformed
strata

Differential Stress
In addition to confining pressure, rocks may be subjected to directed pressure. This occurs, for example, at
convergent plate boundaries where slabs of lithosphere
collide. Here the forces that deform rock are unequal in
different directions and are referred to as differential
stress. (A discussion of various types of differential
stress is provided in Chapter 10.) Unlike confining pressure, which “squeezes” rock equally in all directions,
differential stresses are greater in one direction than in
others.
Differential stress that squeezes a rock mass as if it
were placed in a vise is termed compressional stress.
As shown in Figure 8.4B, rocks subjected to compressional stress are shortened in the direction of greatest
stress and elongated, or lengthened, in the direction
perpendicular to that stress. Along convergent plate
boundaries, the greatest differential stress is directed
horizontally in the direction of plate motion. Consequently, in these settings, the crust is greatly shortened
(horizontally) and thickened (vertically), resulting in
mountainous topography.
In high-temperature, high-pressure environments,
rocks are ductile, which allows their mineral grains to
flatten (like what happens when you step on a tennis ball)
when subjected to differential stress. The metaconglomerate, also called a stretch pebble conglomerate, shown
in Figure 8.5 illustrates this tendency. The parent rock, a
conglomerate, consisted of nearly spherical pebbles that
have been flattened into elongated structures by differential stress. On a larger scale, rocks that are ductile deform
by flowing rather than breaking or fracturing. As a result,
deeply buried rocks will develop intricate folds when
deformed by differential stress (Figure 8.6).
By contrast, in near-surface environments where
temperatures and pressure are comparatively low, rocks
are brittle and tend to fracture when subjected to differential stress. Continued deformation grinds and
pulverizes the mineral grains into smaller and smaller
fragments.

In a depositional
environment, as confining
pressure increases, rocks
deform by decreasing in
volume.

Increasing
confining
pressure

Confining pressure and
differential stress (https://
goo.gl/GbqzMz)

Deformed
strata

High confining
pressure
A.
During mountain building, rocks subjected to
differential stress are shortened in the direction
of maximum stress and lengthened in the
direction of minimum stress.

Deformed
strata

B.

Hot, chemically active fluids enhance metamorphism by dissolving and transporting ions from one site
in the crystal structure to another, thereby facilitating
the process of recrystallization. In increasingly hotter
environments, these fluids become correspondingly more
reactive.
Differential
stress

Maximum

Figure 8.5
Metaconglomerate, also
called stretched pebble
conglomerate This metaconglomerate is made
of once nearly spherical
pebbles that have been
heated and flattened into
elongated structures by
differential stress. (Photo by
E. J. Tarbuck)

Chemically Active Fluids
Water is abundant in Earth’s crust. In the upper crust,
water occurs as groundwater. At depth, hot water is
released into the surrounding rocks when a magma
body cools and solidifies. In addition, many minerals,
including clays, micas, and amphiboles, are hydrated—
which means they contain water in their crystalline
structures. Elevated temperatures and pressures cause
these minerals to dehydrate, expelling hot, mineralladen water.

SmartFigure 8.4

Maximum

246

CHAPTER 8

Metamorphism and Metamorphic Rocks

Figure 8.6
Deformed and folded
gneiss, Anza Borrego
Desert State Park,
California (Photo by A. P.
Trujillo/APT Photos)

In some metamorphic environments, hot fluids
transport mineral matter over considerable distances.
This occurs, for example, when hot, ion-rich fluids,
called a hydrothermal solution, are expelled from
a magma body as it cools and solidifies. If the rocks
that surround the pluton differ markedly in chemical
composition from the invading fluids, there may be an
exchange of ions between these fluids and host rocks.
In other words, these fluids bring in new atoms or
take out atoms rather than simply reorganize what is
already present. When this occurs, the overall chemical composition of the surrounding rock changes, in a
process called metasomatism. One example of metasomatism is the formation of the mineral wollastonite
(CaSiO3) from calcite (CaCO3), the primary ingredient
in limestone. When a silica-rich hydrothermal solution invades limestone, calcite reacts with silica (SiO2)
to generate wollastonite, and the gas carbon dioxide
(CO2) is driven off.

The Importance of Parent Rock
Most metamorphic rocks have the same overall chemical composition as the parent rocks from which they
formed, except for the possible loss or acquisition
of volatiles such as water (H2O) and carbon dioxide
(CO2). Therefore, when we try to establish from what
parent material metamorphic rocks were derived, the
most important clue comes from their overall chemical
composition.
Consider the large exposures of the metamorphic
rock marble found high in the Alps of Southern Europe.
Because marble and the common sedimentary rock

limestone have the same mineralogy (calcite), it seems
reasonable to conclude that limestone is the parent rock
of marble. Furthermore, because limestone usually forms
in warm, shallow marine environments, we can surmise
that considerable deformation must have occurred to
convert limy deposits in a shallow sea into marble crags
in the lofty Alps.
The mineral makeup of the parent rock also largely
determines the degree to which each metamorphic agent
will cause change. For example, when magma forces its
way into an existing body of rock, high temperatures and
hot fluids may alter the host rock. If the host rock is composed of minerals that are comparatively nonreactive,
such as quartz, any alterations that may occur will be
confined to a narrow zone next to the igneous intrusion.
However, when the host rock is limestone, which is
highly reactive, the zone of metamorphism may extend
far from the intrusion.

8.2

Concept Checks

1. List four agents that drive metamorphism.
2. Why is heat considered the most important agent
of metamorphism?
3. How is confining pressure different from
differential stress?
4. What role do chemically active fluids play in
metamorphism?
5. What characteristic of a metamorphic rock is
determined primarily by its parent rock?

247

8.3 Metamorphic Textures

8.3

Metamorphic Textures
Explain how foliated and nonfoliated textures develop.

The term texture is used to describe the size, shape, and arrangement of the mineral grains
within a rock. Recall that texture is one way in which igneous and sedimentary rocks are classified. Most igneous and many sedimentary rocks consist of mineral grains or crystals that have
a random orientation and thus appear uniform when viewed from any direction. By contrast,
metamorphic rocks that contain platy minerals (such as micas) and/or elongated minerals (such
as amphiboles) typically display some kind of preferred orientation in which the mineral grains
exhibit a parallel to subparallel alignment. Like a fistful of pencils, rocks containing elongated
mineral grains that are oriented parallel to each other appear different when viewed from the
side than when viewed head-on. A rock that exhibits a preferred orientation of its mineral constituents is said to possess foliation.

Foliation
The term foliation refers to any planar (nearly flat)
arrangement of mineral grains or crystals within a rock.
Although foliation may occur in some sedimentary and
even a few types of igneous rocks, it is a fundamental
characteristic of metamorphosed rocks that have been
strongly deformed, mainly by folding. In metamorphic
environments, foliation is ultimately driven by compressional stress that shortens rock units, causing mineral
grains in preexisting rocks to develop parallel, or nearly
parallel, alignments. Examples of foliation include the
parallel alignment of platy minerals through rotation,
recrystallization, and flattening of mineral grains or
pebbles. Foliated textures include rock cleavage in
which rocks can be easily split into tabular slabs, and
compositional banding in which the separation of dark
and light minerals generates a layered appearance.
These diverse types of foliation can form in many different ways.

the newly formed mineral grains exhibit a distinct layering, and the metamorphic rocks containing them exhibit
foliation.

Flattening Spherically Shaped Grains Mechanisms
that flatten existing mineral grains are important in the
metamorphism of rocks that contain minerals such as
quartz, calcite, and olivine. These minerals normally
develop roughly spherical crystals and have a rather
simple chemical composition.

F O L I AT I O N
Before metamorphism
(Confining pressure)

Rotation of Platy Mineral Grains The rotation of
existing mineral grains is the easiest of the foliation mechanisms to envision. Figure 8.7 illustrates the
mechanics by which platy or elongated mineral grains
are rotated. Note that the new alignment is roughly
perpendicular to the direction of maximum stress.
Although physical rotation of platy minerals contributes
to the development of foliation in low-grade metamorphism, other mechanisms dominate in more extreme
environments.

M
e
t
a
m
o
r
p
h
i
s
m

After metamorphism
(Differential stress)

Recrystallization That Produces New Minerals
Recall that recrystallization is the creation of new mineral grains from preexisting ones. When recrystallization
occurs as rock is being subjected to differential stress,
any elongated minerals (such as amphiboles) and platy
minerals (such as micas) that form tend to recrystallize
perpendicular to the direction of maximum stress. Thus,

Platy and elongated mineral
grains having random
orientation.

Mineral grains that are
aligned roughly
perpendicular to the
direction of maximum
differential stress.

SmartFigure 8.7
Mechanical rotation of
platy mineral grains to
produce foliation
(https://goo.gl/vaWv6I)

248

CHAPTER 8

Metamorphism and Metamorphic Rocks

Figure 8.8
Solid-state flow of mineral grains Mineral grains can be flattened by solidstate flow when units of a mineral’s
crystalline structure slide relative to
each other. This mechanism involves
breaking existing chemical bonds and
forming new ones.

Original
nearly spherical
quartz grains

Slippage along crystal
structures causes grains
to elongate perpendicular
to direction of maximum
stress

Flattened rock containing elongated
quartz grains

A change in grain shape can occur as distinct units
of a mineral’s crystalline structure slide relative to one
another along discrete planes, thereby distorting the
grain, as shown in Figure 8.8. This type of gradual solidstate flow involves slippage that disrupts the crystal lattice as atoms shift positions by breaking existing chemical
bonds and forming new ones.
The shape of a mineral may also be altered by a
process in which individual atoms move from a location
along the margin of the grain that is highly stressed to a
less-stressed position on the same grain (Figure 8.9). This
mechanism, called pressure solution, is significantly
aided by hot, ion-rich water. Mineral matter (ions) dissolves where grains are in contact with each other (areas
of high stress) and is deposited in pore spaces (areas of
low stress). As a result, the mineral grains tend to become
shortened in the direction of maximum stress and elongated in the direction of minimum stress. While both of
these mechanisms flatten mineral grains, the mineralogy
remains the same.

Rock, or Slaty, Cleavage Rocks that split into thin
slabs when hit with a hammer exhibit rock cleavage.
Rock cleavage develops in various metamorphic rocks
but is best displayed in slates that exhibit an excellent
splitting property called slaty cleavage (Figure 8.10).
Because it splits easily, slate is used for building materials such as roof and floor tiles as well as billiard table
surfaces.
In low-grade metamorphic environments, slaty
cleavage is known to develop where beds of shale (and
related sedimentary rocks) are strongly folded and metamorphosed to form slate (Figure 8.11). The process begins
when compressional stress begins to deform rock units,
producing broad folds. With further deformation the
clay minerals in shale, which initially aligned roughly
parallel to the bedding surfaces, begin to recrystallize
into tiny flakes of chlorite and mica. However, these new
platy mineral grains grow so they are aligned roughly

Original
nearly
spherical
quartz grains

Mineral matter
moves from areas
of higher stress to
areas of lower
stress

Flattened rock containing elongated quartz grains

Figure 8.9

Foliated Textures
Various types of foliation exist, depending largely upon
the grade of metamorphism and the mineralogy of the
parent rock. We will look at three: rock, or slaty, cleavage; schistosity; and gneissic texture, or banding.

Pressure solution results in flattened mineral grains This
mechanism flattens mineral grains by dissolving ions from
areas of high stress and depositing ions at sites of low stress.
This mechanism, as well as the one shown in Figure 8.8,
changes the shape of mineral grains but not their volume and
mineralogy.

249

8.3 Metamorphic Textures

Figure 8.10

perpendicular to the maximum
directional stress, as shown in Figure 8.11B.
Because slate typically forms
during the low-grade metamorphism of shale, evidence of the
original sedimentary bedding
surfaces is often preserved. However, as Figure 8.11C illustrates,
the orientation of slate’s cleavage
usually develops at an angle to the
sedimentary beds. Thus, unlike
shale, which splits along bedding
planes, slate often splits across bedding surfaces. Other metamorphic
rocks, such as schists and gneisses,
sometimes split along planar surfaces and exhibit rock cleavage.

Excellent slaty cleavage Slaty cleavage is exhibited by the rock in this
slate quarry. Because slate breaks into flat slabs, it has many uses. (Photo
by Fred Bruemmer/Photolibrary) The inset photo shows the use of slate for the
roof of this house in Switzerland. (Photo by E. J. Tarbuck)
_TT27


Schistosity At higher temperatures and pressures, the minute
mica and chlorite flakes in slate
begin to recrystallize into larger
muscovite and biotite crystals.
When these platy minerals are
large enough to be discernible with the unaided
eye, they exhibit planar or layered structures called
schistosity. Rocks that have this type of foliation are
referred to as schist. In addition to containing platy
minerals, schist often contains deformed quartz and
feldspar crystals that appear flattened or lens-shaped
and are embedded among the mica grains.

Other Metamorphic Textures
Metamorphic rocks that do not exhibit foliated textures
are referred to as nonfoliated. Nonfoliated metamorphic
rocks typically develop in environments where deformation
is minimal and the parent rocks are composed of minerals
SmartFigure 8.11

Gneissic Texture, or Banding During high-grade metamorphism, ion
migration can result in the segregation of minerals, as shown in
Figure 8.12. Notice that the dark
biotite and amphibole crystals
and light silicate minerals
(quartz and feldspar) have
separated, giving the rock
a banded appearance
called gneissic texSedimentary strata
ture, or gneissic
Bedding surfaces
banding. Metamorphic rocks
with this texture are called
gneiss (pronounced “nice”).
A.
Although they
are foliated,
gneisses do not usuSand
grains
ally split as easily
as slates and some
Clay
schists.
minerals

Slaty cleavage
and its orientation
to relict bedding
surfaces.
Deformed strata

Differential
stress

Slaty
cleavage
surfaces
C.

B.
Slaty
cleavage

Relict
bedding
surfaces

Relict bedding
surfaces

Development of rock
cleavage When shale that
is interbedded with sandstone is strongly folded and
metamorphosed, the clay
minerals begin to recrystallize into tiny flakes of chlorite and mica. These new
platy minerals grow so they
are aligned roughly perpendicular to the directed
stress, which gives slate its
foliation. (https://goo.gl/V2tgtQ)

250

CHAPTER 8

Figure 8.12
Development of gneissic
banding Gneissic banding develops through the
migration of ions that cause
felsic and mafic minerals to
grow in separate layers.

Metamorphism and Metamorphic Rocks
Ion migration causes
light and dark minerals
to separate.

Parent rock with
randomly oriented
mineral grains.
Quartz

Differential
stress

Amphibole

Biotite
Feldspar

Unmetamorphosed

High-grade
metamorphism

that exhibit equidimensional crystals, such as quartz or calcite. For example, when a fine-grained limestone (made of
calcite) is metamorphosed by the intrusion of a hot magma
body, the small calcite grains recrystallize to form larger
interlocking crystals. The resulting rock, marble, exhibits
Figure 8.13
Garnet–mica schist The dark red
garnet crystals (porphyroblasts) are
embedded in a matrix of fine-grained
micas. (Photo by E. J. Tarbuck)

large, intergrown calcite crystals, similar in appearance to
those in coarse-grained igneous rocks.
Metamorphic rocks may
also contain some unusually
large grains, called porphyroblasts, that are surrounded
by a fine-grained matrix of
other minerals. Porphyroblastic textures develop in a
Dennis Tasa
wide range of rock types and
Gneissic texture
metamorphic environments
when minerals in the parent rock
recrystallize to form new minerals. During recrystallization, certain metamorphic minerals, such as garnet, tend
to develop a small number of very large crystals. By contrast, minerals such as muscovite and biotite typically form
a large number of smaller grains. As a result, metamorphic
rocks that contain large crystals (porphyroblasts) of, for
example, garnet embedded in a finer-grained matrix of
biotite and muscovite, are relatively common (Figure 8.13).

8.3

Concept Checks

1. Define foliation.
2. Briefly describe three ways in which the mineral
grains in a rock develop a preferred orientation
(that is, foliation).
3. Distinguish among slaty cleavage, schistosity,
and gneissic textures.
Close up of
porphyroblast
Porphyroblasts

E Y E ON E A R T H

4. What is meant by nonfoliated texture? Name one
rock that exhibits this texture.

8.1

T

his metamorphic rock outcrop (bedrock exposed at the
surface) is found in the Southern Alps, located on the
South Island of New Zealand. The continued growth of the
Southern Alps is somewhat unique in that these mountains lie
where the Pacific and Australian plates collide and simultaneously
slide past one another along a large transform fault called the
Alpine Fault.

QUESTION 1 Do the rocks in this outcrop display foliation?
Explain.
QUESTION 2 Do these rocks appear to have experienced highgrade or low-grade metamorphism? Explain.

Shutterstock

E. J. Tarbuck

251

8.4 Common Metamorphic Rocks

Metamorphic Rocks
8.4 Common
List and describe the most common metamorphic rocks.
Most metamorphic rocks that we observe at Earth’s surface were derived from the three most common sedimentary rocks—shale, limestone, and quartz sandstone. Shale is the most likely parent of
most slate, phyllite, schist, and gneiss. This sequence of metamorphic rocks reflects an increase in
grain size, a change in rock texture, and a change in mineralogy.
Limestone, which is composed of the mineral calcite
(CaCO3), is the parent rock of
marble, while quartz (SiO2)
sandstone is the parent of
quartzite. Because calcite and
quartz are simple chemical
compounds compared to clay
minerals, their mineralogy
does not change during metamorphism; calcite usually
remains calcite, and quartz
remains quartz. Rather, these
minerals recrystallize to
produce larger fused grains
that are the main constituents of marble and quartzite,
respectively.
The major characteristics of the most common
metamorphic rocks are summarized in Figure 8.14. Notice
that metamorphic rocks can
be broadly classified by the
type of foliation exhibited
and, to a lesser extent, the
chemical composition of the
parent rock. It is worth noting
that certain rock names (slate,
schist, and gneiss) are also
used to describe rock texture.

Foliated
Metamorphic Rocks

Texture

Metamorphic Rock

Slate

Phyllite

F
o
l
i
a
t
e
d

Schist

Gneiss

Marble

Quartzite

Slate A very fine-grained
(less than 0.5-millimeter) foliated rock composed mainly
of minute chlorite and mica
Hornfels
flakes (too small to be visible
to the human eye) is termed
slate. Slate may also contain tiny quartz and feldspar
crystals. Thus, slate generally appears dull and closely
resembles shale. A noteworthy characteristic of slate is
its excellent rock cleavage, or tendency to break into flat
slabs (see Figure 8.10).

N
o
n
f
o
l
i
a
t
e
d

Comments

Parent
Rock

Figure 8.14
Classification of common
metamorphic rocks (Photos
by E. J. Tarbuck)

Composed of tiny
chlorite and mica
flakes, breaks in flat
slabs called slaty
cleavage, smooth
dull surfaces

Shale,
mudstone,
or siltstone

Fine-grained, glossy
sheen, breaks along
wavy surfaces

Shale,
mudstone,
or siltstone

Medium- to
coarse-grained,
scaly foliation, micas
dominate

Shale,
mudstone,
or siltstone

Coarse-grained,
compositional
banding due to
segregation of light
and dark colored
minerals

Shale,
granite,
or volcanic
rocks

Medium- to
coarse-grained,
relatively soft (3 on
the Mohs scale),
interlocking calcite
or dolomite grains

Limestone,
dolostone

Medium- to
coarse-grained, very
hard, massive, fused
quartz grains

Quartz
sandstone

Very fine-grained, Often shale,
but can
often exceedingly
have any
tough and durable,
usually dark colored composition

Slate is most often generated by the low-grade
metamorphism of shale, mudstone, or siltstone. Less
frequently it is produced when volcanic ash is metamorphosed. Slate’s color depends on its mineral constituents:

252

CHAPTER 8

Metamorphism and Metamorphic Rocks

Figure 8.15
Mica schist This sample of
schist is composed mostly
of muscovite and biotite
and exhibits foliation. (Photo

Mica schist

Parallel alignment
of mineral grains

by E. J. Tarbuck)

Black (carbonaceous) slate contains organic material, red
slate gets its color from iron oxide, and green slate usually
contains a lot of the mineral chlorite.

Phyllite Phyllite represents a degree of metamorphism
between slate and schist. Its constituent platy minerals are
larger than those in slate but not large enough to be readily identifiable with the unaided eye. Although phyllite
appears similar to slate, it can be easily distinguished from
slate by its glossy sheen and wavy surface (see Figure 8.14).
Phyllite exhibits rock cleavage and is composed mainly of
very fine crystals of mainly muscovite, chlorite, or both.

Schist Medium- to coarse-grained metamorphic rocks
in which platy minerals are dominant are called schists.
These flat components commonly include muscovite
and biotite that display parallel alignments that give the
rock its foliated texture (Figure 8.15). In addition, schists
contain smaller amounts of other minerals, often quartz
and feldspar. Some schists are composed mostly of dark
minerals (such as amphiboles). As with slate, the parent
rock of most schists is shale that has undergone mediumto high-grade metamorphism during a major mountainbuilding episode.
Figure 8.16
Banded gneiss found in
the Adirondacks, New
York (Photo by Michael Collier)

As you learned in the previous section, the term
schist describes the texture of rocks, and as such it is
used to name rocks that have a wide variety of chemical compositions. To indicate composition, mineral
names are added. For example, schists composed primarily of muscovite and biotite are called mica schist
(see Figure 8.15). Mica schists often contain accessory
minerals, some of which are unique to metamorphic
rocks. Some common accessory minerals that occur as
porphyroblasts include garnet, staurolite, and andalusite, in which case the rock is called garnet-mica
schist, staurolite-mica schist, or andalusite-mica schist
(see Figure 8.13).
In addition, schists may be composed largely of the
minerals chlorite or talc, in which case they are called
chlorite schist and talc schist, respectively. Both chlorite
and talc schists can form when rocks having basaltic compositions undergo metamorphism.

Gneiss Gneiss is the term applied to medium- to
coarse-grained banded metamorphic rocks in which
granular and elongated (as opposed to platy) minerals
predominate. The most common minerals in gneiss are
quartz, potassium feldspar, and plagioclase feldspar. Most
gneisses also contain lesser amounts of biotite, muscovite,
and amphibole. Some gneisses will split along the layers
of platy minerals, but most break in an irregular fashion.
Recall that during high-grade metamorphism, the
light and dark components separate, giving gneisses their
characteristic banded or layered appearance. Thus, most
gneisses consist of alternating bands of white or reddish
feldspar-rich zones and layers of dark ferromagnesian
minerals (Figure 8.16). These banded gneisses often exhibit
evidence of deformation, including folds and sometimes
faults.
Gneisses having a felsic composition may be derived
from granite or its fine-grained equivalent, rhyolite.
However, most gneisses are generated through highgrade metamorphism of shale. Therefore, gneiss represents the highest-grade metamorphic rock in the
sequence of shale, slate, phyllite, schist, and gneiss.
Like schists, gneisses may also include large crystals of
accessory minerals such as garnet. Gneisses made up
primarily of dark minerals also occur. For example, an
amphibole-rich rock that exhibits a gneissic texture is
called amphibolite.

Nonfoliated Metamorphic Rocks
Marble The metamorphism of limestone or dolostone produces the crystalline metamorphic rock called
marble (see Figure 8.14). Pure marble is white and
composed essentially of the mineral calcite. Because of
its relative softness (3 on the Mohs scale), marble is easy
to cut and shape. White marble is particularly prized

253

8.5 Metamorphic Environments
Quartz sandstone
as a stone from which monuments and statues are carved,
such as the Lincoln Memorial
in Washington, DC, and the
Taj Mahal in India (see GEOgraphics 8.1). Unfortunately,
when marble is exposed to acid
rain, its composition (calcium
carbonate) makes it susceptible
to chemical weathering.
The parent rocks of most
marbles contain impurities
that color the stone. Thus,
marble can be pink, gray, green,
or even black and may contain a variety
of accessory minerals (such as chlorite,
mica, garnet, and wollastonite).
Close up
When marble forms from limestone interbedded with shales,
it appears banded and exhibits visible foliation. When
deformed, these banded marbles may develop highly
contorted mica-rich folds that enhance the rocks’ artistic
appearance. These decorative marbles have been used as
building stones since prehistoric times.

Quartzite Quartzite is a very hard metamorphic rock
formed from quartz sandstone (Figure 8.17). Under moderate- to high-grade metamorphism, the quartz grains
in sandstone fuse together (see the inset in Figure 8.17).
Recrystallization is often so complete that, when broken,
quartzite splits across the original quartz grains rather
than along their boundaries. In some instances, sedimentary features such as cross-bedding are preserved
and give the rock a banded appearance. Pure quartzite
is white, but iron oxide may produce reddish or pinkish
stains, while dark mineral grains may impart shades of
green or gray.
Hornfels Hornfels is a fine-grained nonfoliated meta-
_TT28


Quartzite

Metamorphism
Increase in
temperature
and pressure

variable mineral composition. The parent rock of most
hornfels is shale or another clay-rich rock, which has
been “baked” by a hot intruding magma body. Hornfels tends to be gray to black in color and quite hard,
and it may display conchoidal fracture.

Concept Checks

1. Although slate and phyllite resemble each other,
how can they be differentiated?
2. In the rock mica schist, what does mica indicate,
and what does schist indicate?
3. Briefly describe the appearance of the
metamorphic rock gneiss and explain how it
forms.
4. Describe slate, phyllite, schist, and gneiss in
terms of texture and grain size.
5. Compare and contrast marble and quartzite.

morphic rock, and unlike marble and quartzite, it has a

8.5

Quartzite Quartzite is a
nonfoliated metamorphic
rock formed from quartz
sandstone. These close-up
images show the interlocking quartz grains typical of
quartzite as compared to
the loosely bound grains
in this quartz sandstone.
(Photos by Dennis Tasa)

Close up

8.4

Figure 8.17

Metamorphic Environments
Write a description for each of these metamorphic environments: contact
metamorphism, hydrothermal metamorphism, subduction zone metamorphism,
and regional metamorphism.

Metamorphism occurs in many different environments. Most of these environments occur in the
vicinity of plate margins, and several are associated with igneous activity. We will consider the basic
metamorphic environments—contact or thermal metamorphism, hydrothermal metamorphism,
burial and subduction zone metamorphism, and regional metamorphism—as well as a few types
of metamorphism that generate relatively small quantities of metamorphic rock.

CHAPTER 8

Metamorphism and Metamorphic Rocks

Figure 8.18

0

Pressure (kilobars)

Metamorphic environments
This graph illustrates the
temperatures and pressures typically associated
with the major types of
metamorphic environments.

0

Temperature (°C)
400
600

200

Hydrothermal

2

metamorphism

4

Low
grad
e

Contact metamorphism

Reg

iona

l me

ria

tamo

la

nd

8

sm

High

su

uc

12

20

rphi

bd

grad

tio

n

10

Not found
in nature

e

ne

me

ta

14

vertical axis. Notice that
hydrothermal metamorphism occurs in relatively
low-temperature and lowpressure environments,
whereas burial and subduction metamorphism
occur under relatively
low-temperature and
high-pressure conditions.
Although not shown on
this graph, regional and
subduction metamorphism
involve directional stress,
whereas hydrothermal
and contact metamorphism do not.

40

mo

hi

sm
50

15

As Figure 8.18 illustrates, each type of metamorphism
occurs over a range of temperatures and pressures.
On this graph, temperature, which increases from
surface conditions to about 1000°C (1800°F), is displayed along the top, and pressure is shown along the
SmartFigure 8.19

Collier) (https://goo.gl/MWBhsm)

30

zo

rp

Contact
metamorphism Contact
metamorphism produces
a zone of alteration called
an aureole around an intrusive igneous body. In the
photo, the dark layer is a
type of metamorphic aureole called a roof pendant,
which consists of metamorphosed host rocks that are
in contact with the upper
part of the light-colored
igneous pluton. The term
roof pendant implies that
the rock was once the roof
of a magma chamber. The
photo shows the Sierra
Nevada, near Bishop,
California. (Photo by Michael

1000
0

10

Bu

6

800

Depth (kilometers)

256

Host
rock
Magma
chamber
Metamorphic
aureole

A. Implacement of
igneous body and
metamorphism

Contact, or Thermal, Metamorphism
Contact metamorphism, or thermal metamorphism,
occurs in Earth’s upper crust (low pressure), when rocks
immediately surrounding a molten igneous body are
“baked” (high temperature). Because contact metamorphism does not involve directional stress, the resulting
metamorphic rocks are not foliated.
Contact metamorphism alters rocks in a discrete
zone adjacent to the heat source, called an aureole
(Figure 8.19). Small intrusions such as dikes and sills (see
Chapter 4) typically form aureoles only a few centimeters
thick. By contrast, large molten bodies that eventually
cool to form batholiths can produce aureoles that extend
outward for several kilometers. These large aureoles
often consist of distinct zones of metamorphism. Close

Host
rock

B. Crystallization
of pluton

Igneous
pluton
Metamorphic aureole
(roof pendant)

Shale
Quartz
sandstone
Limestone

Igneous
pluton

Hornfels

Quartzite

Marble

Magma
chamber

Increasing metamorphic grade

Figure 8.20

C. Uplift and erosion expose pluton and metamorphic cap rock

Rocks produced by contact metamorphism Contact metamorphism of shale yields hornfels, while contact metamorphism of quartz sandstone and limestone produces quartzite
and marble, respectively.

257

8.5 Metamorphic Environments

Figure 8.21

to the magma body, high-temperature minerals
such as garnet may form, whereas farther away, low- Hydrothermal metamorphism
can occur at shallow crustal
grade minerals such as chlorite are produced.
depths in regions where geysers
Depending mainly on the composition of the
and hot springs are active.
parent rock, a variety of metamorphic rocks can
form in the same setting (Figure 8.20). For example,
during contact metamorphism of mudstones and shales,
the clay minerals are baked, much like clay is baked in
a kiln to make pottery. The result is a very hard, finegrained metamorphic rock called hornfels (see Figure
8.14). Hornfels can also form from a variety of other
materials, including volcanic ash and basaltic rocks.
Other metamorphic rocks that are produced by contact
metamorphism are marble and quartzite (see
Hydrothermal
Figure 8.20). Recall that limestone is the parvein
ent of marble and that the metamorphism of
deposits
quartz sandstone produces quartzite.

Hydrothermal metamorphism associated with an
intrusive igneous body
Pegmatites and hydrothermal mineral deposits form
adjacent to an igneous
intrusion (pluton). (Photo by
Pavel Svofoda/Fotolia)

Geyser
Fault

Hydrothermal
Metamorphism
When hot, ion-rich water
circulates through pore
spaces or fractures in rock,
a chemical alteration called
hydrothermal metamorphism
may occur (Figure 8.21). Recall
that hot mineral-laden fluids called
hydrothermal solutions contribute to metamorphism
by enhancing the recrystallization of existing minerals.
In addition, hot ion-rich fluids facilitate the movement
of mineral matter into and out of rock bodies, thereby
changing their overall chemical composition.
The water for hydrothermal metamorphism can be
groundwater that has percolated down from the surface,
where it is heated and circulates upward. This
Black
type of metamorphism tends to occur at low smoker
pressures (shallow depth) and relatively
low to moderate temperatures.
Water that drives hydrothermal
metamorphism may also arise from igneous activity. As large magma bodies cool
and solidify, ion-rich water is driven into
the surrounding host rocks. When the
host rock is porous or highly
Cold seawater
fractured, mineral matter
percolates into
contained in these fluids may the hot newly
formed crust
precipitate to form important
deposits of copper, silver, and
gold. These ion-rich fluids can also
generate pegmatites—very coarsegrained granitic (felsic) igneous rocks.
As scientific understanding of
plate tectonics developed, it became
clear that the most widespread occurrence of hydrothermal metamorphism is

Pegmatite
deposits

Igneous body
(pluton)
Magma chamber

along the axis of the mid-ocean ridge system (Figure 8.22).
As plates move apart, upwelling magma from the mantle
generates new seafloor. Seawater percolating through the
young, hot oceanic crust is heated and chemically reacts
with the newly formed basaltic rocks. The result is the
Figure 8.22

Hot, mineral-rich
water rises to
the seafloor

Hydrothermal metamorphism along a mid-ocean
ridge (Photo by Fisheries and
Oceans Canada/Uvic-Verena
Tunnicliffe/Newscom)

Black smoker
spewing hot,
mineral-rich
seawater
Mid-ocean ridge

258

CHAPTER 8

Serpentinite

Soapstone

Figure 8.23
Serpentinite and
soapstone These
metamorphic rocks are
produced by hydrothermal
alteration of mafic rocks
along the mid-ocean ridge
system. (Photos by Dennis Tasa)

SmartFigure 8.24
Regional
metamorphism Regional
metamorphism is often associated with a continental
collision where rocks are
squeezed between two
converging plates, resulting in mountain building.
(https://goo.gl/kkykbZ)

Metamorphism and Metamorphic Rocks

conversion of mafic rocks of the oceanic crust and uppermost mantle into the hydrated rocks serpentinite and
soapstone (Figure 8.23).
Hydrothermal solutions circulating through the seafloor also remove large amounts of metals, such as iron,
cobalt, nickel, silver, gold, and copper, from the newly
formed crust. These hot, metal-rich fluids eventually rise
along fractures and gush from the seafloor at temperatures of about 350°C (660°F), generating particle-filled
clouds called black smokers. Upon mixing with the cold
seawater, sulfides and carbonate minerals containing
these heavy metals precipitate to form metallic deposits.
Geologists credit this process with the formation of the
copper ores mined today on the Mediterranean island of
Cyprus.

lithosphere is being subducted (see Figure 8.3). In this
setting, cold, dense oceanic crust and sediments, which
are poor conductors of heat, are subducting rapidly
enough that pressure increases faster than temperature.
This phenomenon, called subduction zone metamorphism, differs from burial metamorphism in that differential stress plays a major role in deforming rock as it is
being metamorphosed.

Regional Metamorphism

Regional metamorphism is a common, widespread
type of metamorphism typically associated with mountain building, where large segments of Earth’s crust are
intensely deformed by the collision of two continental
crust blocks (Figure 8.24). Whereas denser oceanic crust
subducts under more buoyant continental crust, with
Burial and Subduction Zone
the collision of continental crust blocks, two landmasses
instead collide and deform. Sediments and crustal rocks
Metamorphism
that form the margins of the colliding continents are
Burial metamorphism tends to occur where massive
folded and faulted and, as a result, shorten and thicken
amounts of sedimentary or volcanic material accumulate
like a rumpled carpet. Continental collisions may also
in a subsiding basin such as the Gulf of Mexico (see Figcause crystalline basement rocks lying under sedimenure 8.3). Here, low-grade metamorphic conditions may
tary layers, as well as slices of oceanic crust that once
be reached within the deepest layers. Confining pressure floored the intervening ocean basin, to be uplifted and
and heat drive the recrystallization of the constituent
deformed.
minerals, changing the texture and/or mineralogy of the
The general thickening of the crust that occurs
rock without appreciable deformation.
during mountain building results in buoyant lifting,
Rocks and sediments can also be carried to great
in which deformed rocks are elevated high above sea
depths along convergent boundaries where oceanic
level. Crustal thickening also results in the deep burial
of large quantities of rock as one crustal block is thrust
Sediments deposited on
beneath another. Deep in the roots of mountains,
continental margins
elevated temperatures caused by deep burial are
responsible for the most intense metamorphic activity within a mountain belt.
Ocean
In some settings, deeply buried
basin
rocks become heated beyond their
Continental crust
melting points, producing magma.
Subducting oceanic l
itho
When these magma bodies grow large
sp
he
enough to buoyantly rise, they intrude
re
the overlying metamorphic and sediAsthenosphere
mentary rocks (see Figure 8.24). Consequently, the cores of many mounRegions of low-grade
tain
belts consist of folded and faulted
T
metamorphism
metamorphic
rocks, often intertwined
I
with
igneous
bodies. Over time,
M
these
deformed
rock masses are
E
uplifted, and erosion removes
the overlying material to
expose the igneous and metaContinental crust
morphic core of the mountain
Region
of
high-grade
range.
Partial melting
metamorphism
Regional metamorphism
of deeply buried
crustal rocks
Asthenosphere
produces some of the most
common metamorphic rocks.

259

8.5 Metamorphic Environments

SmartFigure 8.25

Zone of fault breccia and gouge

Metamorphism along a
fault zone (Photo A by A. P.
Trujillo; photo B by Ann BykerkKauffman) (https://goo.gl/sV1uW3)

Brittle
fracture

Offset
drainage

Active
fault
zone

A. Near Earth’s surface, where
rocks behave like a brittle
solid, fault breccia is
generated along fault zones.

In this process, shale is metamorphosed to produce the
sequences of slate, phyllite, schist, and gneiss. In addition, quartz sandstone and limestone are metamorphosed
into quartzite and marble.

Other Metamorphic Environments
Other, less-common types of metamorphism generate
relatively small amounts of metamorphic rock that tends
to be geographically localized.

Metamorphism Along Fault Zones Near Earth’s surface, rock behaves like a brittle solid. Consequently,
movement along a fault zone fractures and pulverizes
rock (Figure 8.25A). The result is a loosely coherent rock
called fault breccia composed of broken and crushed
rock fragments. Displacements along California’s San
Andreas Fault have created a zone of fault breccia and
related rock types more than 1000 kilometers (600
miles) long and up to 3 kilometers (nearly 2 miles) wide.
Much of the deformation associated with fault zones
occurs at great depth and thus at high temperatures. In
this environment, preexisting minerals deform by ductile
flow (Figure 8.25B). As large slabs of rock move in opposite
directions, the minerals in the fault zone between them
tend to form elongated grains that give the rock a foliated
and/or lineated appearance. Rocks formed in these zones
of intense ductile deformation are termed mylonites
(mylo = a mill, ite = a stone).
_TT29


Impact Metamorphism Impact, or shock, metamorphism occurs when high-speed projectiles called

B. At depth, rocks deform by
slow ductile flow to form
rocks called mylonites.

Ductile
flow

Zone of mylonite

meteoroid (fragments of comets or asteroids) strike
Earth’s surface (see GEOgraphics 8.2). Upon impact,
the energy of the once rapidly moving meteorite is
transformed into heat energy and shock waves that pass
through the surrounding rocks. The result is pulverized,
shattered, and sometimes melted rock.
The products of these impacts, called impactiles,
include mixtures of fused fragmented rock plus glassrich ejecta that resemble volcanic bombs. In some
cases, a very dense form of quartz (coesite) and minute
diamonds are found. The existence of these highpressure minerals provides convincing evidence that
pressures and temperatures involved in impact metamorphism can be as great as those found in the upper
mantle.

8.5

Concept Checks

1. In which type of metamorphism does
compressional stress play a major role?
2. Name three rocks that are produced by contact
metamorphism.
3. What is an aureole?
4. What is the agent of hydrothermal metamorphism?
5. Which type of plate boundary is associated with
regional metamorphism?
6. List the common metamorphic rocks generated
by regional metamorphism.

261

8.6 Metamorphic Zones

8.6

Metamorphic Zones
Explain how index minerals are used to establish the metamorphic grade
of a rock body.

In areas affected by metamorphism, geologists can observe the usually systematic variations
in the mineralogy and texture of the altered rocks. These differences are clearly related to
variations in the degree of metamorphism that takes place in each metamorphic zone.

Textural Variations
Across areas where regional metamorphism has
occurred, rock textures vary based on the intensity of
metamorphism. If we begin with a clay-rich sedimentary rock such as shale or mudstone, a gradual increase
in metamorphic intensity from low grade to high grade
is accompanied by a general coarsening of the grain
size. Figure 8.26 illustrates that as metamorphic intensity
increases, shale changes to a fine-grained slate, which
then forms phyllite, which, through continued recrystallization, generates a medium-grained schist. Under more
intense conditions, a gneissic texture that exhibits layers
of dark and light minerals may develop. This systematic
transition in metamorphic textures can be observed as
we approach the Appalachian Mountains from the west.
Beds of shale, which once extended over large areas of
the eastern United States, still occur as nearly flat-lying

strata in Ohio. However, in the broadly folded Appalachians of central Pennsylvania, the rocks that once
formed flat-lying beds are folded and display a preferred
orientation of platy mineral grains, as exhibited by welldeveloped slaty cleavage. As we move further east toward
the intensely deformed crystalline Appalachians, we
find large exposures of schists. Some of the most intense
zones of metamorphism are found in Vermont and New
Hampshire, where gneissic rocks are exposed at the
surface.

Index Minerals and Metamorphic Grade
In addition to textural changes, we encounter corresponding changes in mineralogy as we shift from areas
of low-grade metamorphism to those of high-grade
metamorphism. An idealized transition in mineralogy
SmartFigure 8.26
Textural variations caused by regional metamorphism
Idealized illustration of textural variations produced by regional
metamorphism, progressing
from low-grade metamorphism
(slate) to high-grade metamorphism (gneiss). (Photos by E. J.
Tarbuck) (https://goo.gl/367yOH)

Temperature increases

Pressure increases

Slate
Phyllite
Schist
Gneiss

(Se Sha
dim le
en
tar
y)

Lo
gra w
de

B.
High-grade
metamorphism

te

Ph

yll

Int

ite

Sc

erm
e
gra diat
de e

Low-grade
metamorphism
A.

Sla

his

t
Gn

eis

s

PPar
me arttiial
m
(
(MMig ellttiingal
igmma ng
Hig
attiite)
gra h
te)
de

262

CHAPTER 8

Figure 8.27

Metamorphism and Metamorphic Rocks

M e tamor phic Zones and Index Miner als

to dominate. Under more
extreme conditions, metaSlate
Schist
morphic rocks may conShale
Phyllite
Gneiss
tain garnet and staurolite
crystals (Figure 8.28). At
Chlorite
temperatures approaching
Muscovite
the melting point of rock,
sillimanite forms. SillimanBiotite
ite is a high-temperature
Garnet
metamorphic mineral used
Staurolite
to make porcelains used in
extreme environments, such
Sillimanite
as for spark plugs.
Quartz / Feldspar
Through the study of
metamorphic rocks in their
natural settings (called field studies) and through experithat results from the regional metamorphism of
mental studies, researchers have learned that certain
shale is shown in Figure 8.27. The first new mineral to
minerals, such as those listed in Figure 8.27, are good
form as shale changes to slate is chlorite. At higher
indicators of the metamorphic environment in which they
temperatures, flakes of muscovite and biotite begin
formed. Using these index minerals, geologists distinguish among different zones of regional metamorphism.
For example, the mineral chlorite begins to form when
temperatures are relatively low—less than 200°C (400°F;
SmartFigure 8.28
Garnet, an index mineral,
see Figure 8.27). Thus, rocks containing chlorite (usuprovides evidence of
ally slates) are categorized as low grade. By contrast, the
intermediate- to high-grade
mineral sillimanite forms only in extreme environments
metamorphism These garnet
where temperatures exceed 600°C (1100°F), and rocks
porphyroblasts are found in a
containing it are considered high grade. By mapping the
gneiss in the Adirondacks, New
occurrences of index minerals, geologists can identify
York. (Photo by Michael Collier) (http://
zones of varying metamorphic grades (Figure 8.29).
goo.gl/KrkufS)

Metamorphic zones and
index minerals This is a
typical transition of various
index minerals associated
with the progression from
low-grade to high-grade
metamorphism of the rock
shale.

Parent

Low Grade

Intermediate Grade

Migmatites In the most extreme environments, even
the highest-grade metamorphic rocks undergo change.
For example, gneissic rocks may be heated sufficiently to
trigger melting. However, minerals melt at different temperatures. The light-colored silicates, usually quartz and
potassium feldspar, have the lowest melting temperatures

Garnet

E Y E ON E A R T H

High Grade

8.2

T

his rock outcrop, located in Joshua Tree National
Park, California, consists of dark-colored
metamorphic rocks that overlie light-colored
igneous rocks.

QUESTION 1 Name the type of metamorphism—contact,
hydrothermal, burial, subduction zone, or regional
metamorphism—that likely produced these metamorphic
rocks.
QUESTION 2 Write a brief statement that outlines the
geologic history of this area, based on what you observe
in this image.
E.J. Tarbuck

263

8.7 Interpreting Metamorphic Environments

Figure 8.30
N

Canada

Migmatite Under highgrade metamorphism,
light-colored (felsic) minerals
in a gneiss may begin
to melt, while the darkcolored (mafic) minerals
remain solid. If this melt
solidifies in place, the
rock—called a migmatite—
will contain light-colored
igneous rock intermixed
with metamorphic rock
composed of dark-colored
(mafic) minerals. (Photo by

Maine

United States

Vermont

New
Hampshire

Key
A
New
York

Massachusetts

Conneticut

Low
grade
B
Intermediate
grade
High
grade

Harlan H. Roepke)

Rhode
Island

Figure 8.29
Zones of metamorphic intensities in New England
Highly generalized map that shows areas of low- to high-grade
metamorphism in New England.

and begin to melt first, whereas the mafic silicates, such
as amphibole and biotite, remain solid. When the partially melted rock cools, the light bands will be composed
of igneous or igneous-appearing components, while the
dark bands will consist of unmelted metamorphic material. Rocks of this type are called migmatites (migma =
mixture, ite = a stone) (Figure 8.30). The bands in migmatites often form intricate folds and may contain tabular
inclusions of the dark components. Migmatites serve to

8.7

illustrate the fact that some rocks are considered transitional and do not fit neatly into any of the three basic
rock groups.

8.6

Concept Checks

1. Describe the different grades of metamorphism that
might be encountered moving west to east from
Ohio to the crystalline core of the Appalachians.
2. How do geologists use index minerals?
3. Explain why migmatites are difficult to place into
any one of the three basic rock groups.

Interpreting Metamorphic Environments
Describe the temperature and pressure conditions associated with the following
metamorphic facies: blueschist facies, hornfels facies, and zeolite facies.

Nearly a century ago, geologists realized that groups of associated minerals could be used to determine the pressures and temperatures at which rocks undergo metamorphism. This discovery led
Finnish geologist Pentti Eskola to propose the concept of metamorphic facies. Simply, metamorphic
rocks containing the same assemblage of minerals belong to the same metamorphic facies—
implying that they formed in very similar metamorphic environments. Using metamorphic facies to
determine a metamorphic environment is analogous to using a group of plants to define a climatic
zone, areas that experience similar precipitation and temperature conditions. For instance, sparsely
vegetated regions dominated by cacti identify the desert climate zone, characterized by low precipitation and high temperatures.

Common Metamorphic Facies
The common metamorphic facies are shown in Figure
8.31. These include the hornfels, zeolite, greenschist,
amphibolite, granulite, blueschist, and eclogite facies.

Facies names are based on the minerals that define
them. For example, rocks of the amphibolite facies are
characterized by hornblende (a common amphibole);
the greenschist facies consists of schists in which the

Figure 8.31
Metamorphic facies and
corresponding temperature
and pressure conditions
Note the metamorphic
rocks produced from
regional metamorphism of
basalt versus shale under
similar conditions of temperature and pressure.

Metamorphism and Metamorphic Rocks

It should be noted that
the
name
for each metamor0
200
800
1000
0 S
0
phic
facies
refers to a metaZeolite
hal
Hornfels Facies
Facies
Bas e
morphic
rock
derived specifialt
2
cally
from
a
basaltic
parent.
Greenschist
Slat
10
e
This
is
because
Pentti
Eskola
Facies
Phy
4
Amphibolite
llite
concentrated
his
work
on the
Gre
Facies
ens
Granulite
M
c
metamorphism
of
basalts,
hist
6
ica
20
Sch
Facies
and his basic terminology,
ist
Am
phib Gneiss
8
although now slightly modiolite
fied, remains. The names of
30
Gra
nuli
10
te
Eskola’s facies serve as conBlueschist
venient labels for particular
Not found
Facies
12
40
in nature
combinations of temperatures
and pressures, no matter
14
Eclogite
what the mineral composiFacies
50
tion. In other words, even
if a nonbasaltic parent rock
produces different indicator
minerals under a given set of metamorphic conditions,
green minerals chlorite, epidote, and serpentine are
the facies names shown in Figure 8.31 are used to denote
prominent. Similar groups of minerals are found in
the temperature and pressure ranges embodied by that
rocks of all ages and in all parts of the world. Thus,
metamorphic rock. For example, mica schist belongs to
the concept of metamorphic facies is useful in interthe amphibolite facies, despite the fact that mica schist
preting Earth’s history. Rocks belonging to the same
was derived from shale—a nonbasaltic parent rock.
metamorphic facies all formed under the same conditions of temperature and pressure, and therefore in
similar tectonic settings, regardless of their location
Metamorphic Facies and Plate
or age.
Diagenesis

Temperature (°C)
400
600

Depth (kilometers)

CHAPTER 8

Pressure (kilobars)

264

Figure 8.32
Metamorphic facies and
plate tectonics These
block diagrams show
various metamorphic facies
and the tectonic environments that generate them.

Contact and hydrothermal
metamorphism
Hornfels facies
and hydrothermal
alteration
(low to high T, low P)

Subduction zone
metamorphism
Blueschist facies
(low T, high P)

Trench

Subduction zone
metamorphism
A.

Melting

Eclogite facies
(high T, high P)

Regional
metamorphism
Low T, Low P
Zeolite facies
Greenschist facies
Amphibolite facies
Granulite facies
High T, High P

Tectonics

Figure 8.32 shows how the concept of facies fits into the

context of plate tectonics. Near deep-ocean trenches,
slabs of relatively cool oceanic lithosphere and the overlying crust are subducted. As the lithosphere descends,
sediments and crustal rocks are subjected to steadily
increasing temperatures and pressures (Figure 8.32A).
However, temperatures in the slab remain cooler than
the surrounding mantle because rock is a poor conductor
of heat and therefore warms slowly. The metamorphic
facies associated with this type of high-pressure, lowtemperature environment is called the blueschist facies
because of the presence of the blue-colored variety of
amphibole called glaucophane (Figure 8.33A). The rocks of

Burial
metamorphism
Zeolite facies
(low T, low P)

Hydrothermal
metamorphism
Hydrothermal
alteration
(low to high T, low P)
Oceanic
ridge

Continental
crust
Partial
melting
of crust
B.

Basaltic magma
derived from partial
melting of peridotite

Basaltic
oceanic crust
Asthenosphere

Asthenosphere
C.

265

8.7 Interpreting Metamorphic Environments

the Coast Range of California
belong to the blueschist facies;
these highly deformed rocks
were once deeply buried but
have been uplifted because of
a change in the plate boundary. In some areas, subduction
carries rocks to even greater
depths, producing the eclogite
facies that is diagnostic of very
high temperatures and pressures
(Figure 8.33B).
A. Blueschist forms in low-temperature,
B. Eclogite forms in high-temperature
Along some convergent
high-pressure environments
and extreme high-pressure environments
zones, continental plates collide
to form extensive mountain belts
(see Figure 8.32B). This activity results in large areas
increased temperature results in expansion, so mineral
of regional metamorphism that often include zones of
phases that occupy greater volume (are less dense) tend
contact and hydrothermal metamorphism. The increasto be more stable at high temperatures. Thus, detering temperatures and pressures associated with regional
mining the conditions of temperature and pressure at
metamorphism are recorded by the zeolite–greenschist–
which a mineral is stable (does not change) is not an
amphibolite–granulite facies sequence shown in Figure
easy task. To help in this endeavor, researchers have
8.31.
turned to the laboratory. Here materials of various
compositions are heated and placed under pressures
that approximate conditions at various depths within
Earth. From such experiments, we can determine
Mineral Stability and Metamorphic
which minerals are likely to form in various metamorEnvironments
phic environments.
In most tectonic environments, such as along subducSome minerals, such as quartz, are stable over a
tion zones, rocks experience an increase in both preswide range of metamorphic settings and therefore are
sure and temperature simultaneously. An increase in
not useful in determining metamorphic environments.
pressure causes minerals to contract, which favors
Fortunately, other groups of related minerals do provide
the formation of high-density minerals. However,
useful estimates of conditions during metamorphism.
One of the most important of these groups includes the

E Y E ON E A R T H

8.3

T

he Matterhorn, located on the border between
Switzerland and Italy, is one of the highest peaks
in the Alps. Except for its base, the Matterhorn is
composed mainly of gneiss.

QUESTION 1 To which metamorphic grade do the rocks
of the upper Matterhorn belong?
QUESTION 2 What type of plate boundary—divergent,
convergent, or transform fault boundary—is associated
with the formation of the Matterhorn and related
mountainous structures of the Alps?
QUESTION 3 Which type of metamorphism—contact,
hydrothermal, burial, subduction zone, or regional
metamorphism—likely produced the Matterhorn?
Vaclav Volrab/Shutterstock

Figure 8.33
Rocks produced by subduction
zone metamorphism A. Blueschist has a blue hue because
of the blue-colored amphibole
called glaucophane. B. This
sample of eclogite contains reddish grains of garnet and green
grains of pyroxene. (Photos by
Dennis Tasa)

CHAPTER 8

Metamorphism and Metamorphic Rocks

Figure 8.34
Group of minerals useful
in determining metamorphic environments This
_TT30


(Photo A by Harry Taylor/Dorling
Kindersley Media Library; photo
B by Dennis Tasa; photo C
by Biophoto Associates/Photo
Researchers, Inc.)

Pressure (kilobars)

phase diagram illustrates
the conditions of pressure and temperature
at which the three
polymorphs of Al2SiO5
(andalusite, kyanite, and
sillimanite) are stable.

0
0

400

2

Temperature (°C)
700
500
600

Andalusite

4
6
8
10

Sillimanite
Kyanite
x

12

A. Andalusite

800

B. Kyanite

900
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

Depth (kilometers)

266

C. Sillimanite

minerals kyanite, andalusite, and sillimanite. These
three minerals have identical chemical compositions
(Al2SiO5) but different crystalline structures, which
makes them polymorphs (see Chapter 3). Figure 8.34 is a
phase diagram that shows the specific range of pressures
and temperatures at which each of these aluminum-rich
silicates is stable.
Because shales and mudstones, which are very common, contain the elements found in these minerals,
metamorphic products of shale (slate, phyllite, schist,
and gneiss) often contain varying amounts of kyanite,
andalusite, or sillimanite. For example, if shale were buried to a depth of about 35 kilometers (10 kilobars), at a

temperature of 550°C, the mineral kyanite would form
(see x in Figure 8.34).
In general, andalusite is produced by contact
metamorphism in near-surface environments where
temperatures are high but pressures are relatively low.
Kyanite is the high-pressure polymorph that forms
during the subduction and deep burial associated with
mountain building. Sillimanite, on the other hand,
forms only at high temperatures, as a result of contact
with a very hot magma body and/or very deep burial.
Knowing the ranges of temperatures and pressures a
rock experienced during metamorphism provides geologists with valuable data needed to interpret past tectonic environments.

8.7

Concept Checks

1. Define metamorphic facies.
2. What two physical conditions vary within
Earth to produce different metamorphic
environments?
3. The rocks of the Coast Range of California belong
to the blueschist facies. What does this tell you
about the environment in which these rocks
formed?
4. Which process would most likely form minerals
belonging to the hornfels facies—contact
metamorphism or regional metamorphism?
Explain.

9
Geologic
Time

Rafting the Colorado river in Arizona’s Marble Canyon. The
rocks exposed in the walls of the canyon contain clues to
millions of years of Earth history. (Photo by Michael Collier)

I

n the late eighteenth century, James Hutton recognized the immensity of Earth his-

tory and the importance of time as a component in all geologic processes. In the nineteenth century, Sir Charles Lyell and others effectively demonstrated that Earth had
experienced many episodes of mountain building and erosion, which must have required
great spans of geologic time. Although these pioneering scientists understood that Earth
was very old, they had no way of determining its age in years. Was it tens of millions,
hundreds of millions, or even billions of years old? Long before geologists could establish
a geologic time scale that included numerical dates in years, they gradually assembled
a time scale using relative dating principles. What are these principles? What part do
fossils play? With the discovery of radioactivity and the development of radiometric dating techniques, geologists now can assign quite accurate dates to many of the events in
Earth history. What is radioactivity? Why is it a good “clock” for dating the geologic past?

9.1

Creating a Time Scale: Relative Dating Principles
Distinguish between numerical and relative dating and apply relative dating
principles to determine a time sequence of geologic events.

Figure 9.1 shows a hiker resting atop the Permian-age Kaibab Formation at Cape Royal, on the
Grand Canyon’s North Rim. Beneath him are thousands of meters of sedimentary strata that go as
far back as Cambrian time, more than 540 million years ago. These strata rest atop even older sedimentary, metamorphic, and igneous rocks from a span known as the Precambrian. Some of these
rocks are 2 billion years old. Although the Grand Canyon’s rock record has numerous interruptions,
the rocks beneath the hiker contain clues to great spans of Earth history.

The Importance of a Time Scale

perceive our planet. They learned that Earth is much
older than anyone had previously imagined, and they
learned that its surface and interior have been changed
over and over again by the same geologic processes that
operate today.

Like the pages in a long and complicated history book,
rocks record the geologic events and changing life-forms
of the past. The book, however, is not complete. Many
pages, especially in the early chapters, are missing. Others are tattered, torn, or smudged. Yet enough of the book
remains to allow much of the story to be deciphered.
Interpreting Earth history is an important goal of the
science of geology. Like a modern-day sleuth, a geologist
must interpret the clues found preserved in the rocks. By
studying rocks, especially sedimentary rocks, and the features they contain, geologists can unravel the complexities of the past.
Geologic events by themselves, however, have little
meaning until they are put into a time perspective. Studying history, whether it is the Civil War or the age of dinosaurs, requires a calendar. Among geology’s major contributions to human knowledge are the geologic time scale
and the discovery that Earth history is exceedingly long.

Numerical Dates During the late 1800s and early
1900s, attempts were made to determine Earth’s age.
Although some of the methods appeared promising at
the time, none of those early efforts proved to be reliable.
What those scientists were seeking was a numerical
date. Such dates specify the actual number of years that
have passed since an event occurred. Today, our understanding of radioactivity allows us to accurately determine numerical dates for rocks that represent important
events in Earth’s distant past. We will study radioactivity
later in this chapter. Prior to the discovery of radioactivity, geologists had no reliable method of carrying out
numerical dating and had to rely solely on relative dating.

Numerical and Relative Dates

Relative Dates When we place rocks in their proper

The geologists who developed the geologic time scale
revolutionized the way people think about time and

sequence of formation—indicating which formed first,
second, third, and so on—we are establishing relative
dates. Such dates cannot tell us how long ago something

275

9.1 Creating a Time Scale: Relative Dating Principles

Figure 9.1

took place, only that it followed one event and preceded
another. The relative dating techniques that were developed are valuable and still widely used. Numerical dating
methods did not replace those techniques but supplemented them. To establish a relative time scale, a few
basic principles had to be discovered and applied. They
were major breakthroughs in thinking at the time, and
their discovery was an important scientific achievement.

Contemplating geologic
time This hiker is resting
atop the Kaibab Formation,
the uppermost layer in the
Grand Canyon. (Photo by
Michael Collier)

Principle of Superposition
Nicolas Steno (1638–1686), a Danish anatomist, geologist, and priest, was the first to recognize a sequence of
historical events in an outcrop of sedimentary rock layers.
Working in the mountains of western Italy, Steno applied
a very simple rule that has become the most basic principle of relative dating—the principle of superposition
(super = above; positum = to place). This principle simply
states that in an undeformed sequence of sedimentary
rocks, each bed is older than the one above and younger
than the one below. Although it may seem obvious that a
rock layer could not be deposited with nothing beneath it
for support, it was not until 1669 that Steno clearly stated
this principle.
This rule also applies to other surface-deposited
materials, such as lava flows and beds of ash from volcanic eruptions. Applying the law of superposition to the
beds exposed in the upper portion of the Grand Canyon, we can easily place the layers in their proper order.
Among those pictured in Figure 9.2, the sedimentary
rocks in the Supai Group are the oldest, followed in order
by the Hermit Shale, Coconino Sandstone, Toroweap
Formation, and Kaibab Limestone.
Figure 9.2
Superposition Applying the principle of superposition to
these layers in the upper portion of the Grand Canyon,
the Supai Group is oldest, and the Kaibab Limestone is
youngest.

Dennis Tasa

276

CHAPTER 9

Figure 9.3

into a different type of sediment or until they
thin out at the edge of the basin of deposition (Figure 9.4A). For example, when a
river creates a canyon, we can assume
that identical or similar strata on opposite sides once spanned the canyon
(Figure 9.4B). Although rock outcrops
may be separated by a considerable distance, the principle of lateral continuity
tells us those outcrops once formed a
continuous layer (Figure 9.4C). This principle allows geologists to relate rocks in
isolated outcrops to one another. Combining the principles of lateral continuity and superposition lets us extend
relative age relationships over broad
areas. This process, called correlation,
is examined in Section 9.3.

Original horizontality Most
layers of sediment are
deposited in a nearly
horizontal position. When
we see strata that are
folded or tilted, we can assume that they were moved
into that position by crustal
disturbances after their
deposition. (Photo by Marco
Simoni/Robert Harding World
Imagery)

Principle of Original Horizontality
Steno is also credited with recognizing the importance of
another basic rule, the principle of original horizontality, which says that layers of sediment are generally
deposited in a horizontal position. Thus, if we observe
rock layers that are flat, it means they have not been
disturbed and still have their original horizontality. The
layers in the Grand Canyon illustrate this in Figures 9.1
and 9.2. But if they are folded or inclined at a steep angle
(discussed in detail in Chapter 10), they must have been
moved into that position by crustal disturbances sometime after their deposition (Figure 9.3).

Principle of Lateral Continuity
The principle of lateral continuity refers to the fact
that sedimentary beds originate as continuous layers
that extend in all directions until they eventually grade

E Y E ON E A R T H

T

his image shows West Cedar
Mountain in southern Utah. The gray
rocks are shale that originated as
muddy river delta deposits. The sediments
composing the orange sandstone were
deposited by a river.

QUESTION 1 Place the events related to
the geologic history of this area in proper
sequence. Explain your logic. Include the
following: uplift, sandstone, erosion, and
shale.

Principle of Cross-Cutting
Relationships
Figure 9.5 shows layers of rock that have been offset by
a fault, a fracture in rock along which displacement
occurs. It is clear that the strata must be older than the
fault that broke them. The principle of cross-cutting
relationships states that geologic features that cut
across rocks must form after the rocks they cut through.
Igneous intrusions (see Chapter 4) provide another
example. The dikes shown in Figure 9.6 are tabular
masses of igneous rock that cut through the surrounding rock. The magmatic heat from igneous intrusions
often creates a narrow “baked” zone of contact metamorphism on the adjacent rock, also indicating that the
intrusion occurred after the surrounding rocks were in
place.

9.1
Shale

Sandstone

QUESTION 2 What term is applied to the
type of dates you established for this site?
Michael Collier

277

9.1 Creating a Time Scale: Relative Dating Principles

Principle of Inclusions
Sometimes inclusions can
aid in the relative dating
process. Inclusions are
fragments of one rock unit
that have been enclosed
within another. The basic
principle of inclusions is
logical and straightforward.
The rock mass adjacent
to the one containing the
inclusions must have been
there first in order to provide the rock fragments.
Therefore, the rock mass
that contains inclusions
is the younger of the two.
For example, when magma
intrudes into surrounding
rock, blocks of the surrounding rock may become
dislodged and incorporated
into the magma. If these
pieces do not melt, they
remain as inclusions known
as xenoliths (see Chapter 4).
In another example, when
sediment is deposited atop a
weathered mass of bedrock,
pieces of the weathered rock
become incorporated into
the younger sedimentary
layer (Figure 9.7).
_TT31


Layer ends by thinning at
margin of sedimentary basin

Layer ends by grading
into a different kind
of sediment

A.
Lateral continuity allows us
to infer that the layers
were originally continuous
across the canyon

Figure 9.4
Lateral continuity
A. Sediments are deposited over a large area
in a continuous sheet.
Sedimentary strata extend
continuously in all directions until they thin out at
the edge of a depositional
basin or grade into a different type of sediment.
B. Although rock exposures
are separated by many
miles, we can infer that
they were once continuous.
C. The idea depicted in B is
illustrated in this image of
the Grand Canyon. (Photo by
bcampbell65/Shutterstock)

B.
Coconino Sandstone

Redwall Limestone

Unconformities
When we observe layers of
rock that have been deposC.
ited essentially without
interruption, we call them
conformable. Particular sites exhibit conformable beds representing certain spans
of geologic time. However, no place on
Earth has a complete set of conformable
strata.
Throughout Earth history, the deposition of sediment has been interrupted
over and over again. All such breaks in
the rock record are termed unconformities. An unconformity represents a long
period during which deposition ceased,
erosion removed previously formed rocks,
and then deposition resumed. In each
case, uplift and erosion were followed by
subsidence and renewed sedimentation.

SmartFigure 9.5
Cross-cutting fault The
rocks are older than the
fault that displaced them.
(Morley Read/Alamy)
(https://goo.gl/BiFVHa)

Fault

278

CHAPTER 9

Geologic Time
Dikes

Figure 9.6
Cross-cutting dikes This
igneous intrusion is
younger than the rocks
that are intruded. (Photo by
Jonathan.S kt)

Unconformities are important features because they
represent significant geologic events in Earth history.
There are three basic types of unconformities, and
geologists can use them to identify what intervals of
time are not represented by strata and thus are missing
from the geologic record.

Deposition

Angular Unconformity Perhaps the most easily recognized unconformity is an angular unconformity. It
consists of tilted or folded sedimentary rocks that are
overlain by younger, more flat-lying strata. An angular
unconformity indicates that during the pause in deposition, a period of deformation (folding or tilting) and erosion occurred (Figure 9.8).

5
4
3
2
1

5
4
3
2
1

Uplift
Erosion

SmartFigure 9.7
Inclusions The rock containing
inclusions is younger than the inclusions. (https://goo.gl/Okfrm6)

These inclusions of igneous rock contained in
the adjacent sedimentary layer indicate the
sediments were deposited atop the weathered
igneous mass and thus are younger.

Sedimentary
layers

Angular
unconformity
(#6)

Igneous intrusion

SmartFigure 9.8
Xenoliths are inclusions in an igneous intrusion
that form when pieces of surrounding rock are
incorporated into magma.

Formation of an angular unconformity An
angular unconformity represents an extended
period during which deformation and erosion
occurred. (https://goo.gl/arrwhC)

I
M
E

5
4
3
2
1

Deposition

T

9
8
7
5
4
3
2
1

279

9.1 Creating a Time Scale: Relative Dating Principles

Disconformity
Gap in the rock record represents a
period of nondeposition and erosion

Above the unconformity
lie gently dipping beds
of reddish sandstone
and conglomerate

Angular
unconformity

Rock
hammer

Below the unconformity
lie nearly vertical beds of
sandstone and shale

Figure 9.9
Siccar Point, Scotland James Hutton studied this famous
unconformity in the late 1700s. (Photo by Marli Miller)

When James Hutton studied an angular unconformity in Scotland more than 200 years ago,* he understood that it represented a major episode of geologic
activity (Figure 9.9). He and his colleagues also appreciated the immense time span implied by such relationships; a companion later wrote of their visit to this site,
“the mind seemed to grow giddy by looking so far into
the abyss of time.”

Disconformity A disconformity is a gap in the rock
record that represents a period of erosion rather than
deposition. Imagine that a series of sedimentary layers is deposited in a shallow marine setting. Following
this period of deposition, sea level falls or the land rises,
exposing some the sedimentary layers. During this span,
when the sedimentary beds are above sea level, no new
sediment accumulates, and some of the existing layers are
eroded away. Later, sea level rises or the land subsides,
submerging the landscape. Now the surface is again
below sea level, and a new series of sedimentary beds is
deposited. The boundary separating the two sets of beds
is a disconformity—a span for which there is no rock
record (Figure 9.10). Because the layers above and below a
disconformity are parallel, these features are sometimes
difficult to identify unless you notice evidence of erosion
such as a buried stream channel.
*This pioneering geologist is discussed in the section on the birth of modern
geology in Chapter 1.

Figure 9.10
Disconformity The layers
on both sides of this gap
in the rock record are
essentially parallel.

Younger,
horizontal
sedimentary
rocks

Older,
horizontal
sedimentary
rocks

Nonconformity The third basic type of unconformity
is a nonconformity, in which younger sedimentary
strata overlie older metamorphic or intrusive igneous
rocks (Figure 9.11). Just as angular unconformities and
some disconformities imply crustal movements, so too
do nonconformities. Intrusive igneous masses and metamorphic rocks originate far below the surface. Thus, for
a nonconformity to develop, there must be a period of
uplift and erosion of overlying rocks. Once exposed at the
surface, the igneous or metamorphic rocks are subjected
to weathering and erosion, then undergo subsidence and
renewed sedimentation.

Unconformities in the Grand Canyon The rocks
exposed in the Grand Canyon of the Colorado River
represent a tremendous span of geologic history. It is a
wonderful place to take a trip through time. The canyon’s
colorful strata record a long history of sedimentation in
a variety of environments—advancing seas, rivers and
deltas, tidal flats and sand dunes. But the record is not

Nonconformity
Period of uplift and erosion that
exposed the deep rocks at the surface

Younger, sedimentary
layers deposited atop
erosion surface

Older, igneous and/or
metamorphic rocks
that formed deep
within the crust

Figure 9.11
Nonconformity Younger
sedimentary rocks rest atop
older metamorphic or igneous rocks.

280

CHAPTER 9

Geologic Time

Figure 9.12
Cross section of the Grand Canyon All three types of unconformities
are present. (Center photo by Marli Miller; other photos by E. J. Tarbuck)

Disconformity
Kaibab Plateau

Kaibab
Limestone

Toroweap
Coconino
Sandstone

Angular unconformity

Hermit Shale

Supai
Group

Disconformity

Redwall
Limestone

Nonconformity

Disconformity
Muav
Limestone
Tonto
Group

Angular unconformity
Nonconformity

Bright
Angel
Shale
Tapeats
Sandstone

Inner
gorge
Non

con

Colorado
River

E Y E ON E A R T H

form

Unkar
Group
ity

Zoroaster Granite
Vishnu Schist

9.2

T

his close-up shows pieces of diorite (darkest rock) in granite.
The thin white line is a vein of quartz. Think of a vein as a
tiny dike.

QUESTION 1 What term is applied to the pieces of diorite?
QUESTION 2 Place the quartz vein, diorite, and granite in order
from oldest to youngest.

Marli Miller

281

9.1 Creating a Time Scale: Relative Dating Principles

SmartFigure 9.13

Angular
unconformity

Applying principles
of relative dating (https://
goo.gl/w4HtAw)

K
J I
H G
E

Working out the
geologic history of a
hypothetical region

F

D

Uplift

Sill

C

Interpretation:

Dike

A

6. Finally, a period of uplift and erosion. The
irregular surface and stream valley indicate that
another gap in the rock record is being created
by erosion.

Ocean
E
C
B
A
1. Beneath the
ocean, beds A, B,
C, and E were
deposited in that E
order (law of
D
superposition).
C
B
A

Angular
unconformity

B

Ocean

K
I HJ
G
F

E

Sill

D

Subsidence
C

Rock
eroded
away
F

Sill

E

Sill
Uplift

2. Uplift and intrusion of a sill
(layer D). We know that sill D
is younger than beds C and E
because of the inclusions in
the sill of fragments from
beds C and E.

E
D
C
B
A

D
C

Dike

B

B

A

5. Next, beds, G, H,
I, J, and K were
deposited in that
order atop the
erosion surface
to produce an
angular
unconformity.

A

Sill

4. Layers A through F were
tilted and exposed layers
were eroded.

F
Dike

3. Next is the intrusion of dike F.
Because the dike cuts through
layers A through E, it must be
younger (principle of
cross-cutting relationships).

continuous. Unconformities represent vast amounts of
time that have not been recorded in the canyon’s layers.
Figure 9.12 is a geologic cross section of the Grand
Canyon. All three types of unconformities can be seen
in the canyon walls.

Applying Relative Dating Principles
If you apply the principles of relative dating to the
hypothetical geologic cross section in Figure 9.13, you can
place in proper sequence the rocks and the events they
represent. The statements within the figure summarize
the logic used to interpret the cross section.
In this example, we establish a relative time scale
for the rocks and events in the area of the cross section.
Remember that this method gives us no idea how many
years of Earth history are represented, for we have no

numerical dates. Nor do we know how this area compares
to any other. See GEOgraphics 9.1 for another example
of applying relative dating principles.

9.1

Concept Checks

1. Distinguish between numerical dates and relative
dates.
2. Sketch and label four simple diagrams that
illustrate each of the following: superposition,
original horizontality, lateral continuity, and
cross-cutting relationships.
3. What is the significance of an unconformity?
4. Distinguish among angular unconformity,
disconformity, and nonconformity.

Dike

283

9.2 Fossils: Evidence of Past Life

9.2

Fossils: Evidence of Past Life
Define fossil and discuss the conditions that favor the preservation of organisms
as fossils. List and describe various types of fossils.

Fossils, the remains or traces of prehistoric life, are inclusions in sediment and sedimentary rocks.
They are basic and important tools for interpreting the geologic past. The scientific study of fossils is called paleontology. It is an interdisciplinary science that blends geology and biology in an
attempt to understand all aspects of the succession of life over the vast expanse of geologic time
(see GEOgraphics 9.2). Knowing the nature of the life-forms that existed at a particular time helps
researchers understand past environmental conditions. Further, fossils are important time indicators and play a key role in correlating rocks of similar ages that are from different places.

Types of Fossils
Fossils are of many types. The remains of relatively
recent organisms may not have been altered at all. Such
objects as teeth, bones, and shells are common examples
(Figure 9.14). Far less common are entire animals, flesh
included, that have been preserved because of rather
unusual circumstances. Remains of prehistoric elephants called mammoths that were frozen in the Arctic
tundra of Siberia and Alaska are examples, as are the
mummified remains of sloths preserved in a dry cave
in Nevada.

Permineralization When mineral-rich groundwater
permeates porous tissue such as bone or wood, minerals precipitate out of solution and fill pores and empty
spaces, a process called permineralization. The formation

of petrified wood involves permineralization with silica,
often from a volcanic source such as a surrounding layer
of volcanic ash. The wood is gradually transformed into
chert, sometimes with colorful bands from impurities such
as iron or carbon (Figure 9.15A). The word petrified literally
means “turned into stone.” Sometimes the microscopic
details of the petrified structure are faithfully retained.

Molds and Casts Another common class of fossils
is molds and casts. When a shell or other structure is
buried in sediment and then dissolved by underground
water, a mold is created. The mold faithfully reflects only
the shape and surface marking of the organism; it does
not reveal any information concerning its internal structure. If these hollow spaces are subsequently filled with
mineral matter, casts are created (Figure 9.15B).

Skeleton of a mammoth, a prehistoric relative
of modern elephant, from the La Brea tar pits.

Figure 9.14

Excavating bones from pit 91. It is a site rich
in unaltered Ice Age organisms. Scientists
have been excavating here since 1915.

La Brea tar pits The
fossils here are actual
(unaltered) remains.
(Excavation photo by Reed Saxon/
AP Wide World Photo; skeleton
photo by Martin Shields/Alamy)

284

CHAPTER 9

Geologic Time

Figure 9.15

and protected the remains
from damage by water and
air. As the resin hardened,
a protective pressure-resistant case was formed.

Types of fossils (Photo A
by Bernhard Edmaier/Science
Source; photos B, D, and F by
E. J. Tarbuck; photo C by
Florissant Fossil Beds National
Monument; photo E by Colin
Keates/Dorling Kindersley Media
Library)

B. This trilobite photo illustrates
mold and cast
A. Petrified wood in Arizona’s
Petrified Forest National Park

Trace Fossils In addition to the fossils already
mentioned, there are
numerous other types,
many of them only traces of
prehistoric life. Examples
of such indirect evidence
include:

r Tracks—animal footprints made in soft sediment that later turned into
sedimentary rock.
D. Impressions are
r Burrows—tubes in
common fossils and
C. A fossil bee
sediment,
wood, or rock
often show
preserved as a
made
by
an
animal. These
considerable detail
thin carbon film
holes may later become
filled with mineral matter
and preserved. Some of the
oldest-known fossils are believed to be worm burrows.
r Coprolites—fossil
dung and stomach contents
that can provide useful
information pertaining to
F. Coprolite is fossil dung
the size and food habits of
E. Spider in amber
organisms (Figure 9.15F).
r Gastroliths—highly
polished stomach stones that were used in the grindCarbonization and Impressions A type of fossilizaing of food by some extinct reptiles.
tion called carbonization is particularly effective at preserving leaves and delicate animal forms. It occurs when
fine sediment encases the remains of an organism. As
time passes, pressure squeezes out the liquid and gaseous Conditions Favoring Preservation
components and leaves behind a thin residue of carbon
Only a tiny fraction of the organisms that have lived dur(Figure 9.15C). Black shale deposited as organic-rich mud
ing the geologic past have been preserved as fossils. Norin oxygen-poor environments often contains abundant
mally, the remains of an animal or a plant are destroyed.
carbonized remains. If the film of carbon is lost from a
Under what circumstances are they preserved? Two spefossil preserved in fine-grained sediment, a replica of the cial conditions appear to be necessary: rapid burial and
surface, called an impression, may still show considerable the possession of hard parts.
detail (Figure 9.15D).
When an organism perishes, its soft parts usually
are quickly eaten by scavengers or decomposed by bacteria. Occasionally, however, the remains are buried by
Amber Delicate organisms, such as insects, are difsediment. When this occurs, the remains are protected
ficult to preserve, and consequently they are relatively
from the surface environment, where destructive prorare in the fossil record. Not only must they be processes operate. Rapid burial, therefore, is an important
tected from decay, but they must not be subjected to
condition favoring preservation.
any pressure that would crush them. One way in which
In addition, animals and plants have a much better
some insects have been preserved is in amber, the hardchance of being preserved as part of the fossil record if
ened resin of ancient trees. The spider in Figure 9.15E
they have hard parts. Although traces and imprints of
was preserved after being trapped in a drop of sticky
soft-bodied animals such as jellyfish, worms, and insects
resin. Resin sealed off the insect from the atmosphere

286

CHAPTER 9

Geologic Time

exist, they are not common. Flesh usually decays so
rapidly that preservation is exceedingly unlikely. Hard
parts such as shells, bones, and teeth predominate in the
record of past life.
Because preservation is contingent on special conditions, the record of life in the geologic past is biased. The
fossil record of those organisms with hard parts that lived
in areas of sedimentation is quite abundant. However, we
get only an occasional glimpse of the vast array of other
life-forms that did not meet the special conditions favoring preservation.

9.3

9.2

Concept Checks

1. Describe several ways that an animal or a plant
can be preserved as a fossil.
2. List three examples of trace fossils.
3. What conditions favor the preservation of an
organism as a fossil?

Correlation of Rock Layers
Explain how rocks of similar age that are in different places can be matched up.

To develop a geologic time scale that is applicable to the entire Earth, rocks of similar age in different regions must be matched up. Such a task is called correlation. By correlating the rocks from one
place to another, a more comprehensive view of the geologic history of a region is possible. Figure 9.16,
for example, shows the correlation of strata at three sites on the Colorado Plateau in southern Utah
and northern Arizona. No single locale exhibits the entire sequence, but correlation reveals a more
complete picture of the sedimentary rock record.

Correlation Within Limited Areas
Within a limited area, geologists can correlate rocks
of one locality with those of another simply by walking along the outcropping edges, but this may not be
possible when the rocks are mostly concealed by soil
and vegetation. Correlation over short distances is often
achieved by noting the position of a bed in a sequence
of strata. Or a layer may be identified in another location if it is composed of distinctive or uncommon
minerals.
Many geologic studies involve relatively small areas.
Although they are important in their own right, their
full value is realized only when they are correlated with
other regions. Although the methods just described are
sufficient to trace a rock formation over relatively short
distances, they are not adequate for matching up rocks
separated by great distances. When correlation between
widely separated areas or between continents is the
objective, geologists must rely on fossils.

Fossils and Correlation
The existence of fossils had been known for centuries,
yet it was not until the late 1700s and early 1800s that
their significance as geologic tools was made evident.
During this period, English engineer and canal builder
William Smith discovered that each rock formation in
the canals he worked on contained fossils unlike those in
the beds either above or below. Further, he noted that

sedimentary strata in widely separated areas could be
identified—and correlated—based on their distinctive
fossil content.

Principle of Faunal Succession Based on Smith’s
classic observations and the findings of many later geologists, one of the most important basic principles in historical geology was formulated: Fossil organisms succeed
one another in a definite and determinable order, and
therefore any time period can be recognized by its fossil
content. This is known as the principle of fossil succession. In other words, when fossils are arranged according
to their age, they do not present a random or haphazard
picture. To the contrary, fossils document the evolution
of life through time.
For example, an Age of Trilobites is recognized quite
early in the fossil record. Then, in succession, paleontologists recognize an Age of Fishes, an Age of Coal Swamps,
an Age of Reptiles, and an Age of Mammals. These “ages”
pertain to groups that were especially plentiful and characteristic during particular time periods. Within each of
the “ages” are many subdivisions, based, for example, on
certain species of trilobites and certain types of fish, reptiles, and so on. This same succession of dominant organisms, never out of order, is found on every continent.

Index Fossils and Fossil Assemblages When fossils were found to be time indicators, they became the
most useful means of correlating rocks of similar age in

Figure 9.17
Index fossils Since
microfossils are often very
abundant, widespread,
and quick to appear and
become extinct, they
constitute ideal index
fossils. This scanning
electron micrograph shows
marine microfossils from
the Miocene epoch. (Photo
by Biophoto Associates/Science
Source)

Geologic Time

different regions. Geologists
pay particular attention to
certain fossils called index
fossils (Figure 9.17). These
fossils are widespread geographically but limited to a
short span of geologic time,
so their presence provides
an important method of
matching rocks of the same
age. Rock formations, however, do not always contain a
specific index fossil. In such
situations, a group of fossils,
called a fossil assemblage,
is used to establish the age of
the bed. Figure 9.18 illustrates
how an assemblage of fossils
may be used to date rocks
more precisely than could be
accomplished by the use of
any single fossil.

SmartFigure 9.18

Environmental Indicators

Fossil assemblage Overlapping ranges of fossils help date
rocks more exactly than using a single fossil. (https://goo.gl/dUqgP3)

Rock
unit A

Age

of r
ock
unit
A

Age

ck
of ro
B
unit

Rock unit B

In addition to being important, and often essential,
tools for correlation, fossils are important environmental
indicators. Although we can deduce much about past
environments by studying the nature and characteristics
of sedimentary rocks, a close examination of the fossils
present can usually provide a great deal more information.
For example, when the remains of certain clam shells are
found in limestone, a geologist quite reasonably assumes
that the region was once covered by a shallow sea. Also, by
using what we know of living organisms, we can conclude
that fossil animals with thick shells, capable of withstanding pounding and surging waves, inhabited shorelines.
On the other hand, animals with thin, delicate shells
probably indicate deep, calm offshore waters. Hence, by
looking closely at the types of fossils, the approximate
position of an ancient shoreline may be identified. Fossils
also can be used to indicate the former temperature of
the water. Certain kinds of present-day corals must live in
_TT32


9.4

Younger

Age ranges of some fossil groups

TIME

CHAPTER 9

Older

288

warm and shallow tropical seas like those around Florida
and The Bahamas. When similar types of coral are found
in ancient limestones, they indicate the marine environment that must have existed when they were alive. These
examples illustrate how fossils can help unravel the complex story of Earth history.

9.3

Concept Checks

1. What is the goal of correlation?
2. State the principle of fossil succession in your
own words.
3. Contrast index fossil and fossil assemblage.
4. Along with being important in correlation, how
else are fossils useful to geologists?

Numerical Dating with Radioactivity
Discuss three types of radioactive decay and explain how radioactive isotopes
are used to determine numerical dates.

In addition to establishing relative dates by using the principles described in the preceding
sections, scientists can also obtain reliable numerical dates for events in the geologic past.
For example, we know that Earth is about 4.6 billion years old and that the dinosaurs became
extinct about 65 million years ago. As discussed in Chapter 1, dates expressed in millions and
billions of years truly stretch our imagination because our personal calendars involve time
measured in hours, weeks, and years. Nevertheless, the vast expanse of geologic time is a reality, and radiometric dating allows us to measure it. In this section you will learn about radioactivity and its application in radiometric dating.

289

9.4 Numerical Dating with Radioactivity

Reviewing Basic Atomic Structure
Recall from Chapter 3 that each atom has a nucleus that
contains protons and neutrons and is orbited by electrons.
Electrons have a negative electrical charge, and protons
have a positive charge. A neutron is actually a proton and
an electron combined, so it has no charge (it is neutral).
The atomic number is the number of protons in the
nucleus. Every element has a different number of protons
and thus a different identifying atomic number (hydrogen
= 1, carbon = 6, oxygen = 8, uranium = 92, etc.). Atoms
of the same element always have the same number of
protons, so the atomic number stays constant.
Practically all of an atom’s mass (99.9 percent) is in
the nucleus, indicating that electrons have virtually no
mass at all. So, by adding the protons and neutrons in an
atom’s nucleus, we derive the atom’s mass number. The
number of neutrons can vary, and these variants, or isotopes, have different mass numbers.
To summarize with an example, uranium’s nucleus
always has 92 protons, so its atomic number is always
92. But its neutron population varies, and uranium has
three isotopes: uranium-234 (protons + neutrons = 234),
uranium-235, and uranium-238. All three isotopes are
mixed in nature. They look the same and behave the
same in chemical reactions.

Radioactivity
The forces that bind protons and neutrons together in the
nucleus are usually strong. However, in some isotopes,
the nuclei are unstable because the forces that bind protons and neutrons together are not strong enough. As a
result, the nuclei spontaneously break apart, or decay, in
a process called radioactivity.
What happens when unstable nuclei break apart?
Three common types of radioactive decay are illustrated
in Figure 9.19 and can be summarized as follows:
r Alpha particles (a particles) may be emitted from the
nucleus. An alpha particle is composed of 2 protons
and 2 neutrons. Thus, the emission of an alpha particle
means that the mass number of the isotope is reduced by 4, and the atomic number is lowered by 2.
r When a beta particle (b particle), or an electron, is
given off from a nucleus, the mass number remains
unchanged because electrons have practically no
mass. However, because the electron has come from
a neutron (remember that a neutron is a combination
of a proton and an electron), the nucleus contains
1 more proton than before. Therefore, the atomic
number increases by 1.
r Sometimes an electron is captured by the nucleus. The
electron combines with a proton and forms a neutron.
As in the last example, the mass number remains unchanged. However, because the nucleus now contains 1
fewer proton, the atomic number decreases by 1.
An unstable radioactive isotope is called the parent, and isotopes resulting from the decay of the parent

Figure 9.19

Alpha Emission
Unstable parent
nucleus

+

Daughter
nucleus

+
–

Common types of radioactive decay Notice that
Atomic in each example, the
number: number of protons (atomic
2 fewer number) in the nucleus
Atomic changes, thus producing
mass: a different element.
4 fewer

Neutron

Proton

Alpha
particle emitted

Beta Emission
Unstable parent
nucleus

+
–

Daughter
nucleus

+

Atomic
number:
1 more
Atomic
mass:
no change
Proton

Neutron
Beta (electron)
emitted (–)

Electron Capture
Unstable parent
nucleus
Proton
Electron
Neutron
+
captured

Daughter
nucleus
+
–

Atomic
number:
1 fewer
Atomic
mass:
no change

are termed the daughter products. Figure 9.20 provides
an example of radioactive decay. When the radioactive
parent, uranium-238 (atomic number 92, mass number
238) decays, it follows a number of steps, emitting 8 alpha
particles and 6 beta particles before finally becoming
the stable daughter product lead-206 (atomic number 82,
mass number 206). One of the unstable daughter products produced during this decay series is radon.

Radiometric Dating
Certainly among the most important results of the discovery of radioactivity is that it provides a reliable means
of calculating the ages of rocks and minerals that contain
particular radioactive isotopes. The procedure is called
radiometric dating. Radiometric dating is reliable
because the rates of decay for many isotopes have been
precisely measured and do not vary under the physical
conditions that exist in Earth’s outer layers. Therefore,
each radioactive isotope used for dating has been decaying at a fixed rate since the formation of the minerals
in which it occurs, and the products of decay have been
accumulating at a corresponding rate. For example, when
uranium is incorporated into a mineral that crystallizes
from magma, there is no lead (the stable daughter product)

290

CHAPTER 9

Geologic Time

Decay of U-238
Uranium-238 is an example of a radioactive decay
series. Before the stable
end product (Pb-206) is
reached, many different
isotopes are produced as
intermediate steps.

Atomic mass

Figure 9.20
238
236
234
232
230
228
226
224
222
220
218
216
214
212
210
208
206

U

238

Alpha emission
Beta emission

Th234

U234

Pa234
Th230
Ra226
Rn222
Po218
Bi
Po214

214

Pb214

Bi

210

Pb210

Po210

Pb206

92 91 90 89 88 87 86 85 84 83 82
Atomic number

to daughter atoms is 1:7 (one parent atom for every
seven daughter atoms).
If the half-life of a radioactive isotope is known
and the parent/daughter ratio can be determined, the
age of the sample can be calculated. For example, assume
that the half-life of a hypothetical unstable isotope is
1 million years, and the parent/daughter ratio in a sample
is 1:15. This ratio indicates that four half-lives have passed
and that the sample must be 4 million years old.
Notice that the percentage of radioactive atoms that
decay during one half-life is always the same: 50 percent.
However, the actual number of atoms that decay with
the passing of each half-life continually decreases. Thus,
as the percentage of radioactive parent atoms declines,
the proportion of stable daughter atoms rises, with the
increase in daughter atoms just matching the drop in
parent atoms. This fact is the key to radiometric dating.

Using Radioactive Isotopes

from previous decay. The radiometric “clock” starts at this
point. As the uranium in this newly formed mineral disintegrates, atoms of the daughter product are trapped, and
measurable amounts of lead eventually accumulate.

Of the many radioactive isotopes that exist in nature,
five have proved particularly useful in providing radiometric ages for ancient rocks (Table 9.1). Rubidium-87,
thorium-232, and the two isotopes of uranium are used
only for dating rocks that are millions of years old, but
potassium-40 is more versatile.

Half-Life The time required for half of the nuclei in
a sample to decay is called the half-life of the isotope.
Half-life is a common way of expressing the rate of
radioactive disintegration. Figure 9.21 illustrates what
occurs when a radioactive parent decays directly into
its stable daughter product. When the quantities of parent and daughter are equal (ratio 1:1), we know that
one half-life has transpired. When one-quarter of the
original parent atoms remain and three-quarters have
decayed to the daughter product, the parent/daughter ratio is 1:3, and we know that two half-lives have
passed. After three half-lives, the ratio of parent atoms
SmartFigure 9.21

(https://goo.gl/DFHxZg)

100
94 atoms
ated
mul
u
c
87 atoms
ac

Da
ug

80

ms
ato
r
e
75 atoms
ht

60
50 atoms

potassium-40 is 1.3 billion years, analytical techniques
make it possible to detect tiny amounts of its stable daughter product, argon-40, in some rocks that are younger than
100,000 years. Another important reason for its frequent
use is that potassium is an abundant constituent of many
common minerals, particularly micas and feldspars.
Although potassium (K) has three natural isotopes,
39K, 40K, and 41K, only 40K is radioactive. When 40K
decays, it does so in two ways. About 11 percent changes to
argon-40 (40Ar) by means of electron capture (see Figure
9.19, bottom). The remaining 89 percent of 40K decays to
calcium-40 (40Ca) by beta emission (see Figure 9.19, middle). The decay of 40K to 40Ca, however, is not useful for
radiometric dating because the 40Ca produced by radioactive disintegration cannot be distinguished from calcium
that may have been present when the rock formed.
The potassium-argon clock begins when potassiumbearing minerals crystallize from a magma or form
TABLE 9.1

40
r
Pa

Number of atoms (percent)

Radioactive decay curve
Change is exponential. Half
of the radioactive parent
remains after one half-life.
After a second half-life,
one-quarter of the parent
remains, and so forth.

Potassium-Argon Dating Although the half-life of

en
t

20

0

0

1

25 atoms

a to

2

ms

13 atoms
rem
ain
ing
6 atoms
3

Number of half-lives
(Elapsed time)

4

5

Isotopes Frequently Used in Radiometric
Dating

Radioactive
Parent

Stable Daughter
Product

Currently
Accepted
Half-Life Values

Uranium-238

Lead-206

4.5 billion years

Uranium-235

Lead-207

704 million years

Thorium-232

Lead-208

14.1 billion years

Rubidium-87

Strontium-87

47.0 billion years

Potassium-40

Argon-40

1.3 billion years

291

9.4 Numerical Dating with Radioactivity

within a metamorphic rock. At this point, the new minerals will contain 40K but will be free of 40Ar because this
element is an inert gas that does not chemically combine
with other elements. As time passes, the 40K steadily
decays by electron capture. The 40Ar produced by this
process remains trapped within the mineral’s crystal
lattice. Because no 40Ar was present when the mineral
formed, all of the daughter atoms trapped in the mineral
must have come from the decay of 40K. To determine a
sample’s age, the 40K/40Ar ratio is measured precisely and
the known half-life for 40K applied.
_TT33


A Complex Process Bear in mind that although the
basic principle of radiometric dating is simple, the actual
procedure is quite complex. The analysis that determines
the quantities of parent and daughter must be painstakingly precise. In addition, some radioactive materials
do not decay directly into the stable daughter product,
as was the case with our hypothetical example, and this
fact may further complicate the analysis. In the case of
uranium-238, there are 13 intermediate unstable daughter products formed before the 14th and last daughter
product, the stable isotope lead-206, is produced (see
Figure 9.20).
Sources of Error It is important to understand that an
accurate radiometric date can be obtained only for a mineral that remained a closed system from its formation to
the present. Obtaining a correct date is not possible unless
there was neither addition nor loss of parent or daughter
isotopes. This is not always the case, and an important limitation of the potassium-argon method arises from the fact
that argon is a gas, and it may leak from minerals, throwing off measurements. Indeed, losses can be significant if
the rock is subjected to relatively high temperatures.
Of course, a reduction in the amount of daughter
product, 40Ar, would lead to underestimating the rock’s
actual age. Sometimes temperatures remain high enough
over a sufficiently long period so that all argon escapes.
When this happens, the potassium-argon clock is reset,
and dating the sample gives only the time of thermal
resetting, not the true age of the rock. For other radiometric clocks, a loss of daughter atoms can occur if the
rock has been subjected to weathering or leaching. To
avoid such a problem, one simple safeguard is to use only

fresh, unweathered material and not samples that exhibit
signs of chemical alteration.
To guard against error in radiometric dating, scientists often use cross-checks. This involves subjecting a
sample to two different methods. If the results agree, the
likelihood is high that the date is reliable. If the results
are appreciably different, other cross-checks must be
employed to determine which, if either, is correct.

Earth’s Oldest Rocks Radiometric dating methods
have produced literally thousands of dates for events in
Earth history. Rocks exceeding 3.5 billion years in age
are found on all of the continents. Earth’s oldest rocks (so
far) may be as old as 4.28 billion years (b.y.). Discovered
in northern Quebec, Canada, on the shores of Hudson
Bay, these rocks may be remnants of Earth’s earliest
crust. Rocks from western Greenland have been dated
at 3.7 to 3.8 b.y., and rocks nearly as old are found in the
Minnesota River Valley and northern Michigan (3.5 to
3.7 b.y.), in southern Africa (3.4 to 3.5 b.y.), and in western
Australia (3.4 to 3.6 b.y.). Tiny crystals of the mineral zircon having radiometric ages as old as 4.3 b.y. have been
found in younger sedimentary rocks in western Australia.
The source rocks for these tiny durable grains either no
longer exist or have not yet been found.
Radiometric dating has vindicated the ideas of
Hutton, Darwin, and others, who more than 150 years
ago inferred that geologic time must be immense.
Indeed, modern dating methods prove that there has
been enough time for the processes we observe to have
accomplished tremendous tasks.

Dating with Carbon-14
To date relatively recent events, carbon-14 is used
(Figure 9.22). Carbon-14 is the radioactive isotope of
carbon. The process is often called radiocarbon dating.
Because the half-life of carbon-14 is only 5730 years, radiocarbon dating can be used to date events from the historic
past as well as those from very recent geologic history. In
some cases carbon-14 can be used to date events as far
back as 70,000 years.
Carbon-14 is continuously produced in the upper
atmosphere as a result of cosmic-ray bombardment. Cosmic rays (high-energy nuclear particles) shatter the nuclei
of gas atoms, releasing neutrons. Some of the neutrons

Production of carbon-14
Nitrogen-14
atomic number 7
atomic mass 14

+
–

Decay of carbon-14
Neutron

Carbon-14
atomic number 6
atomic mass 14

+
A.

Figure 9.22

Neutron capture

+
–

Carbon-14
atomic number 6
atomic mass 14

Proton
emitted
B.

Proton
+

(–)
Beta
(electron)
emitted

Nitrogen-14
atomic number 7
atomic mass 14

Carbon-14 Production
and decay of radiocarbon.
These sketches represent
the nuclei of the respective
atoms.

292

CHAPTER 9

Geologic Time

Figure 9.23

carbon-14 gradually decreases as it decays
to nitrogen-14 by beta emission (Figure
9.22B). By comparing the proportions
of carbon-14 and carbon-12 in a sample,
radiocarbon dates can be determined. It is
important to emphasize that carbon-14 can
only be used to date organic materials, such
as wood, charcoal, bones, flesh, and cloth.
Although carbon-14 is only useful in
dating the last small fraction of geologic
time, it is a valuable tool for anthropologists, archaeologists, and historians, as
well as for geologists who study very
recent Earth history (Figure 9.23). In fact,
the development of radiocarbon dating
was considered so important that the
chemist who discovered this application,
Willard F. Libby, received a Nobel Prize
in 1960.

Cave art Chauvet Cave in
southern France, discovered in 1994, contains
some of the earliest-known
cave paintings. Radiocarbon dating indicates that
most of the images were
drawn between 30,000
and 32,000 years ago.
(Photo by Javier Trueba/MSF/Science Source)

are absorbed by nitrogen atoms (atomic number 7, mass
number 14), causing each nucleus to emit a proton. As
a result, the atomic number decreases by 1 (to 6), and a
different element, carbon-14, is created (Figure 9.22A).
This isotope of carbon quickly becomes incorporated into
carbon dioxide, which circulates in the atmosphere and
is absorbed by living matter. As a result, all organisms—
including you—contain a small amount of carbon-14.
As long as an organism is alive, the decaying radiocarbon is continually replaced, and the proportions of
carbon-14 and carbon-12 remain constant. Carbon-12
is the stable and most common isotope of carbon.
However, when any plant or animal dies, the amount of

9.5

9.4

Concept Checks

1. List three types of radioactive decay. For each
type, describe how the atomic number and
atomic mass change.
2. Sketch a simple diagram to explain the idea of
half-life.
3. Why is radiometric dating a reliable method for
determining numerical dates?
4. For what time span does radiocarbon dating
apply?

The Geologic Time Scale
Distinguish among the four basic time units that make up the geologic time scale
and explain why the time scale is considered to be a dynamic tool.

Geologists have divided the whole of geologic history into units of varying length. Together, they
compose the geologic time scale of Earth history (Figure 9.24). The major units of the time scale
were delineated during the nineteenth century, principally by scientists in Western Europe and
Great Britain. Because radiometric dating was unavailable at that time, the entire time scale was
created using methods of relative dating. It was only in the twentieth century that radiometric
methods permitted numerical dates to be added.

Structure of the Time Scale
The geologic time scale subdivides the 4.6-billionyear history of Earth into many different units and
provides a meaningful time frame within which the
events of the geologic past are arranged. As shown in
Figure 9.24, eons represent the greatest expanses of
time. The eon that began about 542 million years ago
is the Phanerozoic, a term derived from Greek words
meaning “visible life.” It is an appropriate description
because the rocks and deposits of the Phanerozoic eon

contain abundant fossils that document major evolutionary trends.
Another glance at the time scale reveals that eons
are divided into eras. The Phanerozoic eon consists
of the Paleozoic era (paleo = ancient, zoe = life), the
Mesozoic era (meso = middle, zoe = life), and the
Cenozoic era (ceno = recent, zoe = life). As the names
imply, these eras are bounded by profound worldwide
changes in life-forms.*
*Major changes in life-forms are discussed in Chapter 22.

293

9.5 The Geologic Time Scale

Era

Cenozoic
Phanerozoic

Mesozoic

66.0

Epoch
Holocene

Quaternary

Millions
of years
ago
Cenozoic

252.2
Paleozoic

Pleistocene
Pliocene

Neogene
Tertiary

Era

Eon

Period

Miocene
Oligocene

Paleogene

Eocene
Paleocene

541

Millions
of years
ago
0.01
2.6
5.3
23.0
33.9
56.0
66.0

Neoproterozoic
Cretaceous

Proterozoic

1000

145.0

Mesoproterozoic
Mesozoic

Jurassic

1600
201.3
Triassic

Paleoproterozoic

252.2

Precambrian

Permian
2500
Carboniferous

298.9

Neoarchean
2800
Archean

Mesoarchean
3200

Pennsylvanian
323.2
Mississippian
358.9
Devonian

Paleozoic

Paleoarchean

419.2

3600

Silurian
443.8
Ordovician

Eoarchean

485.4
~4000
Cambrian

Hadean
~4600

541.0
Precambrian

Each era of the Phanerozoic eon is further divided
into time units known as periods. The Paleozoic has
seven, and the Mesozoic and Cenozoic each have
three. Each of these periods is characterized by a
somewhat less profound change in life-forms as compared with the eras.
Each of the periods is divided into still smaller units
called epochs. As you can see in Figure 9.24, seven
epochs have been named for the periods of the Cenozoic.
The epochs of other periods usually are simply termed
early, middle, and late.

Precambrian Time
Notice that the detailed portion of the geologic time
scale does not begin until about 542 million years ago,
the date for the beginning of the Cambrian period. The
nearly 4 billion years prior to the Cambrian are divided
into two eons, the Archean (archaios = ancient) and
the Proterozoic (proteros = before, zoe = life). It is
also common for this vast expanse of time to simply be
referred to as the Precambrian. Although it represents
about 88 percent of Earth history, the Precambrian is

Figure 9.24
Geologic time scale
Numbers on the time
scale represent time in
millions of years before
present. Numerical
dates were added long
after the time scale was
established using relative dating techniques.
The dates on this time
scale are those currently
accepted by the International Commission
on Stratigraphy (ICS) in
2014. The color scheme
used on this chart was
selected because it is
similar to that used by
the ICS.

Geologic Time

not divided into nearly as many smaller time units as the
Phanerozoic eon.
Why is the huge expanse of Precambrian time not
divided into numerous eras, periods, and epochs? The
reason is that Precambrian history is not known in great
enough detail. The quantity of information that geologists have deciphered about Earth’s past is somewhat
analogous to the detail of human history. The further
back we go, the less that is known. Certainly more data
and information exist about the past 10 years than for the
first decade of the twentieth century; the events of the
nineteenth century have been documented much better
than the events of the first century c.e.; and so on. So it
is with Earth history. The more recent past has the freshest, least disturbed, and most observable record. The further back in time a geologist goes, the more fragmented
the record and clues become. Other reasons to explain
our lack of a detailed time scale for this vast segment of
Earth history include:
r The first abundant fossil evidence does not appear
in the geologic record until the beginning of the
Cambrian period. Prior to the Cambrian, simple lifeforms such as algae, bacteria, fungi, and worms predominated. All of these organisms lack hard parts,
an important condition favoring preservation. For
this reason, there is only a meager Precambrian fossil
record. Many exposures of Precambrian rocks have

E Y E ON E A R T H

been studied in some detail, but correlation can be
difficult when fossils are lacking.
r Because Precambrian rocks are very old, most have
been subjected to a great many changes. Much of
the Precambrian rock record is composed of highly
distorted metamorphic rocks. This makes it difficult
to interpret past environments because many of the
clues present in the original sedimentary rocks have
been destroyed.
Radiometric dating has provided a partial solution to
the troublesome task of dating and correlating Precambrian rocks. But untangling the complex Precambrian
record still remains a daunting task.

Terminology and the Geologic
Time Scale
Some terms that are associated with the geologic time
scale are not “officially” recognized as being a part of it.
The best known, and most common, example is Precambrian—the informal name for the eons that came before
the current Phanerozoic eon. Although the term Precambrian has no formal status on the geologic time scale, it
has been traditionally used as though it does.
Hadean is another informal term that is found on
some versions of the geologic time scale and is used by
many geologists. It refers to the earliest interval (eon) of

9.3

T

his image is from the bottom of the Grand
Canyon, a zone called the Inner Gorge. The
dark rock is the Vishnu Schist. The lightcolored rock, called the Zoroaster Granite, is a
series of dikes. Both rocks date from Precambrian
time. Suppose you are on a raft trip through the
Grand Canyon. Your companions are bright and
curious but are not trained in geology, as you are.
Sitting around the campfire the night before you
reached the site pictured here, you and your fellow
rafters discussed the geologic time scale and the
magnitude of geologic time.

QUESTION 1 When you arrive at this site, someone
asks why Precambrian history seems so sketchy
and why this time span is not divided into nearly as
many subdivisions as Phanerozoic time. Use this
setting as you answer these questions.

Phanerozoic

CHAPTER 9

Vishnu
schist
Precambrian

294

Zoroaster
granite

QUESTION 2 Which is older, the Vishnu Schist or the
Zoroaster Granite? Explain.
Rafting the Colorado River

Michael Collier

9.6 Determining Numerical Dates for Sedimentary Strata

Earth history—before the oldest-known rocks. When the
term was coined in 1972, the age of Earth’s oldest rocks
was about 3.8 billion years. Today that number stands at
slightly greater than 4 billion, and, of course, is subject to
revision. The name Hadean derives from Hades, Greek
for underworld—a reference to the “hellish” conditions
that prevailed on Earth early in its history.
Effective communication in the geosciences requires
that the geologic time scale consist of standardized divisions and dates. So, who determines which names and
dates on the geologic time scale are “official”? The organization that is largely responsible for maintaining and
updating this important document is the International
Commission on Stratigraphy (ICS), a committee of the
International Union of Geological Sciences. Advances
in the geosciences require that the scale be periodically
updated to include changes in unit names and boundary
age estimates.
An ICS geologic time scale from just a few years ago
would have shown the Cenozoic era divided into the Tertiary and Quaternary periods. However, more recent versions divide the Tertiary period into the Paleogene and
Neogene periods. As our understanding of this time span
has changed, so too has its designation on the geologic
time scale. Today, the Tertiary period is considered a
“historic” name and has no official status on the ICS version of the time scale. Many time scales still contain references to the Tertiary period, though, including Figure
9.24. One reason for this is that a great deal of past (and
some current) geologic literature uses this name.

9.6

Some scientists have suggested that the Holocene
epoch has ended and that we have entered a new epoch
called the Anthropocene. It is considered to be the span
(beginning in the early 1800s) in which the global environmental effects of increased human population and
economic development have dramatically transformed
Earth’s surface. Although this designation is currently
used as an informal metaphor for human-caused global
environmental change, a number of scientists feel that
there is merit in recognizing the Anthropocene as a new
“official” geologic epoch.
For those studying historical geology, it is important
to realize that the geologic time scale is a dynamic tool
that continues to be refined as our knowledge and understanding of Earth history evolves.
_TT34


9.5

Concept Checks

1. List the four basic units that make up the geologic
time scale.
2. Why is zoic part of so many names on the
geologic time scale?
3. What term applies to all of geologic time prior
to the Phanerozoic eon? Why is this span not
divided into as many smaller time units as the
Phanerozoic eon?
4. To what does the term Hadean apply? Is it an
“official” part of the geologic time scale?

Determining Numerical Dates for Sedimentary Strata
Explain how reliable numerical dates are determined for layers of sedimentary rock.

Although reasonably accurate numerical dates have been worked out for the periods of the geologic time scale (see Figure 9.24), this is not an easy task. The primary difficulty in assigning
numerical dates to units of time is the fact that not all rocks can be dated by using radiometric
methods. For a radiometric date to be useful, all the minerals in the rock must have formed at
about the same time. For this reason, radioactive isotopes can be used to determine when minerals in an igneous rock crystallized and when pressure and heat created new minerals in a metamorphic rock.
However, samples of sedimentary rock can only rarely be
dated directly by radiometric means. Although a detrital sedimentary rock may include particles that contain
radioactive isotopes, the rock’s age cannot be accurately
determined because the grains composing the rock
are not the same age as the rock in which they occur.
Rather, the sediments have been weathered from rocks
of diverse ages.

Radiometric dates obtained from metamorphic rocks
may also be difficult to interpret because the age of a
particular mineral in a metamorphic rock does not necessarily represent the time when the rock initially formed.
Instead, the date might indicate any one of a number of
subsequent metamorphic phases.
If samples of sedimentary rocks rarely yield reliable
radiometric ages, how can numerical dates be assigned

295

296

CHAPTER 9

Geologic Time

Figure 9.25
Dating sedimentary strata Numerical dates for sedimentary
layers are usually determined by examining their relationship
to igneous rocks.

Rocks of
Paleogene age
Rocks of
Cretaceous
age
Rocks of
Jurassic
age

Wasatch Form
ation

Mesaverde Fo
rmation

Mancos Sha
le

Dakota San
dstone
Volcanic a
sh bed da
ted at 160
million ye
Morrison
ars
Formatio
n
Summerv
ille Form
ation

Igneous dike dated
at 66 million years

to sedimentary layers? Usually a geologist must relate
the strata to datable igneous masses, as in Figure 9.25.
In this example, radiometric dating has determined the
ages of the volcanic ash bed in the Morrison Formation
and the dike cutting the Mancos Shale and Mesaverde
Formation. The sedimentary beds below the ash are
obviously older than the ash, and all the layers above the
ash are younger. The dike is younger than the Mancos
Shale and the Mesaverde Formation but older than the

E Y E ON E A R T H

Wasatch Formation because the dike does
not intrude these Paleogene-age rocks.
From this kind of evidence, geologists estimate
that the last part of the Morrison Formation was deposited about 160 million years
ago, as indicated by the ash
bed. Further, they conclude
that the Paleogene period
began after the intrusion of
the dike, 66 million years
ago. This is just one example
of literally thousands that
illustrate how datable materials are used to bracket the various episodes in Earth history
within specific time periods. It
shows the necessity of combining
laboratory dating methods with
relative dating principles applied
to field observations of rocks.

9.6

Concept Checks

1. Briefly explain why it is often difficult to assign
a reliable numerical date to a sample of
sedimentary rock.
2. How might a numerical date for a layer of
sedimentary rock be determined?

9.4

T

his is a close-up of a sample of the detrital
sedimentary rock conglomerate. The rock
contains radioactive isotopes that will yield
numerical dates.

QUESTION 1 Although radioactive isotopes
are present, a reliable numerical date for this
conglomerate cannot be accurately determined.
Explain.
QUESTION 2 How might a numerical age range be
established for the conglomerate layer?
E.J. Tarbuck

10
Crustal
Deformation

Wyoming’s Grand Tetons are the result of crustal deformation created by tectonic forces that operate in Earth’s
interior. (Photo by Michael Collier)

E

arth is a dynamic planet. Shifting lithospheric plates gradually change
the face of our planet by moving continents across the globe. The results of this tectonic
activity are perhaps most strikingly apparent in Earth’s major mountain belts. Rocks containing fossils of marine organisms are found thousands of meters above sea level, and
massive rock units are bent, contorted, overturned, and sometimes riddled with fractures.
This chapter explores the forces that deform rock and the rock structures that
result. Foliation and rock cleavage were examined in Chapter 8; this chapter is devoted
to the other major structural features of Earth’s crust and the tectonic forces that produce them.

10.1
SmartFigure 10.1
Deformed sedimentary
strata These deformed
strata are exposed in a
roadcut near Palmdale,
California. In addition to
the obvious folding, lightcolored beds are offset
along a fault located on
the right side of the photograph. (Photo by E. J. Tarbuck)
(https://goo.gl/vwWFKx)

What Causes Rock to Deform?
Describe the three types of differential stress and name the type of plate boundary
most commonly associated with each.

Every body of rock, no matter how strong, has a point at which it will deform by bending or
breaking. Deformation (de = out, forma = form) is a general term for the changes in the shape
or position of a rock body in response to differential stress. Most crustal deformation occurs along
plate boundaries. Plate motions and plate interactions along their margins generate the tectonic
forces that cause rock to deform.
The basic geologic features that form as a result of the
forces generated by the interactions of tectonic plates
are called rock structures, or geologic structures
(Figure 10.1). Rock structures include folds (wave-like
undulations), faults (fractures along which one rock
body slides past another), joints (cracks), and small-scale
structures associated with metamorphic rocks such
as foliation and rock cleavage that were introduced in
Chapter 8.

Stress: The Force That Deforms Rocks
From everyday experience, you know that if a door is
stuck, you must expend energy, called force, to open it.
Geologists use the term stress to describe the forces that
deform rocks. Whenever the stresses acting on a rock
body exceed its strength, the rock will deform—usually
by one or more of the following processes: folding, flowing, fracturing, or faulting.
The magnitude of stress is not simply a function of
the amount of force applied but also relates to the area
on which the force acts. For example, if you are walking barefoot on a hard surface, the force (weight) of your

305

10.1 What Causes Rock to Deform?

body is distributed across your entire foot, so the stress
acting on any one point of your foot is low. However, if
you step on a small pointed rock (ouch!), the stress concentration at that point on your foot will be high. Thus,
you can think of stress as a measure of how much force is
applied over a particular area.
As you saw in Chapter 8, when stress is applied uniformly in all directions, it is called confining pressure
(Figure 10.2A). Confining pressure causes the spaces
between mineral grains to close, producing more compact rocks that have greater densities. Confining pressure does not, however, change the shape or orientation of a rock body. By contrast, when stress is applied
unequally in different directions, it is termed differential stress. We will consider three types of differential
stress:
1.

Compressional stress. Differential stress that
squeezes a rock mass as if placed in a vise is known
as compressional stress (com = together, premere
= to press) (Figure 10.2B). Compressional stresses are
most often associated with convergent plate boundaries. When plates collide, Earth’s crust is generally
shortened horizontally and thickened vertically. Over
millions of years, this deformation produces mountainous terrains.
2. Tensional stress. Differential stress that pulls apart
or elongates rock bodies is known as tensional
stress (tendere = to stretch) (Figure 10.2C). Along
divergent plate boundaries where plates are moving
apart, tensional stresses stretch and lengthen rock
bodies. For example, in the Basin and Range Province in the western United States, tensional forces
have stretched and fractured the crust by as much as
twice its original width.
3. Shear stress. Differential stress can also cause
rock to shear, which involves the movement of
one part of a rock body past another (Figure 10.2D).
Shear is similar to the slippage that occurs between
individual playing cards when the top of the deck
is moved relative to the bottom (Figure 10.3). Smallscale deformation of rocks by shear stresses occurs
along closely spaced parallel surfaces of weakness,
such as foliation surfaces and microscopic fractures,
where slippage changes the shape of rocks. By
contrast, at transform fault boundaries, such as the
San Andreas Fault, shear stress causes large segments of Earth’s crust to slip horizontally past one
another.

Strain: A Change in Shape
Caused by Stress
When flat-lying sedimentary layers are uplifted and
tilted, their orientations change, but their shapes are
often retained. This type of deformation results in a

change in orientation (tilting) of the once flat-lying
sedimentary layers and is
called rotation. Deformation may also cause a rock
body to change location—a
process called displacement. For example, displacement occurs during
faulting when the rocks on
one side of the fault move
relative to the rocks on the
opposite side. This type
of deformation changes
the location of a rock body
but does not substantially change its shape or
orientation.
Differential stress can
also change the shape of a
rock body, a type of deformation that geologists call
strain. Like the circle shown
in Figure 10.3, strained
bodies lose their original
configuration during deformation. Strain is illustrated
by the deformed trilobite fossil show in Figure 10.4. When
we compare the deformed
specimen to a trilobite fossil
of the same species that has

Figure 10.2

A. Confining pressure

Confining pressure versus
three types of stresses
Confining pressure A. changes
the volume of a block of rock but
not its general shape. In contrast,
compressional B., tensional C.,
and shear D. stresses change the
shape of a rock body.

Compression
B. Compressional stress
(shortening)

Tension

C. Tensional stress
(stretching)

Shear
D. Shear stress
(sliding and tearing)

By sliding the top of the deck relative to the
bottom, we can illustrate the type of shearing that
commonly occurs along closely spaced planes of
weakness in rocks.

Shear stress causes the circle in this deck of
cards to become an ellipse, which can be used
to measure the amount and type of strain.

Figure 10.3
Shearing and the resulting
deformation (strain)
An ordinary deck of playing cards with a circle
embossed on its side
illustrates shearing and the
resulting strain.

306

CHAPTER 10

Crustal Deformation

not been deformed (see Figure 9.15B), the type of strain
that occurred to the surrounding rock body can be determined. Stress is the force that acts to deform rock bodies,
while strain is the resulting distortion, or change in the
shape of the rock body.

10.1

Concept Checks

1. What is rock deformation? How might a rock body
change during deformation?
2. List the three types of differential stress and
briefly describe the changes they impart to rock
bodies.
3. Identify the plate boundary that is most
commonly associated with each of the three
types of differential stresses.

Figure 10.4
Deformed trilobite Compare the fossil of this common Paleozoic life-form with the
fossil in Figure 9.15B, page 284, to see the extent of change. (Photo by Marli Miller)

10.2

4. How is strain different from stress?

How Do Rocks Deform?
Compare and contrast brittle and ductile deformation.
_TT35


When rocks are subjected to stresses that exceed their strength, they deform, usually by bending or
breaking. It is easy to visualize how rocks break because we normally think of rocks as being brittle.
But how can large masses of rock be bent into intricate folds without fracturing in the process? To
answer this question, geologists performed experiments in which they subjected rocks to differential stress under conditions experienced at various depths within Earth’s crust.

Types of Deformation
Through these experiments to determine how large
masses of rock can be bent into intricate folds without
fracturing, geologists determined that although different
rocks deform under somewhat different conditions and
rates, rocks experience three types of deformation: elastic, brittle, and ductile.

Elastic Deformation When stress is applied gradually,
rocks initially respond by deforming elastically. Changes
that result from elastic deformation are recoverable; that is, like a rubber band, the rock will snap back
to nearly its original size and shape when the stress is
removed. During elastic deformation, the chemical
bonds of the minerals within a rock are stretched but do
not break. When the stress is removed, the bonds snap
back to their original length. You will see in Chapter 11
that the energy for most earthquakes comes from the

release of stored elastic energy as the rock snaps back to
its original shape.

Brittle Deformation When stress exceeds the elastic limit
(strength) of a rock, the rock either bends or breaks. Rocks
that break into smaller pieces exhibit brittle deformation
(bryttian = to shatter). From our everyday experience, we
know that glass objects, wooden pencils, china plates, and
even our bones exhibit brittle failure once their strength is
surpassed. Brittle deformation occurs when stress breaks
the chemical bonds that hold a material together.
Ductile Deformation Ductile deformation is a process
in which a rock body is forced to flow in a solid state so that
it changes shape without fracturing. Ordinary objects that
display ductile behavior include modeling clay, beeswax,
taffy, and some metals. For example, an automobile’s fender
may be dented but not broken when hit by another vehicle.

307

10.2 How Do Rocks Deform?

Ductile deformation may occur by slippage along
planes of weakness such as bedding surfaces and foliation in rock bodies. Recall from Chapter 8 that individual
mineral grains may also change shape through the process of solid-state flow (see Figure 8.8).

0

30 meters

Factors That Affect Rock Strength
The major factors that influence the strength of a rock
and how it will deform include temperature, confining
pressure, rock type, and time.

The Role of Confining Pressure Recall from Chapter 8
that pressure, like temperature, increases with depth
as the thickness of the overlying rock increases. Buried
rocks are subjected to confining pressure, which is much
like water pressure, where the forces are applied equally
in all directions. Confining pressure “squeezes” the materials in Earth’s crust, making the materials stronger and
thus harder to break. Therefore, rocks that are deeply
buried are “held together” by the immense pressure and
tend to bend rather than fracture.

The Influence of Rock Type In addition to the impact
of the physical environment, deformation of rock is
greatly influenced by its mineral composition and texture. For example, igneous and some metamorphic
rocks (quartzite, for example) are composed of minerals
that have strong internal chemical bonds. These strong,
brittle rocks tend to fail by fracturing when subjected
to stresses that exceed their strength. By contrast, sedimentary rocks that are weakly cemented or metamorphic
rocks that contain zones of weakness, such as foliation,
are more susceptible to ductile deformation and tend
to fold or flow (Figure 10.5). Weak rocks that are most
likely to behave in a ductile manner (bend or flow) when
subjected to differential stress include rock salt, shale,
limestone, and schist. In fact, rock salt is so weak that
large masses of it often rise through overlying beds of
sedimentary rocks, much as hot magma rises toward
Earth’s surface. Perhaps the weakest naturally occurring
solid to exhibit ductile flow is glacial ice. At increasing

Rocks exhibiting ductile
deformation
These sedimentary rock
layers were deformed at
great depth, under high
temperatures and high
pressures. Consequently,
they bend without breaking—a type of ductile
deformation. (Photo by Michael
Collier)

The Role of Temperature The effect of temperature
on the strength of a material can be easily demonstrated with a piece of glass tubing commonly found
in a chemistry lab. If the tubing is dropped on a hard
surface, it will shatter. However, if the tubing is heated
over a Bunsen burner, it can be easily bent into a variety
of shapes. Rocks respond to heat similarly. Where temperatures are high (deep in Earth’s crust), rocks tend
to soften and become more malleable, so they deform
by folding or flowing (ductile deformation). Likewise,
where temperatures are low (at or near the surface),
rocks tend to behave like brittle solids and fracture.

Figure 10.5

depths, however, the strength of all rock types decreases
significantly.
Some outcrops—sites where bedrock is exposed at
the surface—consist of a sequence of interbedded weak
and strong rock layers, such as shale and well-cemented
sandstone beds, that have been moderately deformed by
folding. In these settings, the strong sandstone layers are
often highly fractured, while the weak shale beds form
broad undulating folds. The formation of diverse structures
(one brittle and one ductile) within the same rock mass can
be illustrated by placing a Milky Way or similar chocolateover-caramel candy bar into a refrigerator. When the cool
candy bar is slowly bent, it will exhibit brittle deformation
in the chocolate and ductile deformation in the caramel.

Time as a Factor One key factor that researchers
are unable to duplicate in the laboratory is how rocks
respond to small stresses applied gradually over long
spans of geologic time. However, we can observe the
effects of time on deformation in everyday settings. For
example, marble benches have been known to sag under
their own weight over a time span of 100 years or so, and
wooden bookshelves may bend within a few months after
being loaded with books.
In general, when tectonic forces are applied gradually over long spans of time, rocks tend to display ductile
behavior and deform by bending or flowing. However,
the same rocks may shatter if force is applied suddenly.
An analogous situation occurs when you slowly move the
two ends of a taffy bar together. The taffy will deform
by folding. However, if you hit the taffy swiftly against
the edge of a table, it will break into two or more pieces,
exhibiting brittle failure.

308

CHAPTER 10

Crustal Deformation

Figure 10.6
Deformation caused by
three types of stress
Brittle deformation (fracturing and faulting) dominates in the upper crust,
where the temperatures
are comparatively cool. By
contrast, at depths greater
than about 10 kilometers (6
miles), where temperatures
are high, rock deforms by
ductile flow and folding.

How Rocks Respond to Differential Stress
TYPE OF
STRESS

COMPRESSION
(Causes shortening)

TENSION
(Causes stretching)

SHEAR
(Causes tearing)

At shallow
depths rocks
exhibit
brittle
fracture

Reverse faulting

Normal faulting

Strike-slip faulting

Stretching

Shearing

At greater
depths rocks
deform
by ductile
flow

Folding

Ductile Versus Brittle Deformation
and the Resulting Rock Structures
You have probably seen a drinking glass drop on a hard
surface and shatter into pieces. What you witnessed is
analogous to brittle deformation that occurs in Earth’s
crust. In nature, brittle deformation occurs when stresses
exceed the strength of a rock, causing it to break or
fracture.
In the upper crust, to depths of about 10 kilometers (6 miles), most rocks tend to exhibit brittle behavior
by fracturing or faulting. When tectonic forces cause
upwarping of the crust, rocks near the surface are
stretched and pulled apart, forming fractures called
joints (see Figure 10.26, page 321). Faults, by contrast,
are fractures in Earth’s crust where the rocks on one side
of the fault surface are displaced relative to the rocks on
the other side.
Folds, common features of deformed sedimentary rock layers, provide evidence that rocks can bend
without breaking (see Figure 10.5). Rocks that display
evidence of ductile deformation usually were generated
at depth in high-temperature and high-pressure environments. The resulting rocks often exhibit contorted
folds that give the impression that the strength of the
rock was akin to that of soft putty. Weak rocks, however, can bend or flow without breaking in less extreme
environments.

Figure 10.6 illustrates deformation of Earth’s crust
as a result of the three types of stress: compressional,
tensional, and shear stress. Compressional stresses associated with convergent plate boundaries tend to shorten
and thicken Earth’s crust by folding, flowing, and faulting, whereas tensional stresses along divergent plate
boundaries tend to lengthen rock bodies by displacement
along faults in the upper crust and by ductile flow at
depth. Shearing, often associated with transform plate
boundaries, tends to produce fault zones in the upper
crust and ductile flow at depth. Brittle deformation—
fracturing and faulting—dominates in the upper crust,
where temperatures are relatively cool. By contrast, at
greater depths where temperatures and pressures are
high, rocks exhibit ductile behavior and deform by folding or flowing.

10.2

Concept Checks

1. Describe elastic deformation.
2. Compare and contrast brittle and ductile
deformation and describe the conditions that
favor one over the other.
3. List and describe the four factors that affect rock
strength.

309

10.3 Folds: Rock Structures Formed by Ductile Deformation

10.3

Folds: Rock Structures Formed by Ductile
Deformation
List and describe five common folded structures.

Along convergent plate boundaries, flat-lying sedimentary strata, tabular intrusions, and volcanic
rocks are often bent into a series of wavelike undulations called folds. Folds in sedimentary strata
are much like those that would form if you were to hold the ends of a sheet of paper on a flat surface and then push them together. In nature, folds come in a wide variety of sizes and configurations. Some folds are broad flexures in which strata hundreds of meters thick have been slightly
warped. Others are very tight microscopic structures found in metamorphic rocks. Size differences
notwithstanding, most folds result from compressional stresses that result in a shortening and thickening of the crust.
To aid our understanding of folds and folding, it is important to become familiar with the terminology used to
name the parts of a fold. Folds are geologic structures
consisting of stacks of originally horizontal surfaces, such
as sedimentary strata, that have been bent as a result
of permanent deformation. Each layer is bent around
an imaginary axis called a hinge line, or simply a hinge
(Figure 10.7). In some folds, the hinge lines are horizontal.
However, hinge lines can be inclined at an angle, in
which case the fold is known as a plunging fold (see Figure 10.9).
Folds are also described by their axial plane, which
is a surface that connects all the hinge lines of the
folded strata. In simple folds, the axial plane is vertical and divides the fold into two roughly symmetrical
limbs. However, the axial plane often leans to one side
so that one limb is steeper and shorter than the other. In
extreme cases, the axial plane can be tilted such that it
has a horizontal orientation, making the fold appear to be
“lying on its side.”

Anticlines and Synclines
The two most common types of folds are anticlines and
synclines (Figure 10.8). Anticlines occur when compressional stresses squeeze sedimentary layers into arch-like
folds. These upfolded structures are sometimes spectacularly displayed along highway roadcuts that pass through
deformed strata. Typically found in association with anticlines are trough-like structures called synclines. Notice
in Figure 10.8 that the right limb of the syncline is also
the left limb of the adjacent anticline.
Depending on their orientation, these basic folds
are described as symmetrical when the limbs are mirror images of each other and asymmetrical when they
are not. An asymmetrical fold is said to be overturned
if one or both limbs are tilted beyond the vertical. An
overturned fold can also “lie on its side” so the axial
plane is horizontal. These recumbent folds are common

Axial plane

SmartFigure 10.7

Hinge line

Features associated with
symmetrical folds The
axial plane divides a fold as
symmetrically as possible,
while the hinge line traces
the points of maximum
bending of any layer.

Axial plane

(https://goo.gl/S9h2Ic)

Limb

Limb
Before erosion
Axial plane

Limb

Limb

After erosion

in highly deformed mountainous regions such as
the Alps.
Folds also can be tilted by tectonic forces that cause
their hinge lines to slope rather than have a horizontal
orientation (Figure 10.9A). Folds of this type are called
plunging folds because the hinge lines of the fold dip
downward (plunge) and penetrate Earth’s surface.
Figure 10.9B shows the outcrop pattern produced when
erosion removes the upper layers of a plunging anticline
and exposes its interiors. Note that the outcrop pattern of an eroded anticline “points” in the direction it
is plunging. The opposite is true for a syncline, which
exhibits an outcrop pattern that points in the opposite
direction of its plunge.

310

CHAPTER 10

SmartFigure 10.8
Common types of
folds When sedimentary
rock layers are folded
in an arch-like manner,
the structure is called an
anticline. By contrast,
trough-like structures are
called synclines. Notice
that the limb of an anticline
is also the limb of the
adjacent syncline.

E.J. Tarbuck

E.J. Tarbuck

Normal limb

(https://goo.gl/Xz0acg)

Symmetrical fold

b

ne

Syncline

Syncline

Asymmetrical fold
Axial plane

Axial plane

Lim

Lim

b

Lim

b

(http://goo.gl/kgB5Qg)

Overturned fold
Axial plane

b

Lim

b

A good example of topography that results when
erosional forces attack folded sedimentary strata is
found in the Valley and Ridge Province of the Appalachians (Figure 10.10). It is important to recognize that
ridges are not necessarily associated with anticlines,
nor are valleys related to synclines. Rather,
ridges and valleys result because of differential

A plunging anticline A. A fold is
said to plunge if the axis (hinge
line) of the fold is tilted rather
than horizontal. B. The same fold
shown in A, as it would appear
after being eroded.

Overturned
limb

Anticli

Anticline

SmartFigure 10.9

Michael Collier

Lim

Limb

weathering and erosion. In the Valley and Ridge Province, for instance, resistant sandstone beds remain as
imposing ridges separated by valleys cut into more easily eroded shale or limestone beds.

Susquehanna River
l
Plunge
nta
zo
e
i
n
r
i
l
Ho Hinge

Limb

A. Before erosion

Lim

b

Harrisburg, PA
Limb

B. After erosion

SmartFigure 10.10

Lim

b

Topography that results when erosional forces attack
folded sedimentary strata This satellite image,
taken over south-central Pennsylvania, shows a
portion of the Valley and Ridge Province of the
Appalachians. Can you identify a plunging fold in
this image? (Photo courtesy of NASA) (https://goo.gl/I1c66S)

311

10.3 Folds: Rock Structures Formed by Ductile Deformation

Domes and Basins

Youngest strata

SmartFigure 10.11

Oldest strata

Domes versus basins
Gentle upwarping and
downwarping of crustal
rocks produce A. domes
and B. basins. Erosion of
these structures results in
an outcrop pattern that is
roughly circular or slightly
elongate. (https://goo.gl/9PJtjY)

r
ive

Broad uplifting of crystalYoungest
Oldest
line basement rock may
strata
strata
deform the overlying cover
of sedimentary strata and
generate large folds. When
this upwarping produces a
circular or slightly elongated
structure, the feature is
called a dome (Figure 10.11A).
The Black Hills of western
South Dakota is a very large
A. Upwarping produces a dome.
B. Downwarping produces a basin.
structural dome generated by
deposits can produce salt domes like those surrounding
upwarping. Here erosion has stripped away the highest
the coastal areas of the Gulf of Mexico. Salt domes are
portions of the overlying sedimentary beds, exposing
older igneous and metamorphic rocks in the center (Fig- economically important rock structures because when
salt migrates upward, the surrounding oil-bearing sediure 10.12).
mentary layers are often bent upward to form oil reserStructural domes can also be formed by the intruvoirs (see Figure 23.5C, page 709).
sion of magma (laccoliths), as shown in Figure 4.28, page
Downwarped structures having a bowl-like shape are
130. In addition, the upward migration of buried salt
termed basins (Figure 10.11B). Several large basins exist in
the United States (Figure 10.13). The basins of Michigan
Belle Fourc
and
Illinois have gently sloping beds similar to saucers.
he
R
These basins resulted from large accumulations of sediment, the weight of which caused the underlying crust to
subside (see the section on isostasy in Chapter 14). In addition, a few structural basins resulted from giant meteorite
impacts, including Sudbury Basin, Canada.
Dakota
Because large basins contain sedimentary beds slopsandstone
Limestone
hogback
ing at low angles, they are usually identified by the age
plateau
Central
of the rocks composing them. The youngest rocks of a
crystalline
area

Figure 10.13
KEY
Upper Penn.

Y

X

Lower Penn.
Oldest
Rocks

Upper Miss.

Mount
Rushmore

A

Lower Miss.

Youngest
Rocks

Devonian
Silurian
Ordovician

Red Valley

r
ive

WIS.

eR

LAKE
MICHIGAN

nn

0

30 km

0

20 mi

e
hey

Milwaukee

C

Youngest
Rocks

MICHIGAN

Y

X
Schist

Chicago

B

ILL.

Granite

INDIANA

Figure 10.12
The Black Hills of South Dakota, a large structural dome The
central core of the Black Hills is composed of resistant
Precambrian-age igneous and metamorphic rocks. The surrounding rocks are mainly younger limestones and sandstones.

Detroit

A

LAKE
ERIE

OHIO

B

The bedrock geology of
the Michigan Basin The
youngest rocks are
centrally located, whereas
the oldest beds flank this
structure.

312

CHAPTER 10

Crustal Deformation

SmartFigure 10.14

Mon

The East Kaibab
Monocline, Arizona This
monocline consists of bent
sedimentary beds that were
deformed by faulting in the
bedrock below. The thrust
fault shown is called a blind
thrust because it does not
reach the surface. (Photo

ocl

ine

by Michael Collier)
(https://goo.gl/4FVx8Y)

Mon
Sedimentary
strata removed
by erosion

Fault in
basement rock

ocl

ine

sedimentary strata (Figure 10.14). These folds
appear to have resulted from the reactivaEast Kaibab Monocline, Arizona
tion of ancient, steep-dipping faults located
in basement rocks beneath the plateau. As
large blocks of basement rock were displaced
upward, the comparatively ductile sedimentary strata above responded by draping over
the fault like clothes hanging over a bench.
Displacement along these reactivated faults
often exceeds 1 kilometer (0.6 miles).
Examples of monoclines found on the
Colorado Plateau include the East Kaibab
Monocline, the Raplee Anticline, the Waterpocket Fold, and the San Rafael Swell. The
inclined strata shown in Figure 10.14 once
extended over the sedimentary layers now
exposed at the surface—evidence that tremendous volumes of rock have been eroded from this area.

10.3

basin are found near the center, and the oldest rocks are
at the flanks. This is just the opposite of a dome, such as
the Black Hills, where the oldest rocks are found in the
interior.

Monoclines
Although we discuss folds and faults in separate sections,
folds can be uniquely coupled with faults. Examples of
this close association are broad, regional features called
monoclines. Particularly prominent features of the
Colorado Plateau, monoclines (mono = one, kleinen =
incline) are large, step-like folds in otherwise horizontal

E Y E ON E A R T H

Concept Checks

1. Distinguish between anticlines and synclines,
between domes and basins, and between
anticlines and domes.
2. Draw a cross-sectional view of a symmetrical
anticline. Include a line to represent the axial
plane and label both limbs.
3. The Black Hills of South Dakota are a good
example of what type of geologic structure?
4. Where are the youngest rocks in an eroded basin
outcrop: near the center or near the flanks?
5. How do monoclines form?

10.1

T

his image features a large geologic structure, called
Sheep Mountain, that outcrops in north-central
Wyoming. It consists of sedimentary layers that were
folded about 60 million years ago during the Laramide
mountain-building episode. This episode generated
a portion of the Rocky Mountains that stretches from
southern Montana to New Mexico.

A
B

Direction
of
plunge

QUESTION 1 Based on the direction that these folded
sedimentary layers are plunging, would you describe this
fold as a plunging anticline or a plunging syncline? Explain.
QUESTION 2 Are the sedimentary beds located at point A
younger or older than those at point B?
Michael Collier

313

10.4 Faults and Joints: Rock Structures Formed by Brittle Deformation

Faults and Joints: Rock Structures Formed
by Brittle Deformation

10.4

Sketch and briefly describe the relative motion of rock bodies located on
opposite sides of normal, reverse, and thrust faults as well as both types
of strike-slip faults.

Faults form where brittle deformation leads to fracturing and displacement of Earth’s crust. Occasionally, small faults can be recognized in roadcuts where sedimentary beds have been offset less
than a meter, as shown in Figure 10.15. Faults of this scale usually occur as single discrete breaks. By
contrast, large faults, like the San Andreas Fault in California, have displacements of hundreds of
kilometers and consist of many interconnecting fault surfaces. These structures, described as fault
zones, can be several kilometers wide and are often easier to identify from aerial photographs than
at ground level.
Because faults have nearly planar surfaces, geologists
describe their orientations by their strike and dip. Strike
can be defined as the direction of a horizontal line on an
inclined surface. For example, the strike (or trend) of the
San Andreas Fault is in a northwesterly direction. Dip
is the angle of inclination of a surface measured from a
horizontal plane. The San Andreas is nearly vertical, so it
has a dip, or inclination, of about 90 degrees. By contrast,
some faults are nearly horizontal, with dips of 10 degrees
or less.
Strike and dip can be used to describe the orientation of sedimentary layers, dikes, joints, and other planar
structures, in addition to faults. For example, the hinge
and limbs of an anticline can be described by their strike
and dip. How strike and dip are used to map geologic
structures is considered later in this chapter.

Fault

Offset
layer

Half arrows
show sense
of slip
SmartFigure 10.15
Faults are fractures along which
slip has occurred (Photo by
E. J. Tarbuck) (https://goo.gl/vFFfSV)

Dip-Slip Faults
Faults in which movement is primarily parallel to the
dip (inclination) of the fault surface are called dip-slip
faults. Geologists identify the rock surface immediately
above the fault surface as the hanging wall block and
the rock below the fault as the footwall block (Figure
10.16). These names were first used by prospectors and
miners who excavated metallic ore deposits such as gold
that had precipitated from hydrothermal solutions along
inactive fault zones. The miners would walk on the rocks
below the mineralized fault zone (the footwall block) and
hang their lanterns on the rocks above (the hanging wall
block).

Normal Faults Dip-slip faults are classified as normal
faults when the hanging wall block moves down relative to the footwall block (Figure 10.17). Normal faults are
found in a variety of sizes. Some are small, having displacements of only a meter or so, like the one shown in
the roadcut in Figure 10.15. Others, however, extend for
tens of kilometers and
may sinuously trace
the boundary
of a mountain
front. Most large
Fault
normal faults
have relatively
Hanging wall
steep dips that
block
tend to flatten out with
depth. Normal
faults tend to
be associated
Footwall
with tensional
block
stresses that
pull rock units
apart, thereby
lengthening the

SmartFigure 10.16
Hanging wall block and
footwall block The rock
immediately above a fault
surface is the hanging wall
block, and the one below
is the footwall block. These
names came from miners
who excavated ore deposits that formed along fault
zones. The miners hung their
lanterns on the rocks above
the fault trace (hanging wall
block) and walked on the
rocks below the fault trace
(footwall block).
(http://goo.gl/RblGZH)

314

CHAPTER 10

Crustal Deformation

SmartFigure 10.17
Normal dip-slip faults The
upper diagram illustrates
the relative displacement
that occurs between the
blocks on either side of a
normal dip-slip fault; the
hanging wall block drops
relative to the footwall
block. The lower diagram
shows how erosion may
alter the up-faulted block.
_TT36


to 5000 feet) above the adjacent down-faulted basins.
One exception is the Panamint Range, which rises 3368
meters above sea level—more than 11,000 feet above the
floor of Death Valley, which lies directly to the east.
Basin and Range Province topography evolved
in association with a system of normal faults trending
roughly north–south. Movements along these faults
produced alternating uplifted fault blocks called horsts
(horst = hill) and down-dropped blocks called grabens
(graben = ditch). Horsts form the ranges and are the
source of sediments that have accumulated in the basins
created by the grabens. As Figure 10.18 illustrates, structures called half-grabens, which are tilted fault blocks,
also contribute to the alternating topographic highs and
lows in the Basin and Range Province.
Also notice in Figure 10.18 that the slopes of the
large normal faults associated with the Basin and Range
Province decrease with depth and eventually join to
form a nearly horizontal fault called a detachment
fault. These faults represent a major boundary between
the rocks below, which exhibit ductile deformation,
and the rocks above, which exhibit mainly brittle
deformation.

Before erosion

TENSIONAL STRESS

(https://goo.gl/FzUys7)

Footwall
block

Hanging wall
block

After erosion

Normal faults are dip-slip faults in which the hanging
wall block moves down relative to the footwall block.

crust. This “pulling apart” can be accomplished either by
uplifting that causes the surface to stretch and break or
by horizontal forces that have opposing orientations.
In the western United States, large normal faults
are associated with structures called fault-block mountains. Excellent examples of faultblock mountains are found in the
Basin and Range Province, a region
that encompasses Nevada and portions of the surrounding states (Figure 10.18). Here the crust has been
elongated and broken to create more
Graben
than 200 relatively small mountain
ranges. Averaging about 80 kilometers (50 miles) in length, the ranges
rise 900 to 1500 meters (3000

Reverse and Thrust Faults Dip-slip faults in which
the hanging wall block moves up relative to the footwall
block are called reverse faults (Figure 10.19). A type of
reverse fault having a dip less than 45 degrees is called
a thrust fault. Reverse and thrust faults result from

Horst

SmartFigure 10.18
Normal faulting in the Basin and Range Province Here, tensional
stresses have elongated and fractured the crust into numerous
blocks. Movement along these faults has tilted the blocks, producing
parallel mountain ranges called fault-block mountains. The downfaulted blocks (grabens) form basins, whereas the up-faulted blocks
(horsts) erode to form rugged mountainous topography. In addition,
numerous tilted blocks (half-grabens) form both basins and mountains. (Photo by Michael Collier) (http://goo.gl/FbBhca)

Fault-block
mountains

Extension
Horst
Half
graben

Detachment fault

Horst
Graben

315

10.4 Faults and Joints: Rock Structures Formed by Brittle Deformation

compressional stresses that produce horizontal shortening of the crust.
Most high-angle reverse faults are small and accommodate local displacements in regions dominated by
other types of faulting. Thrust faults, on the other hand,
exist at all scales, with some large thrust faults having displacements ranging from tens to hundreds of
kilometers. When thrust faults are oriented at a very low
angle, the hanging wall block can be thrust nearly horizontally over the footwall block.
Thrust faulting is most pronounced along convergent
plate boundaries. Compressional forces associated with
colliding plates generally create folds as well as thrust
faults that thicken and shorten the crust to produce mountainous topography. Examples of mountainous belts produced by this type of compressional tectonics include the
Alps, Northern Rockies, Himalayas, and Appalachians.
Montana’s Glacier National Park, located in the
Northern Rockies, is a classic site of thrust faulting (Figure
10.20). Mountain peaks that provide the park’s majestic
scenery have been carved mainly from a thick sheet of Precambrian limestones that were displaced, as essentially one
unit, over much younger Cretaceous shale deposits. This
block of sedimentary rock was 6 kilometers (4 miles) thick
and slid a distance of about 100 kilometers (60 miles) along
the Lewis Thrust Fault. At the eastern edge of Glacier
National Park is a peak called Chief Mountain. This wellknown landmark is an isolated remnant of a thrust sheet
that was severed by the erosional forces of glacial ice and

SmartFigure 10.19
Reverse faults Reverse
faults are a type of dipslip fault generated by
compressional stresses
that displace the hanging
wall block upward relative
to the footwall block. (https://

Before erosion
COMPRESSIONAL STRESS

Hanging wall
block

After erosion

Footwall
block

Reverse faults are dip-slip faults in which the hanging wall
block moves up relative to the footwall block.

running water. An isolated block, like Chief Mountain, is
called a klippe (klippe = cliff) (Figure 10.20D).

Strike-Slip Faults
A fault in which the dominant displacement is horizontal
and parallel to the strike (trend) of the fault surface is called

SmartFigure 10.20

A. Geologic setting prior to thrust faulting
Stress
Incipient thrust fault

Precambrian
rocks

Stress

Cretaceous
rocks

B. Movement along the Lewis
Thrust Fault displaced mainly
Precambrian rocks over Cretaceous
strata in what is now Glacier
National Park, Montana.

Glacier
National
Park

Development of the Lewis Thrust Fault Large-scale movement
along the Lewis Thrust Fault displaced Precambrian rock over
Cretaceous strata in what is now Glacier National Park, Montana.
(Photo by Phillippe Clement/AGE/Fotostock) (https://goo.gl/0gl6HB)

Stress
Thrust fault

C. Erosion sculpted the thrust
sheet into a majestic landscape
and created an isolated remnant
of the thrust sheet called Chief
Mountain.

goo.gl/6ngGC7)

Precambrian

s
rock

Lewis Thrust Fault

Stress

Cretaceous
rocks

Chief
Mountain

ocks
brian r s
m
a
c
e
r
P
oc k
eous r
Cretac

D. Chief Mountain in Glacier National
Park, Montana, is a klippe.

316

CHAPTER 10

Crustal Deformation

Figure 10.21
Strike-slip faulting
A. The block diagram illustrates the features associated with large strike-slip
faults. Notice how the
stream channels have been
offset by fault movement.
B. Aerial view of the San
Andreas Fault. (Photo by D.

Offset drainage
Linear valley
Sag pond

A.

Parker/Science Source)

Active
fault traces
San
Andreas
Fault

B.

between two tectonic plates. These large strike-slip
faults are called transform faults (trans = across,
forma = form). Numerous transform faults cut the oceanic lithosphere and link spreading oceanic ridges. Others accommodate displacement between continental
blocks that slip horizontally past each other. Some
of the best-known transform faults include California’s San Andreas Fault, New Zealand’s Alpine
Fault, the Middle East’s Dead Sea Fault, and
Turkey’s North Anatolian Fault. Large transform
Inactive
fault traces faults, like the San Andreas, accommodate relative
displacements of up to several hundred kilometers
(see GEOgraphics 10.1).
Rather than being a single fracture along which
movement takes place, most continental transform faults
consist of a zone of roughly parallel fractures. The zone
may be up to several kilometers wide. The most recent
movement, however, is often along a strand only a few
meters wide, which may offset features such as stream
channels (Figure 10.21). Crushed and broken rocks produced during faulting are more easily eroded, so depressions such as linear valleys or sag ponds often mark the
locations of large strike-slip faults.

a strike-slip fault (Figure 10.21). The earliest scientific
records of strike-slip faulting were made following surface
ruptures that produced large earthquakes. One of the most
noteworthy of these was the great San Francisco earthquake
of 1906. During this strong earthquake, structures such as
fences and roads that were built across the San Andreas Fault
were displaced as much as 4.7 meters (15 feet).

Right- and Left-Lateral Strike-Slip Faults Because
movement along the San Andreas Fault causes the
crustal block on the opposite side of the fault to move to
the right as you face the fault, it is called a right-lateral
strike-slip fault (Figure 10.21). The Great Glen Fault in
Scotland, which exhibits the opposite sense of displacement, is a well-known example of a left-lateral strikeslip fault. The total displacement along the Great Glen
Fault is estimated to exceed 100 kilometers (60 miles).
Also associated with this fault trace are numerous lakes,
including Loch Ness, home of the legendary monster.
Transform Faults

Some strike-slip faults slice
through Earth’s crust and accommodate motion

SmartFigure 10.22
Oblique-slip faults
Oblique-slip faults exhibit
a combination of dip-slip
and strike-slip movement.

TENSIONAL STRESS

(https://goo.gl/09SLpI)

SHEAR STRESS

SHEAR STRESS

Oblique-Slip Faults
Faults that exhibit both dip-slip and strike-slip movement, called oblique-slip faults, are caused by a combination of shearing and tensional or compressional stress
(Figure 10.22). Nearly all faults have minor components
of both dip-slip and strike-slip movement, so defining a
fault as oblique requires that both types of slip be significant enough to be observed and measured.

What Do Faults Have in Common?
Although we classify faults based on the relative movement of the rocks on opposite sides of the fault surface,
the same processes generate all types of faults. Faults are
a type of brittle deformation that results when stress surpasses the strength of a rock body, causing rock on one
side of the fault to move relative to rock on the opposite
side. Therefore, although faults vary considerably in size,
they all exhibit similar characteristics.

Faults and Earthquakes Sudden displacement along
any fault can produce an earthquake, although normal
faults are not generally associated with large earthquakes.
Some of the most destructive earthquakes occur along
large strike-slip faults, like the San Andreas. One of the
most noteworthy of these was the earthquake that struck
near Port-au-Prince, Haiti, in 2010. During this strong
earthquake, an estimated 230,000 people lost their lives,
and 300,000 homes were destroyed (Figure 10.23).
Even larger earthquakes have been recorded along
low-angle thrust faults. The most destructive thrust faults

317

10.4 Faults and Joints: Rock Structures Formed by Brittle Deformation

Figure 10.23
Destruction in Port-auPrince, Haiti, following a
devastating earthquake
in January 2010. (Photo by
Orlando Barria/EFE/Newscom)

form a convergent plate boundary between a subducting
slab of oceanic lithosphere and the overlying plate. This
type of thrust fault is so large and destructive it is called
a megathrust fault. Megathrust faults lie beneath the
ocean floor and can displace
the overlying water, generating destructive tsunamis.
Megathrust faults have produced the majority of Earth’s
most powerful earthquakes,
including the 2011 Japan
quake and the 2004 Indian
Ocean quake near Sumatra.
Up-faulted

earthquakes. Occasionally, horizontal movement along
a strike-slip fault produces a fault scarp when an area of
higher ground is displaced next to lower terrain.
Figure 10.24
Fault scarp This fault
scarp was created during
the Alaska earthquake of
1964. (Photo courtesy of the
USGS)

Fault scarp

Fault Scarps Vertical displacements along faults
may produce long, low cliffs
called fault scarps
(scarpe = slope). Fault scarps,
such as the one shown in
Figure 10.24, are usually
generated by rapid vertical
displacements associated with

Down-faulted

USGS

320

CHAPTER 10

Crustal Deformation

Figure 10.25
Slickensides As two rock
bodies slide past one
another, their fault surfaces
often become polished and
grooved into slickensides.

Slickensides
Fault

(Photo by E. J. Tarbuck)

Slickensides

The majority of fault surfaces that
have been uplifted and exposed by erosion are remnants of past deformation. On some of these fault
surfaces, the rocks became highly polished and
striated, or grooved, as the crustal blocks slide past
one another. These polished and striated surfaces,
called slickensides (sliken = smooth), provide geologists with evidence for the direction of the most
recent displacement along the fault (Figure 10.25). By
swiping your hand back and forth across these surfaces, the direction of relative movement should be
obvious.

Joints
Among the most common rock structures are fractures called joints. Unlike faults, joints are fractures
along which no appreciable displacement has occurred.
Although some joints have a random orientation, most
occur in roughly parallel groups.
We have already considered two types of joints.
Recall from Chapter 4 that columnar joints form when
igneous rocks cool and develop shrinkage fractures
that produce elongated, pillarlike columns (see Figure
4.31, page 132). In addition, recall from Chapter 6 that

E Y E ON E A R T H

sheeting produces a pattern of gently curved joints that
develop more or less parallel to the surface of large
exposed igneous bodies such as batholiths. Here the
jointing results from the gradual expansion that occurs
when erosion removes the overlying load and reduces
pressure on the rock.
Most joints are produced when rocks in the outermost crust are deformed, causing the rock to fail by
brittle fracture. Extensive joint patterns often develop in
response to relatively subtle and often barely perceptible
regional upwarping and downwarping of the crust. In
many cases, the cause of jointing at a particular locale is
not particularly obvious.
Many rocks are broken by two or even three sets of
intersecting joints that slice the rock into numerous regularly shaped blocks. These joint sets often exert a strong
influence on other geologic processes. For example,
chemical weathering tends to be concentrated along
joints, and joint patterns influence how groundwater
moves through the crust (Figure 10.26).
Joints may also be significant from an economic
standpoint. Some of the world’s largest and most important mineral deposits are located along joint systems.
Hydrothermal solutions (mineralized fluids) can migrate
into fractured host rocks and precipitate economically
significant amounts of copper, silver, gold, zinc, lead, and
uranium.
Highly jointed rocks present a risk to construction
projects, including bridges, highways, and dams. On
June 5, 1976, the Teton Dam in Idaho failed, taking 14
lives and causing nearly $1 billion in property damage. This
earthen dam, constructed of very erodible clays and silts,
was situated on highly fractured volcanic rocks. Although
attempts were made to fill the voids in the jointed rock,
water gradually penetrated the subsurface fractures and
undermined the dam’s foundation. Eventually the moving
water cut a tunnel into the easily erodible clays and silts.
Within minutes the dam failed, sending a 20-meter- (65foot-) high wall of water down the Teton and Snake Rivers.

10.2

T

his satellite image shows an area just south of the
Tien Shan Mountains, China. The distinctive red,
green, and cream-colored bands are sedimentary
rock layers that were tilted by compressional forces as
various landmasses collided with southern Asia. Also
visible in this image is the Piqiang Fault, which runs roughly
perpendicular to the colored sedimentary layer for about
70 kilometers (40 miles).

Piqiang Fault

QUESTION 1 What type of fault is the Piqiang Fault?
QUESTION 2 Is it a right-lateral or left-lateral fault?

NASA

321

10.5 Mapping Geologic Structures

10.4

Concept Checks

1. Contrast the movements that occur along normal
faults and along reverse faults. What type of
stress is indicated by each fault?
2. What type of faults are associated with faultblock mountains?
3. How are reverse faults different from thrust
faults?

Figure 10.26 Nearly parallel joints in the Navajo
Sandstone, Arches National Park, Utah Weathering and
erosion along the joints have produced a topography known in
the park as “fins.” (Photo by Michael Collier)

10.5

4. Describe the relative movement along a strikeslip fault.
5. How are joints different from faults?

Mapping Geologic Structures
Explain how strike and dip are measured and how these measurements tell
geologists about the orientations of rock structures located mainly below Earth’s
surface.
_TT37


By studying the orientations of faults, folds, and tilted sedimentary formations, geologists can often
reconstruct the original geologic setting and determine the nature of the forces that generated
these structures. In this way, the complex events of Earth’s geologic history are unraveled.
Frequently, structures are so large that only a small portion is visible from any particular vantage point. In many
situations, most of the bedrock is concealed by vegetation or buried by recent sedimentation. Consequently,
reconstruction must be done using data gathered from a
limited number of outcrops of exposed bedrock. Despite
these challenges, a number of mapping techniques
enable geologists to infer the shape and orientation of
rock structures below the surface. In recent years this
work has been aided by advances in aerial photography,
satellite imagery, and the development of the Global
Positioning System (GPS). In addition, seismic reflection
profiling (see Chapter 12) and drill holes provide data on
the composition and orientation of rock structures that
lie at depth.

In the previous section you learned that geologists
use strike (trend) and dip (inclination) to describe the
orientation of planar rock features, such as sedimentary
bedding and fault surfaces (Figure 10.27). In addition, by
knowing the strike and dip of rocks at the surface, geologists can predict the nature and structure of rock units
hidden beneath the surface.
Strike is the compass bearing (direction) of the
line produced by the intersection of an inclined rock
layer (or fault) with a horizontal surface (Figure 10.27).
The strike is generally expressed as an angle relative to

Dip

S

ion

°

Strike/dip
symbol
30

Sedimentary rock units, because they are
usually deposited in horizontal layers, are
most useful when studying rock deformation. If the sedimentary rock layers
are horizontal, geologists infer that
the area is undisturbed structurally. Inclined, bent, or broken
strata indicate that a period of
deformation occurred following deposition.

N

Li
st ne o
rik f
e

Strike and Dip

Strike and dip of rock
layers

E

W

dir
ect

Figure 10.27

Strike
N 42°E

N

Dip angle 30°

Horizontal
plane

322

CHAPTER 10

Crustal Deformation

Figure 10.28
Mapping geologic
structures By establishing the strike and dip of
outcropping sedimentary
beds and placing symbols
on a map, geologists can
infer the orientation of the
rock structures below the
surface.

north. For example, N10°E means the line of strike is
10 degrees to the east of north.
Dip is the angle of inclination of the surface of a
rock unit or fault, measured from a horizontal surface.
Dip includes both an angle of inclination and a direction
toward which the rock is inclined. In Figure 10.27 the
dip angle of the rock layer is 30 degrees. The direction of
dip is always at a 90-degree angle to the strike.
When doing field research, geologists measure the
strike and dip of sedimentary strata at as many outcrops as practical (Figure 10.28A). These data are then
plotted on a topographic map or an aerial photograph,
using T-shaped symbols. In laboratories, this information, as well as notes about the rock units, is used to
prepare graphical depictions of the study area, called
geologic maps. Figure 10.28B shows a simplified geologic map of the study area. Geologic maps are valuable tools used to infer the orientation and shape of
buried rock structures (Figure 10.28C). Using this information, geologists can reconstruct the pre-erosional
structures and begin to interpret the region’s geologic
history. Geologic maps are also used to aid in extracting mineral resources and assessing hazards, such as
the potential for groundwater contamination from a
proposed disposal site.

76° 40°

30°

76°

Outcrops

30°

40°

A. Study area
76°

30°

40°

30°

40°

76°

B. Geologic map

76°

30°

40°

10.5

m

e

on

e

ale

st

nd

sh

on

ne

to

st

nd

es

d

Sa

Re

Sa

m

le

ne

sto

nd

Li

Sa

ha

ds

Re

Li

es

Concept Checks

to

ne

1. Distinguish between the two measurements used
to establish the orientation of deformed strata.

C. Block diagram

2. Briefly describe the method geologists use to
infer the orientation of rock structures that lie
mainly below Earth’s surface.

11
Earthquakes
and
Earthquake
Hazards

Tsunami striking the coast of Japan on March 11, 2011.
(Photo by Sadatsugu Tomizawa/AFP/Getty Images)

O

Figure 11.1
Presidential palace damaged during the 2010
Haiti earthquake (Photo by
Luis Acosta/AFP/Getty Images)

n January 12, 2010, an estimated 316,000 people lost their lives when
a magnitude 7.0 earthquake struck the small Caribbean nation of Haiti, the poorest
country in the Western Hemisphere. In addition to the staggering death toll, more
than 300,000 people were injured, and more than 280,000 houses were destroyed
or damaged. The quake originated only 25 kilometers (15 miles) from the country’s
densely populated capital city of Port-au-Prince (Figure 11.1). It occurred along a San
Andreas–like fault system at a depth of just 10 kilometers (6 miles). Because of the
quake’s shallow depth, ground shaking was exceptional for an event of this magnitude.
Other factors that contributed to the Port-au-Prince disaster included the city’s
geologic setting and the nature of its buildings. The city is built on sediment, which is
quite susceptible to ground shaking during an earthquake. More importantly, inadequate
or nonexistent building codes meant that buildings collapsed far more readily than
they should have. At least 52 aftershocks, measuring magnitude 4.5 or greater, jolted
the area and added to the trauma that survivors experienced for days after the original
quake. An earthquake’s magnitude (abbreviation: M) is a measure of earthquake
strength that will be discussed later in this chapter.

329

11.1 What Is an Earthquake?

Is an Earthquake?
11.1 What
Sketch and describe the mechanism that generates most earthquakes.
An earthquake is ground shaking caused by the sudden and rapid movement of one block of rock
slipping past another along fractures in Earth’s crust called faults. Most faults are locked, except
for brief, abrupt movements when sudden slippage produces an earthquake. Faults are locked
because the confining pressure exerted by the overlying crust is enormous, causing these fractures
in the crust to be “squeezed shut.”
Earthquakes tend to occur along preexisting faults where
internal stresses cause the crustal rocks to rupture or
break into two or more units. The location where slippage
begins is called the hypocenter, or focus. Earthquake
waves radiate from this spot outward into the surrounding rock. The point on Earth’s surface directly above the
hypocenter is called the epicenter (Figure 11.2).
Large earthquakes release huge amounts of stored-up
energy as seismic waves—a form of energy that travels
through the lithosphere and Earth’s interior. The energy
carried by these waves causes the material that transmits
them to shake. Seismic waves are analogous to waves produced when a stone is dropped into a calm pond. Just as
the impact of the stone creates a pattern of circular waves,
an earthquake generates waves that radiate outward in all
directions from the hypocenter. Although seismic energy
dissipates rapidly as it moves away from the quake’s hypocenter, sensitive instruments can detect earthquakes even
when they occur on the opposite side of Earth.
Thousands of earthquakes occur around the world
every day. Fortunately, most are small and cannot be
detected by people. Of these, only about 15 strong earthquakes (magnitude 7 or greater) are recorded each year,
many of them occurring in remote regions. Occasionally,
a large earthquake is triggered near a major population center. Such events are among the most destructive
San Francisco in flames following the 1906 quake.
Broken water mains left firefighters without water.

Fault trace

Figure 11.2
Earthquakes hypocenter and epicenter The
hypocenter is the zone
at depth where the initial
displacement occurs. The
epicenter is the surface
location directly above the
hypocenter.

Epicenter
Fault

Seismic
waves
Hypocenter
(focus)

natural forces on Earth. The shaking of the ground,
coupled with the liquefaction of soils, wreaks havoc on
buildings, roadways, and other structures. In addition,
when a quake occurs in a populated area, power and gas
lines are often ruptured, causing numerous fires. In the
famous 1906 San Francisco earthquake, much of the
damage was caused by fires that became uncontrollable
when broken water mains left firefighters with only trickles of water (Figure 11.3).
Figure 11.3
Earthquakes can trigger fires
(Reproduced from the collection of the Library
of Congress; inset photo by Hal Garb/AFP/
Getty Images)

Fire triggered when a gas line
ruptured during the Northridge
earthquake in southern California
in 1994.

330

CHAPTER 11

Earthquakes and Earthquake Hazards

Discovering the Causes
of Earthquakes
The energy released by volcanic eruptions, massive
landslides, and meteorite impacts can generate earthquake-like waves, but these events are usually weak.
What mechanism produces a destructive earthquake?
As you have learned, Earth is not a static planet.
Because fossils of marine organisms have been discovered thousands of meters above sea level, we know
that large sections of Earth’s crust have been thrust
upward. Other regions, such as California’s Death Valley, exhibit evidence of extensive subsidence. In addition to these vertical displacements, offsets in fences,
roads, and other structures indicate that horizontal
movements between blocks of Earth’s crust are also
common (Figure 11.4).
The actual mechanism of earthquake generation
eluded geologists until H. F. Reid conducted a landmark
study following the 1906 San Francisco earthquake. This
earthquake was accompanied by horizontal surface displacements of several meters along the northern portion
of the San Andreas Fault. Field studies determined that
during this single earthquake, the Pacific plate lurched as
much as 9.7 meters (32 feet) northward past the adjacent
North American plate. To better visualize this, imagine
standing on one side of the fault and watching a person
on the other side suddenly slide horizontally 32 feet to
your right.

Figure 11.4
Displacement of structures along a fault (Color
photo by John S. Shelton/University of Washington Libraries; inset
photo by G. K. Gilbert/USGS)

What Reid concluded from his investigations is
illustrated in Figure 11.5. Over tens to hundreds of
years, differential stress slowly bends the crustal rocks
on both sides of a fault. This is much like a person
bending a limber wooden stick, as shown in Figure
11.5A,B. Frictional resistance keeps the fault from rupturing and slipping. (Friction inhibits slippage and is
enhanced by irregularities that occur along the fault
surface.) At some point, the stress along the fault overcomes the frictional resistance, and slip initiates. Slippage allows the deformed (bent) rock to “snap back” to
its original, stress-free, shape; a series of earthquake
waves radiate as it slides (Figure 11.5C,D). Reid termed
this “springing back” elastic rebound because the
rock behaves elastically, much as a stretched rubber
band does when it is released.

Aftershocks and Foreshocks
Strong earthquakes are followed by numerous earthquakes of lesser magnitude, called aftershocks, which
result from crust along the fault surface adjusting to
the displacement caused by the main shock. Aftershocks gradually diminish in frequency and intensity
over a period of several months following an earthquake. In a little more than a month following the
2010 Haiti earthquake, the U.S. Geological Survey
detected nearly 60 aftershocks with magnitudes of 4.5
or greater. The two largest aftershocks had magnitudes
of 6.0 and 5.9, both large
enough to inflict damage.
Hundreds of minor tremors
were also felt.
Although aftershocks are
weaker than the main earthquake, they often trigger the

d
uce
prod ve
t
l
u
fa e gro
ga
g
alon n oran fornia.
e
g
a
a
li
p
a
n
i
p
Sli offset xico, C
e
s
l
i
a
h
t
of C
east

This fence was offset
2.5 meters (8.5 feet)
during the1906 San
Francisco earthquake.

11.1 What Is an Earthquake?

Ti m e

Tens to hundreds of years

Deformation of rocks

Deformation of a
limber stick

SmartFigure 11.5
Elastic rebound
(https://goo.gl/ooefwf)

A. Original position of rocks on opposite sides of a fault.

Seconds to a few minutes

B. The movement of tectonic plates causes the rocks to
bend and store elastic energy.

C. Once the strength of the rocks is exceeded, slippage
along the fault produces an earthquake.

D. The rocks return to their original shape, but in a new
location.

destruction of already weakened structures. For example,
in northwestern Armenia in 1988, where many people
lived in large apartment buildings constructed of brick
and concrete slabs, a moderate earthquake of magnitude
6.9 weakened many structures, and a strong aftershock of
magnitude 5.8 completed the demolition.
In contrast to aftershocks, small earthquakes called
foreshocks often, but not always, precede major earthquakes by days or, in some cases, several years. Monitoring of foreshocks to predict forthcoming earthquakes has
been attempted with only limited success.

11.1

Concept Checks

1. What is an earthquake? Under what
circumstances do most large earthquakes occur?
2. How are faults, hypocenters, and epicenters
related?
3. Who was first to explain the mechanism by which
most earthquakes are generated?
4. Explain what is meant by elastic rebound.

331

332

CHAPTER 11

Earthquakes and Earthquake Hazards

11.2

Faults and Earthquakes
List the basic fault types and describe the tectonic setting where each type of
faulting tends to dominate.

Earthquakes occur along both new and preexisting faults, in places where differential stresses cause
Earth’s crust to break. Some of these faults are large and capable of generating major earthquakes.
One example is the San Andreas Fault, which is the strike-slip fault that separates two great sections of Earth’s lithosphere: the North American plate and the Pacific plate.
The slippage that occurs along faults can be explained by
the plate tectonics theory, which states that large slabs
of Earth’s lithosphere are continually grinding past one
another. These mobile plates interact with neighboring
plates, straining and deforming the rocks at their edges.
Faults associated with plate boundaries are the source of
most earthquakes.

Normal Faults and Divergent Plate
Boundaries
Recall from Chapter 10 that there are three basic
types of faults: normal faults, reverse faults (including
thrust faults), and strike-slip faults. Normal faults
occur where tensional stress causes Earth’s crust to be
stretched and elongated. Therefore, most earthquakes
along normal faults are associated with divergent plate
boundaries, mainly seafloor spreading centers and continental rifts. Although common, normal faults are not
generally associated with large earthquakes.

Thrust Faults and Convergent
Plate Boundaries
Strong earthquakes also occur along large faults associated with convergent plate boundaries. Compressional
forces associated with continental collisions that result
in mountain building generate numerous reverse
faults and thrust faults. Displacement along reverse
and thrust faults result in the rocks above a fault being
Figure 11.6
Megathrust faults are the
sites of Earth’s largest
earthquakes Convergent
plate boundaries are the
sites where one plate
is subducting beneath
another, producing
some of Earth’s largest
earthquakes.

Compressional
stresses

Thrust faults

forced (or thrust) over the rocks below the fault surface (Figure 11.6). The April 25, 2015, earthquake (M7.8)
in Nepal, which took the lives of more than 7000
people, is an example of an earthquake that occurred
along a thrust fault. This thrust fault is on or near the
plate boundary between the subducting India plate
and the overriding Eurasian plate to the north. The
epicenter of the quake was located about 80 kilometers
(50 miles) north of the Nepalese capital of Kathmandu,
where the India plate is converging with the Eurasian
plate at a rate of 4.5 centimeters (about 2 inches) per
year, driving the uplift of the Himalayas.
In addition, the plate boundary between a subducting slab of oceanic lithosphere and the overlying
plate form a fault referred to as a megathrust fault
(see Figure 11.6). Because these large thrust faults
lie partially beneath the ocean floor, movement along
these faults may displace the overlying seawater, generating destructive tsunamis. Megathrust faults have
produced the majority of Earth’s most powerful and
destructive earthquakes, including the 2011 Japan
quake (M 9.0), the 2004 Indian Ocean (Sumatra)
quake (M 9.1), the 1964 Alaska quake (M 9.2), and the
largest earthquake yet recorded, the 1960 Chile quake
(M 9.5).

Strike-slip Faults and Transform
Plate Boundaries

Faults in which the dominant displacement is horizontal
and parallel to the strike (direcThrust faults are associated with subduction
tion) of the fault surface are
zones and continental collisions.
called strike-slip faults.
Large strike-slip faults that
slice through Earth’s lithoMegathrust
sphere and accommodate
fault
motion between two tectonic
plates are called transform
faults. For example, the
Overriding
plate
San Andreas Fault is a large
strike-slip fault that separates the North American
te
pla
plate and the Pacific plate.
g
n
cti
Most transform faults,
du
b
Su
including the San Andreas
Fault, are not perfectly straight

333

11.2 Faults and Earthquakes

Fa

Rupture
surface

as

During an earthquake the initial slippage
begins at the hypocenter.

dre

Slippage along large faults does not occur instantaneously. The initial slip begins at the hypocenter and
propagates (travels) along the fault surface, at 2 to 4 kilometers per second—faster than a rifle shot (Figure 11.8).
Slippage on one section of the fault adds strain to the
adjacent segment, which may also slip. As this zone of
slippage advances, it can slow down, speed up, or even
jump to a nearby fault segment. The propagation of the
rupture zone along a fault that is 300 kilometers (200
miles) long, for example, takes about 1.5 minutes, and it
takes about 30 seconds for a fault that is 100 kilometers
(60 miles) long. Earthquake waves are generated at every
point along the fault as that portion of the fault begins to
slip.
Although a rupture can propagate in both horizontal
directions from the hypocenter, it often travels mainly
in one direction. For example, during the 1906 San

ul

Rupture
surface

t

Pacific
plate
Los Angeles

Francisco earthquake, the rupture began near the southern end of the 477-kilometer (296-mile) rupture zone of
the San Andreas Fault and traveled mainly northward.
In contrast, the 1857 Fort Tejon earthquake, one of the
largest U.S. earthquakes, began at the northern end of
the rupture zone, and the zone of slippage propagated
southward.
Moderate earthquakes result from slippage along
relatively small faults or small segments of large faults.
The amount of displacement on the fault surface, called
fault slip, is typically no more than a few meters. By
contrast, during the largest earthquakes, fault slips of
50 meters (160 feet) have been observed. The maximum
displacement during the 2011 earthquake in Japan is
estimated to have exceeded 40 meters (130 feet), one of
the largest yet measured. In addition, the fault surface
that ruptures during a large quake can exceed 1000
kilometers (620 miles) in length. Therefore, the ground
shaking produced by large earthquakes is not only

The rupture surface propagates (travels)
along the fault surface, at a rate of 2 to 3
kilometers per second.

Hypocenter

Transform plate boundaries and large earthquakes The San Andreas
Fault is a large fault system
separating the Pacific
plate from the North
American plate. These
large strike-slip faults are
called transform faults and
can generate destructive
earthquakes.

North
American
plate

San
Francisco

An

Fault Rupture and Propagation

Figure 11.7

Sa n

or continuous; instead, they consist of numerous branches
and smaller fractures that display kinks and offsets (Figure
11.7). In addition, geologists have learned that displacement along transform faults occurs in discrete segments
that often behave differently from one another (see
GEOgraphics 10.1, page 318). Some sections of the San
Andreas Fault exhibit slow, gradual displacement known
as fault creep and produce little seismic shaking. Other
segments slip at relatively closely spaced intervals, producing numerous small to moderate earthquakes. Still
other segments remain locked and store elastic energy for
a few hundred years before they break loose. Ruptures on
these segments usually result in major earthquakes.
Earthquakes that occur along locked segments of the
San Andreas Fault tend to be repetitive. Soon after an
earthquake occurs, strain begins accumulating due to the
continuous motion of the plates on both sides of the fault.
Decades or centuries later, the fault fails again.

The rupture surface continues to grow until it
reaches a section of the fault where the rocks
have not been sufficiently strained to rupture.
Rupture
surface

Hypocenter

Hypocenter

Fault
scarp

Fault
Fault
Fault

Figure 11.8
Fault
propagation

334

Earthquakes and Earthquake Hazards

CHAPTER 11

E Y E ON E A R T H

11.1

T

he Calaveras Fault, a branch of the San Andreas
Fault system, cuts directly through the town of
Hollister, California. Rather than being “locked,”
this section of the fault is slowly slipping, producing
noticeable offsets and damage to curbs, sidewalks,
roads, and buildings. The concrete wall and sidewalk
shown here were straight when they were originally
constructed.

QUESTION 1 What term is used to describe the
phenomenon observed in Hollister along the Calaveras
Fault?

Calaveras Fault

QUESTION 2 Are faults that exhibit this type of slippage
considered likely to generate a major earthquake?
Explain.
QUESTION 3 Based on this image, does this strike-slip
fault exhibit right-lateral or left-lateral motion? (Hint: See
Chapter 10.)

Michael Collier

stronger but also lasts longer than the vibrations produced by slippage along small fault segments.
Why do earthquake ruptures stop rather than continue along the entire fault? Evidence suggests that slippage usually stops when the rupture reaches a section
of the fault where the rocks have not been sufficiently
strained to overcome frictional resistance, such as in
a section of the fault that has recently experienced an
earthquake. The rupture may also stop if it encounters a
large kink, or an offset along the fault surface.

11.3

Ball
dropping

Figure 11.9
Ancient Chinese seismograph During an Earth
tremor, the dragons located
in the direction of the main
vibrations would drop a
ball into the mouth of a
frog below. (Photo by James E.
Patterson Collection)

11.2

Concept Checks

1. What type of fault tends to produce the most
destructive earthquakes?
2. During an earthquake the entire length of a fault
slips in a single event that lasts less than
1 second. True or false?
3. Defend or rebut this statement: Faults that do not
experience fault creep may be considered safe.

Seismology: The Study of Earthquake Waves
Compare and contrast the types of seismic waves and describe the principle of
the seismograph.

The study of earthquake waves, seismology, dates back to attempts made in China almost 2000
years ago to determine the direction from which these waves originated. The earliest-known instrument, invented by Zhang Heng, was a large hollow jar containing a weight suspended from the top
(Figure 11.9). The suspended weight (similar to a clock pendulum) was connected to the jaws of several large dragon figurines that encircled the container. The jaws of each dragon held a metal ball.
When earthquake waves reached the instrument, the relative motion between the suspended mass
and the jar would dislodge some of the metal balls into the waiting mouths of frogs directly below.

Instruments That Record Earthquakes
In principle, modern seismographs, or seismometers,
are similar to the instruments used in ancient China. A
seismograph has a weight freely suspended from a support that is securely attached to bedrock (Figure 11.10).

When vibrations from an earthquake reach the instrument, the inertia of the weight keeps it relatively stationary, while Earth and the support move. Inertia can be
simply described by this statement: Objects at rest tend
to stay at rest, and objects in motion tend to remain in

335

11.3 Seismology: The Study of Earthquake Waves
Seismograph recording
earthquake tremors
Spring
Support
moves

Bedrock
Wire

Rotating
drum

Pivot

Hinge
Suspended
weight

Support

Suspended
weight

B.

Bedrock

Rotating drum

Horizontal
ground motion

Figure 11.11

k
oc

Seismograph designed to record vertical
ground motion

r

d
Be

Vertical ground motion

A.

SmartFigure 11.10

Seismic Waves

Principle of the seismograph The inertia of the suspended weight tends to
keep it motionless while the recording drum, which is anchored to bedrock,
vibrates in response to seismic waves. The stationary weight provides a reference point from which to measure the amount of displacement occurring as
a seismic wave passes through the ground. (Photo courtesy of Zephyr/Science Source)
(https://goo.gl/IuclEa)

Body Waves Body waves are further divided into
two types—called primary waves, or P waves, and
secondary waves, or S waves—and are identified by their
mode of travel through intervening materials. P waves are
“push/pull” waves; they momentarily push (compress) and
S
P
waves waves

SmartFigure 11.12

Surface waves

1
minute

Seismograph #1
Su
rfa
ce

P
waves

wa
v
es

motion, unless acted upon by an outside force. You have
experienced inertia when you have tried to stop your
automobile quickly and your body continued to move
forward.
Earthquakes cause both vertical and horizontal ground
motion; therefore, more than
one type of seismograph is
needed to accurately describe
Hypocenter
the intensity of shaking. The
instrument shown in Figure
11.10 detects horizontal
ground motion, while vertical
P w av es
S waves
ground motion is detected if
the weight is suspended from a
spring, as shown in Figure 11.11.
To detect very weak
earthquakes or a great earthquake that has occurred in
another part of the world,
most seismographs are
designed to amplify ground
motion. In earthquake-prone
areas, the instruments used
are designed to withstand
the violent shaking that
Core
can occur near a quake’s
epicenter.

The records obtained from seismographs,
called seismograms, provide useful
information about the nature of seismic
waves. Seismograms reveal that two main
types of seismic waves are generated by
the slippage of a rock mass. One of these
wave types, called body waves, travel through Earth’s
interior. The other type, called surface waves, travel in
the rock layers just below Earth’s surface (Figure 11.12).

Surface waves

1
minute

P wa
ves
Sw
av es

Sw

S
waves

Seismograph #2

P
waves
av

es

Pw
ave
s

S waves and surface waves
have not yet arrived

1
minute

Seismograph #3
Mantle

Body waves (P and S
waves) versus surface
waves P and S waves
travel through Earth’s interior, while surface waves
travel in the layer directly
below the surface. P waves
are the first to arrive at a
seismic station, followed by
S waves, and then surface
waves. (https://goo.gl/y6owpc)

336

CHAPTER 11

Figure 11.13
The characteristic motion
of P and S waves During
a strong earthquake,
ground shaking consists of
a combination of various
kinds of seismic waves.

Earthquakes and Earthquake Hazards
A. As illustrated by a toy Slinky, P waves alternately compress
and expand the material through which they pass.

B. S waves cause material to oscillate at right angles to the
direction of wave motion.
Rope at rest

Slinky at rest

Shake rope

Push Slinky
Compress
Wave direction
Expand

Particle motion

Wave direction
Compress
Wave direction

Wave direction
Particle motion

Particle motion

pull (stretch) rocks in the direction the wave is traveling
(Figure 11.13A). This wave motion is similar to that generated
by human vocal cords as they move air back and forth to
create sound. Solids, liquids, and gases resist stresses that
change their volume when compressed and, therefore, elastically spring back once the stress is removed. Therefore, P
waves can travel through all these materials.
By contrast, S waves “shake” the particles at right
angles to their direction of travel. This can be illustrated
SmartFigure 11.14
Two types of surface
waves (https://goo.gl/5nRPa8)

A. One type of surface wave travels along
Earth’s surface similar to rolling ocean waves.
The red arrows show the movement of rock as
the wave passes.

Wave motion

by fastening one end of a rope and shaking the other end,
as shown in Figure 11.13B. Unlike P waves, which temporarily change the volume of intervening material by
alternately squeezing and stretching it, S waves change
the shape of the material that transmits them. Because
fluids (gases and liquids) do not resist stresses that cause
changes in shape—meaning fluids do not return to their
original shape once the stress is removed—liquids and
gases do not transmit S waves.

Surface Waves There are two types of surface waves.
One type causes Earth’s surface and anything resting
on it to move, much as ocean swells toss a ship (Figure
11.14A). The second type of surface wave causes Earth’s
materials to move side to side. This motion is particularly damaging to the foundations of structures (Figure
11.14B).
Note the time interval (about 5 minutes) between the arrival
of the first P wave and the arrival of the first S wave.

Wave direction

B. A second type of surface wave moves
the ground from side to side and can be
particularly damaging to building
foundations.

Surface waves
First
P wave

First
S wave

Side to side
motion
1 minute
(Earlier)

Wave direction

Figure 11.15
Typical seismogram

T I M E

(Later)

337

11.4 Locating the Source of an Earthquake

Body Waves Versus Surface Waves By examining
the seismogram shown in Figure 11.15, you can see
that the major difference among seismic waves is
their speed of travel. P waves are the first to arrive
at a recording station, then S waves, and finally
surface waves. Generally, in any solid Earth material,
P waves travel about 1.7 times faster than S waves,
and S waves are roughly 10 percent faster than surface
waves.
In addition to the velocity differences in the waves,
notice in Figure 11.15 that the height, or amplitude,
of these wave types also varies. S waves have slightly
greater amplitudes than P waves, and surface waves
exhibit even greater amplitudes. Surface waves also

11.4

retain their maximum amplitude longer than P and S
waves. As a result, surface waves tend to cause greater
ground shaking and, hence, greater property damage,
than either P or S waves.

11.3

Concept Checks

1. Describe how a seismograph works.
2. List the major differences between P, S, and
surface waves.
3. Which type of seismic waves tends to cause the
greatest destruction to buildings?

Locating the Source of an Earthquake
Explain how seismographs are used to locate the epicenter of an earthquake.

When seismologists analyze an earthquake, they first determine its epicenter, the point on Earth’s
surface directly above the focus (see Figure 11.2). The method used for locating an earthquake’s
epicenter relies on the fact that P waves travel faster than S waves.
The traveling waves are analogous to two racing
automobiles, one faster than the other. The first P
wave, like the faster automobile, always wins the
race, arriving ahead of the first S wave. The greater
the length of the race, the greater the difference in
their arrival times at the finish line (the seismic station). Therefore, the greater the interval between the
arrival of the first P wave and the arrival of the first
S wave, the greater the distance to the epicenter.
Figure 11.16 shows three simplified seismograms for the
same earthquake. Based on the P–S interval, which
city—New York, Nome, or Mexico City—is farthest
from the epicenter?
The system for locating earthquake epicenters was
developed by using seismograms from earthquakes
whose epicenters could be easily pinpointed from
physical evidence. From these seismograms, travel–
time graphs were constructed (Figure 11.17). Using the
sample seismogram for New York in Figure 11.16 and
the travel–time curve in Figure 11.17, we can determine the distance separating the recording station
from the earthquake in three steps:
1.

2.

Using the seismogram for New York, we determine
that the time interval between the arrival of the first
P wave and the arrival of the first S wave is
5 minutes.
Using the travel–time graph, we find the location
where the vertical separation between P and S
curves is equal to the P–S time interval; in this example, it is 5 minutes.

3.

From the position in step 2, we draw a vertical line
that extends to the bottom of the graph and read the
distance to the epicenter.

THREE SEISMOGRAMS
Seismogram A – New York, NY
1 minute

FIRST
P WAVE

FIRST
S WAVE

Seismogram B – Nome, Alaska

FIRST
P WAVE

FIRST
S WAVE

Seismogram C – Mexico City, Mexico

FIRST
P WAVE

FIRST
S WAVE

Figure 11.16
Seismograms of the same
earthquake recorded at
three different locations

338

CHAPTER 11

Earthquakes and Earthquake Hazards

Figure 11.17

Using these steps, we determine that the earthquake
occurred 3700 kilometers (2300 miles) from the recording instrument in New York City.
Now we know the distance, but what about
direction? The epicenter could be in any direction from
the seismic station. Using a method called triangulation,
we can determine the location when we know the distance from two or more additional seismic stations (Figure
11.18). On a map or globe, a circle is drawn around each
seismic station. The radius of these circles is equal to the
distance from the seismic station to the epicenter. The
point where the three circles intersect is the approximate
epicenter of the quake.

TRAVEL-TIME GRAPH

Travel–time graph A
travel–time graph is used to
determine the distance to
an earthquake’s epicenter.
The difference in arrival
times of the first P and
S waves in the example
shown is 5 minutes.

Distance from epicenter in miles
1000
2000
3000

17
16
15
14
13

Time in minutes since earthquake

12
11
10

5 min. time
interval

S-WAVE CURVE

9
8
7
6

11.4

P-WAVE CURVE

5

1. What information does a travel–time graph
provide?

4
3

2. Briefly describe the triangulation method used to
determine the epicenter of an earthquake.

2
1
0

Concept Checks

1000

2000
3000
4000
5000
Distance from epicenter in kilometers

6000

Figure 11.18
Triangulation to locate an
earthquake This method
involves using the distance
obtained from three or
more seismic stations to
establish the location of an
earthquake.

Nome

m
4400 k
iles
2750 m

Epicenter

New York
0 km
370 iles
0m
230

2900 km
1800 mi

0
0

1000
1000

2000
2000

3000

Mexico City

3000 MILES
4000

5000 KILOMETERS

11.5 Determining the Size of an Earthquake

Determining the Size of an Earthquake

11.5

Distinguish between intensity scales and magnitude scales.

Seismologists use a variety of methods to determine two fundamentally different measures that
describe the size of an earthquake: intensity and magnitude. The first of these to be used was
intensity—a measure of the amount of ground shaking at a particular location, based on observed
property damage. Later, the development of seismographs allowed scientists to measure ground
motion using instruments. This quantitative measurement, called magnitude, relies on data
gleaned from seismic records to estimate the amount of energy released at an earthquake’s source.

Intensity Scales
Until the mid-1800s, historical records provided the
only accounts of the severity of earthquake shaking and
destruction. Perhaps the first attempt to scientifically
describe the aftermath of an earthquake came following
the great Italian earthquake of 1857. By systematically
mapping effects of the earthquake, a measure of the intensity of ground shaking was established. The map generated
by this study used lines to connect places of equal damage
and hence equal ground shaking. Using this technique,
zones of intensity were identified, with the zone of highest
intensity located near the center of maximum ground shaking and often (but not always) the earthquake epicenter.
In 1902, Giuseppe Mercalli developed a more reliable intensity scale, which is still used today in a modified
form. The Modified Mercalli Intensity scale, shown in
Table 11.1, was developed using California buildings as its
standard. For example, on the 12-point Mercalli Intensity
scale, when some well-built wood structures and most
masonry buildings are destroyed by an earthquake, the
affected area is assigned a Roman numeral X (10).
More recently, the U.S. Geological Survey has developed a webpage called “Did You Feel It,” where Internet
users enter their zip code and answer questions such as
“Did objects fall off shelves?” Within a few hours, a Community Internet Intensity Map, like the one in Figure
11.19 for the 2011 central Virginia earthquake (M5.8), is
TABLE 11.1

generated. Shaking was reported from Maine to Florida, an
area occupied by one-third of the U.S. population. Several
national landmarks were damaged, including the Washington Monument and the National Cathedral located about
130 kilometers (80 miles) away from the epicenter. Because
the crustal rocks east of the Rocky Mountains are cool and
strong, earthquakes are felt over a much larger area than
those of similar magnitudes in the west (see Figure 11.19).

Magnitude Scales
To more accurately compare earthquakes around the
globe, scientists searched for a way to describe the energy
released by earthquakes that did not rely on factors such
as building practices, which vary considerably from one
part of the world to another. As a result, several magnitude scales were developed.

Richter Magnitude In 1935 Charles Richter of the
California Institute of Technology developed the first
magnitude scale to use seismic records. As shown in
Figure 11.20 (top), the Richter scale is calculated by measuring the amplitude of the largest seismic wave (usually
an S wave or a surface wave) recorded on a seismogram.
Because seismic waves weaken as the distance between
the hypocenter and the seismograph increases, Richter
developed a method that accounts for the decrease in wave

Modified Mercalli Intensity Scale

I

Not felt except by a very few under especially favorable circumstances.

II

Felt only by a few persons at rest, especially on upper floors of buildings.

III

Felt quite noticeably indoors, especially on upper floors of buildings, but many people do not recognize it as an earthquake.

IV

During the day felt indoors by many, outdoors by few. Sensation like heavy truck striking building.

V

Felt by nearly everyone, many awakened. Disturbances of trees, poles, and other tall objects sometimes noticed.

VI

Felt by all; many frightened and run outdoors. Some heavy furniture moved; few instances of fallen plaster or damaged chimneys. Damage
slight.

VII

Everybody runs outdoors. Damage negligible in buildings of good design and construction; slight to moderate in well-built ordinary structures;
considerable in poorly built or badly designed structures.

VIII

Damage slight in specially designed structures; considerable in ordinary substantial buildings with partial collapse; great in poorly built structures. (Fall of chimneys, factory stacks, columns, monuments, walls.)

IX

Damage considerable in specially designed structures. Buildings shifted off foundations. Ground cracked conspicuously.

X

Some well-built wooden structures destroyed. Most masonry and frame structures destroyed. Ground badly cracked.

XI

Few, if any, (masonry) structures remain standing. Bridges destroyed. Broad fissures in ground.

XII

Damage total. Waves seen on ground surfaces. Objects thrown upward into air.

339

340

CHAPTER 11

SmartFigure 11.19
USGS Community Internet
Intensity Map Maps like
this one are prepared
using data collected over
the Internet from people
responding to questions
such as “Did objects fall off
shelves?” (https://goo.gl/Pdseso)

Figure 11.20
Determining the Richter
magnitude of an
earthquake

Earthquakes and Earthquake Hazards

amplitude with increasing distance. Theoretically, as long
as equivalent instruments are
USGS Community Internet used, monitoring stations at different locations will obtain the
Intensity Map
same Richter magnitude for
each recorded earthquake.
In practice, however, different recording stations often
obtain slightly different magnitudes for the same earthquake—a result of the variations in rock types through
which the waves travel.
Aug 23, 2011
USGS
01:54:04 PM local
Earthquakes vary enorM5.8
mously
in strength, and
USGS
Depth: 6 km
great
earthquakes
produce
Key for USGS Community Internet Intensity Map
wave
amplitudes
thousands
X
IX
VIII
VII
VI
V
IV
II-III
I
INTENSITY
of times larger than those
Extreme
Violent
Severe
SHAKING Not felt Weak Light Moderate Strong Very strong
generated by weak tremors.
Very Heavy
Moderate/Heavy Heavy
Moderate
Light
none Very light
none
none
DAMAGE
To accommodate this wide
variation, Richter used a logarithmic scale to express magnitude, in which a 10-fold
1. Measure the height (amplitude) of the
increase
in wave amplitude corresponds to an increase of
largest wave on the seismogram (23 mm)
1
on
the
magnitude
scale. Thus, the intensity of ground
and plot it on the amplitude scale (right).
shaking for a magnitude 5 earthquake is 10 times greater
2. Determine the distance to the
than that produced by an earthquake having a Richter
earthquake using the time interval
magnitude (ML) of 4 (Figure 11.21).
separating the arrival of the first P
In addition, each unit of increase in Richter magniwave and the arrival of the first S
tude
equates to roughly a 32-fold increase in the energy
wave (24 seconds) and plot it on
released.
Thus, an earthquake with a magnitude of 6.5
the distance scale (left).
releases 32 times more energy than one with a magnitude of 5.5 and roughly 1000 times (32 × 32) more
30 mm
Amplitude 23 mm
24 sec.
energy than a magnitude 4.5 quake. A major earthquake
20
P
S
with a magnitude of 8.5 releases millions of times more
Seismograph
10
record
energy than the smallest earthquakes felt by humans
(Figure 11.22).
Time
The convenience of describing the size of an earthsec.
0 10 20
quake by a single number that can be calculated quickly
S-P, Distance,
from seismograms makes the Richter scale a powerful

The green dots on the national map show locations of
people who reported feeling earthquakes of similar
magnitude, one that occurred in California versus one
that occurred in Virginia. The difference is
attributable to the rigidity of the bedrock.

sec.
50
40
30
20
10
8
6
4
2

km
500
400

Magnitude,
ML

Amplitude,
mm
100

6

50

5

20
10

4

5

3
2

2
1
0.5

20

1

1.2

0.5

0

300
200
100
60
40

0.1

3. Draw a line connecting the two plots
and read the Richter magnitude (M L 5)
from the magnitude scale (center).

Magnitude vs. Ground Motion and Energy
Magnitude
Change

Ground Motion
Change
(amplitude)

Energy
Change
(approximate)

4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.5
0.1

10,000 times
1000 times
100 times
10 times
3.2 times
1.3 times

1,000,000 times
32,000 times
1000 times
32 times
5.5 times
1.4 times

Figure 11.21
Magnitude versus ground motion and energy released An
earthquake that is one magnitude stronger than another
(M 6 versus M 5) produces seismic waves that have a
maximum amplitude 10 times greater, and they release about
32 times more energy than the waves of the weaker quake.

341

11.5 Determining the Size of an Earthquake

Frequency and Energy Released by Earthquakes of Different Magnitudes
Magnitude
(Mw)

Description

<1

Largest recorded earthquakes–
destruction over vast area
massive loss of life possible

Chile, 1960 (M 9.5);
Alaska, 1964 (M 9.0);
Japan, 2011 (M 9.0)

1

Great earthquakes–
severe economic impact
large loss of life

Sumatra, 2004 (M 9.1);
Mexico City, 1980 (M 8.1)

15

Major earthquakes–
damage ($ billions)
loss of life

New Madrid, Missouri 1812 (M 7.7);
Haiti, 2012 (M 7.0);
Charleston, South Carolina, 1886 (M 7.3)

56,000,000,000

134

Strong earthquakes–
can be destructive in
populated areas

Kobe, Japan, 1995 (M 6.9);
Loma Prieta, California, 1989 (M 6.9);
Northridge, California, 1994 (M 6.7)

1,800,000,000

1319

Moderate earthquakes–
property damage to poorly
constructed buildings

Mineral, Virginia, 2011 (M 5.8);
Northern New York, 1994 (M 5.8);
East of Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, 2011 (M5.6)

56,000,000

13,000

Light earthquakes–
noticable shaking of items
indoors, some property damage

Western Minnesota, 1975 (M 4.6);
Arkansas, 2011 (M 4.7)

130,000

Minor earthquakes–
felt by humans, very light
property damage, if any

New Jersey, 2009 (M3.0);
Maine, 2006 (M3.8);
Texas, 2015 (3.6)

1,300,000

Very minor earthquakes–
felt by humans, no
property damage

1,800

Unknown

Very minor earthquakes–
generally not felt by humans,
but may be recorded

56

9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2

Examples

Energy Release
(equivalent kilograms of explosive)

Average Per Year

56,000,000,000,000

1,800,000,000,000

1,800,000

56,000

Data from USGS

Figure 11.22

tool. Seismologists have since modified Richter’s work
and developed other Richter-like magnitude scales.
Despite its usefulness, the Richter scale is not adequate for describing very large earthquakes. For example,
the 1906 San Francisco earthquake and the 1964 Alaska
earthquake have roughly the same Richter magnitudes.
However, based on the relative size of the affected areas
and the associated tectonic changes, the Alaska earthquake
released considerably more energy than the San Francisco
quake. Thus, the Richter scale is considered saturated for
major earthquakes because it cannot distinguish among
them. Despite this shortcoming, Richter-like scales are still
used because they can be calculated quickly.

Moment Magnitude For measuring medium and
large earthquakes, seismologists now favor a newer scale,
called moment magnitude (MW), which measures the
total energy released during an earthquake. Moment
magnitude is calculated by determining the average
amount of slip on the fault, the area of the fault surface
that slipped, and the strength of the faulted rock.
Moment magnitude can also be calculated by modeling data obtained from seismograms. The results are
converted to a magnitude number, as in other magnitude
scales. As with the Richter scale, each unit increase in
moment magnitude equates to roughly a 32-fold increase
in the energy released.

Because moment magnitude estimates the total
energy released, it is better than the Richter scale for
measuring very large earthquakes. Seismologists have
used the moment magnitude scale to recalculate the
magnitudes of older strong earthquakes. For example,
the 1964 Alaska earthquake, originally given a Richter
magnitude of 8.3, has since been recalculated using the
moment magnitude scale, resulting in an upgrade to MW
9.2. Conversely, the 1906 San Francisco earthquake that
was given a Richter magnitude of 8.3 was downgraded to
MW 7.9. The strongest earthquake on record is the 1960
Chilean subduction zone earthquake, with a moment
magnitude of 9.5.
_TT38


11.5

Concept Checks

1. What does the Modified Mercalli Intensity scale
tell us about an earthquake?
2. What information is used to establish the lower
numbers on the Mercalli scale?
3. How much more energy does a magnitude
7.0 earthquake release than a magnitude 6.0
earthquake?
4. Why is the moment magnitude scale favored over
the Richter scale for large earthquakes?

Annual occurrence of
earthquakes with various
magnitudes

342

CHAPTER 11

Earthquakes and Earthquake Hazards

11.6

Earthquake Destruction
List and describe the major destructive forces that earthquake vibrations can trigger.

The most violent earthquake ever recorded in North America—the Alaska earthquake—occurred
at 5:36 p.m. on March 27, 1964. Felt over most of the state, the earthquake had a moment magnitude (MW) of 9.2 and lasted 3 to 4 minutes. This event left 128 people dead and thousands homeless, and it badly disrupted the state’s economy. Within 24 hours of the initial shock, 28 aftershocks
were recorded, 10 of them exceeding magnitude 6. The epicenter and the towns hardest hit by the
quake are shown in Figure 11.23.
Figure 11.23

earthquakes of 1811–1812, are generally felt more over a
much larger area than those in earthquake-prone areas
such as California.

Region most affected by
the Alaska earthquake,
1964
Anchorage
Whittier
Seward

Valdez
Chenega

Cook
Inlet

Kodiak

Gulf of Alaska

Many factors determine the degree of destruction that
accompanies an earthquake. The most obvious is the
magnitude of the earthquake and its proximity to a populated area. During an earthquake, the region within 20
to 50 kilometers (12 to 30 miles) of the epicenter tends
to experience roughly the same degree of ground shaking, and beyond that limit, vibrations usually diminish
rapidly. Earthquakes that occur in the stable continental interior, such as the New Madrid, Missouri,
Figure 11.24
Comparing damage to
structures The poorly
designed five-story
JCPenney building in
Anchorage, Alaska,
sustained extensive
damage. The steel-frame
adjacent building incurred
very little structural
damage. (Courtesy of NOAA/
Seattle)

Destruction from Seismic Vibrations
The 1964 Alaska earthquake provided geologists with
insights into the role of ground shaking as a destructive
force. As the energy released by an earthquake travels
along Earth’s surface, it causes the ground to vibrate in
a complex manner involving up-and-down as well sideto-side motion. The amount of damage to human-made
structures attributable to the vibrations depends on several factors, including (1) intensity and (2) duration of
the vibrations, (3) the nature of the material on which
structures rest, and (4) the nature of building materials
and construction practices of the region.
All the multistory structures in Anchorage were
damaged by the vibrations. The more flexible woodframe residential buildings fared best. A striking example of how construction variations affect earthquake
damage is shown in Figure 11.24. You can see that the
steel-frame building on the left withstood the vibrations, whereas the poorly designed JCPenney
building was badly damaged. Engineers
have learned that buildings constructed
of blocks and bricks that are not reinforced with steel rods are the most
serious safety threats in earthquakes.
Unfortunately, most of the structures in
the developing world are constructed of
unreinforced concrete slabs and bricks
made of dried mud—a primary reason
the death toll in poor countries such as
Haiti and Nepal is usually higher than
for earthquakes of similar size in the
United States.
The 1964 Alaska earthquake damaged most large structures in Anchorage,
even though they were built according to the earthquake provisions of the
Uniform Building Code. Perhaps some
of that destruction can be attributed to
the unusually long duration of the earthquake. Most quakes involve tremors that

343

11.6 Earthquake Destruction

last less than a minute. For example, the 1994
Northridge earthquake was felt for about 40
seconds, and the strong vibrations of the 1989
Loma Prieta earthquake lasted less than 15
seconds. But the Alaska quake reverberated for
3 to 4 minutes.

Figure 11.25
Ground failure caused
this street in Anchorage,
Alaska, to collapse (Photo
by USGS)

Amplification of Seismic Waves Although
the region near the epicenter experiences
about the same intensity of ground shaking,
destruction may vary considerably in this area.
These differences are usually attributable to
the nature of the ground on which the structures are built. Soft sediments, for example,
generally amplify the vibrations more than
Downtown Anchorage following
solid bedrock. Thus, the buildings in Anchorthe 1964 Alaskan earthquake.
age that were situated on unconsolidated sediments experienced heavy structural damage
(Figure 11.25). In contrast, most of the town of
over reservoir walls and weaken the structures,
Whittier, though much nearer the epicenter,
thereby endangering property as well as the lives of
rested on a firm foundation of solid bedrock and, therethose downstream.
fore, suffered much less damage from seismic vibrations.

Liquefaction The intense shaking of an earthquake

Landslides and Ground Subsidence
can cause loosely packed water-logged materials, such
as sandy stream deposits or fill, to be transformed into
The greatest earthquake-related damage to structures is
a substance that acts like fluids. The phenomenon of
often caused by landslides and ground subsidence trigtransforming a somewhat stable soil into mobile mategered by earthquake vibrations. This was the case during
rial capable of rising toward Earth’s surface is known as
the 1964 Alaska earthquake in Valdez and Seward, where
liquefaction. When liquefaction occurs, the ground may the violent shaking caused coastal sediments to slump,
not be capable of supporting buildings, and underground carrying away both waterfronts. In Valdez, 31 people
storage tanks and sewer lines may literally float toward
died when a dock slid into the sea. Because of the threat
the surface (Figure 11.26).
During the 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake,
in San Francisco’s Marina District, foundaThese tilted buildings rested on unconsolidated
tions failed, and geysers of sand and water shot
sediment that behaved like quicksand during
from the ground, evidence that liquefaction had
the 1964 Niigata, Japan, earthquake.
occurred (Figure 11.27). Liquefaction also contributed to the damage inflicted on San Francisco’s
water system during the 1906 earthquake. During the 2011 Japan earthquake, liquefaction
caused entire buildings to sink several feet.
Seiches The effects of great earthquakes may
be felt thousands of kilometers from their source.
Ground motion may generate seiches, the rhythmic sloshing of water in lakes, reservoirs, and
enclosed basins such as the Gulf of Mexico. The
1964 Alaska earthquake, for example, generated
2-meter (7-foot) waves off the coast of Texas and
damaged small craft, while much smaller waves
were noticed in swimming pools in both Texas
and Louisiana.
Seiches can be particularly dangerous when
they occur in reservoirs retained by earthen
dams. These waves have been known to slosh

Figure 11.26
Effects of liquefaction on
buildings (Photo courtesy of
USGS)

344

CHAPTER 11

Earthquakes and Earthquake Hazards

Figure 11.27
Liquefaction These “sand
volcanoes,” produced by
the Christchurch, New
Zealand, earthquake
of 2011, formed when
“geysers” of sand and
water shot from the ground,
an indication that liquefaction occurred. (Photo by

Sand
volcanoes

Alamy)

Eruption
of water
and sand

Well packed soil

Loose, saturated,
sandy material

Water and upper
sandy layer mobilize

A. Before earthquake

B. During earthquake

an enormous firestorm (see
Figure 11.3). Much of the
city was reduced to ashes
and ruins. It is estimated
that 3000 people died and
more than half of the city’s
400,000 residents were left
homeless.
The historic San Francisco earthquake reminds
us of the formidable threat
of fire, which started during
that quake when gas and
electrical lines were severed.
The initial ground shaking
broke the city’s water lines
into hundreds of disconSand
Ground
volcano
settles
nected pieces, which made
controlling the fires virtually
impossible. The fires, which
raged out of control for 3
days, were finally contained
when expensive houses
Sandy material becomes
along Van Ness Avenue were
more tightly packed
dynamited to provide a fire
C. After earthquake
break, similar to the strategy
used in fighting forest fires.
While few deaths were attributed to the San Francisco fires, other earthquake-initiated fires have been
more destructive, claiming many more lives. For example, the 1923 earthquake in Japan triggered an estimated
250 fires, devastating the city of Yokohama and destroying more than half the homes in Tokyo. More than
100,000 deaths were attributed to the fires, which were
driven by unusually high winds.

of recurrence, the entire town of Valdez was relocated to
more stable ground about 7 kilometers (4.5 miles) away.
Much of the damage in Anchorage was attributed to
landslides. Homes were destroyed in Turnagain Heights
when a layer of clay lost its strength and over 200 acres of
land slid toward the ocean (Figure 11.28). A portion of this
spectacular landslide was left in its natural condition, as a
reminder of this destructive event. The site was appropriately named “Earthquake Park.” Downtown Anchorage
was also disrupted as sections of the main business disB. Blocks of land began to slide toward the sea on a weak layer
called the Bootlegger Cove clay and in less than 5 minutes, as
trict dropped by as much as 3 meters (10 feet).
much as 200 meters of the Turnagain Heights bluff area had
been destroyed.
200 meters
Original

Fire
More than a century ago, San Francisco was the economic center of the western United States, largely
because of gold and silver mining. Then, at dawn on
April 18, 1906, a violent earthquake struck, triggering
SmartFigure 11.28
Turnagain Heights slide
caused by the 1964
Alaska earthquake (Photo

profile

A. Vibrations from the Alaskan earthquake caused cracks to
appear near the edge of the Turnagain Heights bluff.
Layers of sand
and gravel
Turnagain Heights

Bootlegger
Cove clay

courtesy of the USGS)
(https://goo.gl/35qQXQ)

Cracks developed

C. Photo of a
small area of
destruction
caused by the
Turnagain
Heights slide.

345

11.6 Earthquake Destruction

Tsunami speed: 800
km/hr at water depth
of 5000 meters

Tsunami speed: 340
km/hr at water depth
of 900 meters

Displacement on megathrust fault
Subducting plat
e

SmartFigure 11.29

Tsunami speed:
50 km/hr near
shore

Overriding plate

Hypocenter

Bulge

Fault locked, overriding
plate deforms
Ove
rrid
ing
Sub
duc
pla
ting
te
p la
te

What Is a Tsunami?
Major undersea earthquakes occasionally set in motion a
series of large ocean waves that are known by the Japanese name tsunami (“harbor wave”). Most tsunamis
are generated by displacement along a megathrust fault
that suddenly lifts a large slab of seafloor (Figure 11.29).
Once generated, a tsunami resembles a series of ripples
formed when a pebble is dropped into a pond. In contrast
to ripples, tsunamis advance across the ocean at amazing speeds, about 800 kilometers (500 miles) per hour—
equivalent to the speed of a commercial airliner. Despite

Megathrust ruptures,
strain released

Tsunami generated by
displacement of the ocean
floor The speed of a wave
correlates with ocean
depth. Waves moving in
deep water advance at
speeds exceeding 800
kilometers (500 miles)
per hour. Speed gradually
slows to 50 kilometers (30
miles) per hour at depths
of 20 meters (65 feet).
As waves slow in shallow
water, they grow in height
until they rush onto shore
with tremendous force.
The size and spacing of the
swells shown here are not
to scale. (https://goo.gl/3Iphb3)

Over
ridi
ng
Sub
duc
pla
ting
te
p la
te

this striking characteristic, a tsunami in the open ocean
can pass undetected because its height (amplitude) is usually less than 1 meter (3 feet), and the distance separating
wave crests ranges from 100 to 700 kilometers (60 to 450
miles). However, upon entering shallow coastal waters,
these destructive waves “feel bottom” and slow, causing
the water to pile up (see Figure 11.29). A few exceptional
tsunamis have exceeded 30 meters (100 feet) in height. As
the crest of a tsunami approaches the shore, it appears as a
rapid rise in sea level with a turbulent and chaotic surface;
it does not resemble a breaking wave (Figure 11.30).
_TT39


SmartFigure 11.30
Tsunami generated off the
coast of Sumatra, 2004
(AFP/Getty Images, Inc.) (https://
goo.gl/b8OPkN)

346

CHAPTER 11

Earthquakes and Earthquake Hazards

The first warning of an approaching tsunami is
often the rapid withdrawal of water from beaches, the
result of the trough of the first large wave preceding
the crest. Some inhabitants of the Pacific basin have
learned to heed this warning and quickly move to
higher ground. Approximately 5 to 30 minutes after the
retreat of water, a surge capable of extending several
kilometers inland occurs. In a successive fashion, each
surge is followed by a rapid oceanward retreat of the
sea. Therefore, people experiencing a tsunami should
not return to the shore when the first surge of water
retreats.

Tsunami Damage from the 2004 Indonesia
Earthquake A massive undersea earthquake of MW 9.1

occurred near the island of Sumatra on December 26,
2004, sending waves of water racing across the Indian
Ocean and Bay of Bengal. It was one of the deadliest
natural disasters of any kind in modern times, claiming
more than 230,000 lives. As water surged several kilometers inland, cars and trucks were flung around like toys
in a bathtub, and fishing boats were rammed into homes.
In some locations, the backwash of water dragged bodies
and huge amounts of debris out to sea.
The destruction was indiscriminate, destroying
luxury resorts as well as poor fishing hamlets along the
Indian Ocean. Damages were reported as far away as the
coast of Somalia in Africa, 4100 kilometers (2500 miles)
west of the earthquake epicenter.
Figure 11.31
Aftermath of the Japan
tsunami, March 2011 This
tsunami devastated parts
of Natori City. (Photo by Mike
Clark/AFP/Getty Images)

Japan Tsunami Because of Japan’s location along
the circum-Pacific belt and its expansive coastline, it is
especially vulnerable to tsunami destruction. The most
powerful earthquake to strike Japan in the age of modern seismology was the 2011 Tohoku earthquake (M W
9.0). This historic earthquake and devastating tsunami
resulted in at least 15,890 deaths, more than 3000
people missing, and 6107 injured. Nearly 400,000
buildings, 56 bridges, and 26 railways were destroyed
or damaged.
The majority of human casualties and damage were
caused by a Pacific-wide tsunami that reached a maximum height of about 40 meters (130 feet) and travelled
inland 10 kilometers (6 miles) in the region of Sendai,
Japan (Figure 11.31). The chapter-opening photo (pages
326–327) shows this dramatic event. In addition, meltdowns occurred at three nuclear reactors in Japan’s
Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Complex. Across the Pacific
in California, Oregon, Peru, and Chile, some loss of life
occurred, and several houses, boats, and docks were
destroyed. The tsunami was generated when a slab of
seafloor located 60 kilometers (37 miles) off the east
coast of Japan was suddenly “thrust up” an estimated 5 to
8 meters (16 to 26 feet).
Tsunami Warning System In 1946, a large tsunami
struck the Hawaiian Islands without warning. A wave
more than 15 meters (50 feet) high left several coastal
villages in shambles. This destruction motivated the

11.6 Earthquake Destruction

Asia
Aleutian
Islands

1 hr

North
America

6

7

5 hr
4 hr
3 h hr
2h r
1 hr r

8

9

h
hr r

10
hr

hr

3 hr

12
11 hr
10 hr
hr
9
h
8 r
hr
7
h
6 r
hr
5h
4h r
3 r
h
2 r
hr
1
hr

2 hr
4 hr
5 hr

Honolulu

New
Guinea

the center use deep-sea buoys equipped with pressure
sensors to detect energy released by an earthquake.
In addition, tidal gauges measure the rise and fall in
sea level that accompany tsunamis, and warnings are
issued within an hour. Although tsunamis travel very
rapidly, there is sufficient time to warn all except those
in the areas nearest the epicenter. For example, a tsunami generated near the Aleutian Islands would take
5 hours to reach Hawaii, and one generated near the
coast of Chile would travel 15 hours before reaching
the shores of Hawaii (Figure 11.32).

South
America

11.6

Australia

Concept Checks

1. List four factors that influence the amount of
destruction that seismic vibrations cause to
human-made structures.

Figure 11.32
Tsunami travel times Travel times to Honolulu, Hawaii, from
selected locations throughout the Pacific. (Data from NOAA)

2. In addition to the destruction created directly
by seismic vibrations, list three other types of
destruction associated with earthquakes.

U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey to establish a tsunami
warning system for coastal areas of the Pacific that
today includes 26 countries. Seismic observatories
throughout the region report large earthquakes to the
Tsunami Warning Center in Honolulu. Scientists at

3. What is a tsunami? How are tsunamis generated?

E Y E ON E A R T H

4. List at least three reasons an earthquake with a
magnitude of 7.0 might result in more death and
destruction than a quake with a magnitude of 8.0.

11.2

W

ater-saturated sandy soil provides
students an opportunity to experience the
phenomenon of liquefaction. Liquefaction
may occur when ground shaking causes a layer of
saturated material to lose strength and act like a fluid.

QUESTION 1 Describe what you think would happen to
a structure built on sandy soil that suddenly experienced
liquefaction during an earthquake.
QUESTION 2 How might a nearly empty underground
storage tank be affected by liquefaction of the
surrounding soil?

Marli Miller

347

348

CHAPTER 11

Earthquakes and Earthquake Hazards

Where Do Most Earthquakes Occur?

11.7

Locate Earth’s major earthquake belts on a world map and label the regions
associated with the largest earthquakes.

About 95 percent of the energy released by earthquakes originates in a few relatively narrow
zones, shown in Figure 11.33. These zones of earthquake activity are located along fault surfaces
where tectonic plates interact along one of the three types of plate boundaries—convergent,
divergent, and transform plate boundaries.
Strong earthquakes can occur away from plate boundaries, although this is less common. Examples include
the devastating Gujarat, India, earthquake of 2001, the
1811 and 1812 New Madrid, Missouri, earthquakes,
and the Charleston, South Carolina, earthquake of
1886. Intraplate earthquakes occur when internal
stresses build due to interaction of neighboring plates
or because of loading or unloading as, for example, the
melting of the glacial ice sheets following the last ice
age. These stresses may cause failure along once-inactive fault zones.

Earthquakes Associated with
Plate Boundaries
The zone of greatest seismic activity, called the circum-Pacific belt, encompasses the coastal regions of
Chile, Central America, Indonesia, Japan, and Alaska,
including the Aleutian Islands (see Figure 11.33). Most
earthquakes in the circum-Pacific belt occur along
convergent plate boundaries, where one plate slides at
a low angle beneath another. The contacts between the
subducting and overlying plates are megathrust faults,
along which Earth’s largest earthquakes are generated
(see Figure 11.6).
There are more than 40,000 kilometers (25,000
miles) of subduction boundaries in the circum-Pacific
belt where displacement is dominated by thrust faulting.
Figure 11.33
Asia

Australia

Alpine
Fault

i c R i d ge

Mid-A
tla
nt
South
America

Chile

East Pacifi
cR

is e

lt

Cir

Pa cif ic

s
ea
dr
An lt
n Fau

m-

Be

cu

Ja

pa

n

North
America
Sa

Global earthquake
belts Distribution of nearly
15,000 earthquakes with
magnitudes equal to or
greater than 5 for a 10-year
period. (Data from USGS)

Ruptures occasionally occur along segments that are
nearly 1000 kilometers (600 miles) long, generating catastrophic megathrust earthquakes with magnitudes of
(MW) 8 or greater.
Another major concentration of strong seismic
activity, referred to as the Alpine–Himalayan belt,
runs through the mountainous regions that flank the
Mediterranean Sea and extends past the Himalayas
(see Figure 11.33). Tectonic activity in this region is
mainly attributed to collisions of the African plate with
the Eurasian plate and of the Indian plate with Southeast Asia. These plate interactions created many thrust
and strike-slip faults that remain active. In addition,
numerous faults located a considerable distance from
these plate boundaries have been reactivated as India
continues its northward advance into Asia. For example, slippage on a complex fault system in 2008 in the
Sichuan Province of China killed an estimated 87,000
people and left 1.5 million others homeless. The cause
was the Indian subcontinent continually shoving the
Tibetan Plateau eastward against the rocks of the Sichuan basin.
Figure 11.33 shows another continuous earthquake
belt that extends thousands of kilometers through the
world’s oceans. This zone coincides with the oceanic
ridge system, which is an area of frequent but weak
seismic activity. As tensional forces pull the plates apart
during seafloor spreading, displacement along normal
faults generates most of the earthquakes in this zone. The
remaining seismic
activity is associated with slippage
Europe
along transform
AlpineHim
faults located
a l a y an Belt
between ridge
segments.
Transform
faults and smaller
Africa
strike-slip faults
also run through
continental crust,
where they may
generate large
earthquakes that
tend to occur on
a cyclical basis.
Examples include

11.7 Where Do Most Earthquakes Occur?
Large earthquakes are relatively uncommon in the middle of continents, far from
the places where plates collide or grind past one another, or where one plate slides
beneath another. Nevertheless, several damaging earthquakes have occurred in the
central and eastern United States since colonial times.

6

Figure 11.34
Historical earthquakes east of the Rockies Large earthquakes are uncommon in the middle of continents, far from the places where plates collide
or grind past one another, or where one plate slides beneath another.
Nevertheless, several damaging earthquakes have occurred in the central and
eastern United States since colonial times.

7
14

5
8
11 3

4

10

2

13

1

12

9

Historic Earthquakes East of the Rockies 1755–2011
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14

LOCATION
East of Oklahoma City
Mineral, Virginia
Southeastern Illinois
Northeast Kentucky
Merriman, Nebraska
Northern New York
Ossipee Lake, New Hampshire
Western Ohio
Valentine, Texas
Giles County, Virginia
Charleston, Missouri
Charleston, South Carolina
New Madrid, Missouri
Cape Ann, Massachusetts

DATE
2011
2011
2008
1980
1964
1944
1947
1937
1931
1897
1895
1886
1811-1812
1755

INTENSITY
VII
VII
VII
VII
VII
VIII
VII
VIII
VIII
VIII
VIII
X
X
VIII

MAGNITUDE*
5.6
5.8
5.4
5.2
5.1
5.8
5.5
5.4
5.8
5.9
6.6
7.3
7.7
?

COMMENTS
Fourteen homes destroyed
Felt by many due to its proximity to large population centers
Occurred along the Wabash Valley Seismic Zone
Largest earthquake ever recorded in Kentucky
Largest earthquake ever recorded in Nebraska
Left several structures unsafe for occupancy
Two earthquakes occurred four days apart
Extensive damage to chimneys and plaster walls
Brick buildings were severely damaged
Changed the flow of natural springs
Structural damage and liquefaction reported
Caused 60 deaths, destroyed many buildings
Three strong earthquakes occurred in remote areas
Chimneys leveled and brick buildings damaged in Boston

Source: U.S. Geological Survey
*Intensity and magnitudes have been estimated for many of these events.

California’s San Andreas Fault, New Zealand’s Alpine
Fault, and Turkey’s North Anatolian Fault, which produced a deadly earthquake in 1999.

Damaging Earthquakes East
of the Rockies
When you think “earthquake,” you probably think of California and Japan. However, six major earthquakes and
several others that inflicted considerable damage have
occurred in the central and eastern United States since
colonial times (Figure 11.34).
Three of these quakes had estimated Richter magnitudes of 7.5, 7.3, and 7.8 and were centered near the

349

Mississippi River valley in southeastern Missouri. Occurring
on December 16, 1811; January 23, 1812; and February 7,
1812, these earthquakes, plus numerous smaller tremors,
destroyed the town of New Madrid, Missouri, triggered
massive landslides, and caused damage over a six-state area.
The course of the Mississippi River was altered, and Tennessee’s Reelfoot Lake was enlarged. The distances over which
these earthquakes were felt are truly remarkable. Chimneys
were reported downed in Cincinnati, Ohio, and Richmond,
Virginia, and even Boston residents, located 1770 kilometers
(1100 miles) to the northeast, felt the tremor.
Despite the history of the New Madrid earthquake,
Memphis, Tennessee, the largest population center in the
area, does not have adequate earthquake provisions in its
building code. Further, because Memphis is located on
_TT40


350

CHAPTER 11

Earthquakes and Earthquake Hazards

Figure 11.35
Damage to Charleston,
South Carolina, caused
by the August 31, 1886,
earthquake (Photo courtesy of
the USGS)

unconsolidated floodplain deposits, buildings are more
susceptible to damage than are similar structures built on
bedrock. It has been estimated that if an earthquake the
size of the 1811–1812 New Madrid event were to strike in
the next decade, it would result in casualties in the thousands and damages in tens of billions of dollars. Damaging earthquakes that occurred in Aurora, Illinois (1909),
and Valentine, Texas (1931), remind us that other areas in
the central United States are vulnerable.
The greatest historical earthquake in the eastern
states occurred on August 31, 1886, in Charleston, South
Carolina. The event, which spanned 1 minute, caused
60 deaths, numerous injuries, and great economic loss
in a radius of 200 kilometers (120 miles) of Charleston.
Within 8 minutes, effects were felt as far away as Chicago
and St. Louis, where strong vibrations shook the upper
floors of buildings, causing people to rush outdoors.
In Charleston alone, more than 100 buildings were
destroyed and 90 percent of the remaining structures
were damaged (Figure 11.35).
Numerous other strong earthquakes have been
recorded in the eastern United States. New England
and adjacent areas have experienced sizable shocks since
colonial times. The first reported earthquake in the
Northeast took place in Plymouth, Massachusetts, in
1683 and was followed in 1755 by the destructive Cambridge, Massachusetts, quake. New York State has experienced more than 300 earthquakes large enough to be felt
since record-keeping began.
Earthquakes in the central and eastern United
States occur far less frequently than in California, yet
history indicates that the East is vulnerable. Further,

these shocks east of the Rockies have generally produced
structural damage over a larger area than counterparts
of similar magnitude in California. This is because the
underlying bedrock in the central and eastern United
States is older and more rigid. As a result, seismic waves
can travel greater distances with less attenuation than in
the western United States. It is estimated that for earthquakes of similar magnitude, the region of maximum
ground motion in the East may be up to 10 times larger
than in the West (see Figure 11.19). Consequently, the
higher rate of earthquake occurrence in the western
United States is balanced somewhat by the fact that central and eastern U.S. quakes can damage larger areas.

11.7

Concept Checks

1. What is the zone of the greatest amount of
seismic activity?
2. What type of plate boundary is associated with
Earth’s largest earthquakes?
3. Describe another geologic setting where strong
earthquake activity occurs.
4. List two reasons why a repeat of the 1811–1812
New Madrid, Missouri, earthquakes could
be destructive to the Memphis, Tennessee,
metropolitan area.
5. Explain why an earthquake east of the Rockies
may produce damage over a larger area than one
of similar magnitude in California.

351

11.8 Can Earthquakes Be Predicted?

11.8

Can Earthquakes Be Predicted?
Compare and contrast the goals of short-range earthquake predictions and longrange forecasts.

The vibrations that shook the San Francisco area in 1989 caused 63 deaths, heavily damaged the
Marina District, and caused the collapse of a double-decked section of I-880 in Oakland, California
(Figure 11.36). This level of destruction was the result of an earthquake of moderate magnitude (MW
6.9). Seismologists warn that other earthquakes of comparable or greater strength can be expected
along the San Andreas system, which cuts a nearly 1300-kilometer (800-mile) path through the
western one-third of the state (see GEOgraphics 11.1). An obvious question is: Can these earthquakes be predicted?

Short-Range Predictions
The goal of short-range earthquake prediction is to provide
a warning of the location and magnitude of a large earthquake within a narrow time frame (Table 11.2). Substantial
efforts to achieve this objective have been attempted in
Japan, the United States, China, and Russia—countries
where earthquake risks are high. This research has concentrated on monitoring possible precursors—events or
changes that precede a forthcoming earthquake and thus
may provide warning. In California, for example, seismologists monitor changes in ground elevation and variations in
strain levels near active faults. Other researchers measure
changes in groundwater levels, while still others try to predict earthquakes based on an increase in the frequency of
foreshocks that precede some, but not all, earthquakes.

Japanese and Chinese scientists have tried to monitor
anomalous animal behavior. A few days before the May 12,
2008, earthquake in China’s Sichuan Province, the streets
of a village near the fault were filled with toads migrating
from the mountains. Was this a warning? Perhaps. Walter Mooney, a USGS seismologist, put it best: “Everyone
hopes that animals can tell us something we don’t know
. . . but animal behavior is way too unreliable.” Although
precursors may exist, we have yet to determine effective
ways to interpret and utilize the information.
One claim of a successful short-range prediction,
based on an increase in foreshocks, was made by the
Chinese government after the February 4, 1975, earthquake in Liaoning Province. According to reports,
very few people were killed—even though more than
Figure 11.36
Collapse of the doubledecked section of
I-880 This section of a
double-decked highway,
known as the Cypress
Viaduct, collapsed during
the 1989 Loma Prieta
earthquake. (Photo by Paul
Sakuma/AP Photo)

354

CHAPTER 11

Earthquakes and Earthquake Hazards
TABLE 11.2

Some Notable Earthquakes

Year

Location

856

Iran

Deaths (est.)

Magnitude*

Comments

200,000

893

Iran

150,000

1138

Syria

230,000

1268

Asia Minor

1290

China

100,000

60,000

1556

Shensi, China

830,000

1667

Caucasia

80,000

1727

Iran

77,000

1755

Lisbon, Portugal

70,000

1783

Italy

50,000

Possibly the greatest natural disaster

Tsunami damage extensive

1908

Messina, Italy

120,000

1920

China

200,000

7.5

Landslide buried a village

1923

Tokyo, Japan

143,000

7.9

Fire caused extensive destruction

1948

Turkmenistan

110,000

7.3

Almost all brick buildings near epicenter collapsed

1960

Southern Chile

5700

9.5

The largest-magnitude earthquake ever recorded

1964

Alaska

131

9.2

Greatest-magnitude North American earthquake

1970

Peru

70,000

7.9

Great rockslide

1976

Tangshan, China

242,000

7.5

Estimates for the death toll are as high as 655,000

1985

Mexico City

9500

8.1

Major damage occurred 400 km from epicenter

1988

Armenia

25,000

6.9

Poor construction practices

1990

Iran

50,000

7.4

Landslides and poor construction practices led to great
damage

1993

Latur, India

10,000

6.4

Located in stable continental interior

1995

Kobe, Japan

5472

6.9

Damages estimated to exceed $100 billion

1999

Izmit, Turkey

17,127

7.4

Nearly 44,000 injured and more than 250,000 displaced

2001

Gujarat, India

20,000

7.9

Millions homeless

2003

Bam, Iran

31,000

6.6

Ancient city with poor construction

2004

Indian Ocean
(Sumatra)

230,000

9.1

Devastating tsunami damage

2005

Pakistan/Kashmir

86,000

7.6

Many landslides; 4 million homeless

2008

Sichuan, China

87,000

7.9

Millions homeless, some towns will not be rebuilt

2010

Port-au-Prince,
Haiti

316,000

7.0

More than 300,000 injured and 1.3 million homeless

2011

Japan

16,000

9.0

Majority of the casualties due to a tsunami

*Widely differing magnitudes have been estimated for some of these earthquakes. When available, moment magnitudes are used.
Source: U.S. Geological Survey.

1 million lived near the epicenter—because the earthquake was “predicted,” and the residents were evacuated. Some Western seismologists have questioned
this claim and suggest instead that an intense swarm
of foreshocks, which began 24 hours before the main
earthquake, may have caused many people to evacuate
of their own accord.
One year after the Liaoning earthquake, an estimated 240,000 people perished in the Tangshan,
China, earthquake, which was not predicted. There
were no foreshocks. Predictions can also lead to false
alarms. In a province near Hong Kong, people reportedly evacuated their dwellings for over a month, but no
earthquake followed.

In order for a short-range prediction scheme to be
generally accepted, it must be both accurate and reliable. Thus, it must have a small range of uncertainty in
regard to location and timing, and it must produce few
failures or false alarms. Can you imagine the debate
that would precede an order to evacuate a large U.S.
city, such as Los Angeles or San Francisco? The cost
of evacuating millions of people, arranging for living
accommodations, and providing for their lost work time
and wages would be staggering.
Currently, no reliable method exists for making
short-range earthquake predictions. In fact, leading seismologists in the past 100 years have generally concluded
that short-range earthquake prediction is not feasible.

11.8 Can Earthquakes Be Predicted?

records of earthquakes to see if there are any discernible patterns so that they can establish the probability of
recurrence.

Banda Aceh

,M
04
20
2
9.

Eurasian
Plate
05

20
,M

Singapore

S

6
8.

um
ra

ne

ap

EG

do

M

si
a

H

R

M
0,
00
42
8.
,M
07
7
20
7.
,M T
10
S
20
U

AT

India

/yr
5.7 cm

INDONESIA

9
7.

Philippines

Sumatra

In

g
ic
ism

A

China

Padang
Padang

,

Se

ND

at

SU

Indian-Australian
Plate

INDIAN OCEAN
Australia

Figure 11.37
Seismic gaps: Tools for forecasting earthquakes Seismic
gaps are “quiet zones,” thought to be inactive, that are storing
elastic strain that will eventually produce major earthquakes.
This seismic gap occurs along a patch of the megathrust
fault where oceanic lithosphere is being subducted beneath
Sumatra, near Padang, a low-lying coastal city with a population of 800,000 people.

Long-Range Forecasts
In contrast to short-range predictions, which aim to predict earthquakes within a time frame of hours or days,
long-range forecasts are estimates of how likely it is for
an earthquake of a certain magnitude to occur on a time
scale of 30 to 100 years or more. These forecasts give
statistical estimates of the expected intensity of ground
motion for a given area over a specified time frame.
Although long-range forecasts are not as informative as
we might like, these data are useful for providing important guides for building codes so that buildings, dams,
and roadways are constructed to withstand expected
levels of ground shaking.
Most long-range forecasting strategies are based
on evidence that many large faults break in a cyclical
manner, producing similar quakes at roughly similar
intervals. In other words, as soon as a section of a fault
ruptures, the continuing motions of Earth’s plates begin
to build strain in the rocks again until they fail once
more. Seismologists have therefore studied historical

Seismic Gaps Seismologists began to plot the
distribution of rupture zones associated with great
earthquakes around the globe. The maps revealed that
individual rupture zones tend to occur adjacent to one
another, without appreciable overlap, thereby tracing
out a plate boundary. Because plates are moving at
known velocities, the rate at which strain builds can
also be estimated.
When these researchers studied historical records,
they discovered that some seismic zones had not produced a large earthquake in more than a century or,
in some locations, for several centuries. These quiet
zones, called seismic gaps, are believed to be zones that
are storing strain that will be released during a future
earthquake. Figure 11.37 shows a patch (seismic gap) of
the megathrust fault that lies offshore of Padang, a lowlying city of 800,000 people off the coast of Sumatra that
has not ruptured since 1797. Scientists are particularly
concerned about this seismic gap because, in 2004, a
rupture of an adjacent segment of this megathrust fault
that lies to the north generated a tsunami that claimed
230,000 lives.

Paleoseismology Another method of long-term
forecasting involves paleoseismology (paleo = ancient,
seismos = shake), the study of the timing, location,
and size of prehistoric earthquakes. Paleoseismology
studies are often conducted by digging a trench across
a suspected fault zone and then looking for evidence
of ancient faulting, such as offset sedimentary strata or
mud volcanoes (Figure 11.38). A large vertical offset of
the layers of sediments indicates a large earthquake.
Sometimes buried plant debris can be carbon
dated, allowing for the timing of recurrence to be
established.
One investigation that used this method focused
on a segment of the San Andreas Fault that lies north
and east of Los Angeles. At this site, the drainage of
Pallet Creek has been repeatedly disturbed by successive ruptures along the fault zone. Trenches excavated
across the creek bed have exposed sediments that have
been displaced by several large earthquakes over a span
of 1500 years. From these data, it was determined that
strong earthquakes occur an average of once every 135
years. The last major event, the Fort Tejon earthquake,
occurred on this segment of the San Andreas Fault
in 1857, roughly 150 years ago. Because earthquakes
occur on a cyclical basis, a major event in southern
California may be imminent.
Using other paleoseismology techniques, researchers determined that several powerful earthquakes
(magnitude 8 or larger) have repeatedly struck the

355

12
Earth’s
*
Interior

The Japanese high-tech drilling ship Chikyu is capable
of drilling 7000 meters (nearly 4.5 miles) into the ocean floor.
(Photo by Kyodo/Landov)

*This

chapter was originally prepared by Professor Michael Wysession,
Washington University.

I

f you could slice Earth in half, the first thing you would notice is
that it has distinct layers. The heaviest materials (metals) appear in the center. Lighter
solids (rocks) make up the middle layers, and less dense liquids and gases make up
the outer layer. Within Earth, we know these layers as the iron core, the rocky mantle
and crust, the liquid ocean, and the gaseous atmosphere. More than 95 percent of the
variations in composition and temperatures in Earth are due to this seemingly simple
layered structure. However, this is not the end of the story. If it were, Earth would be
a dead, lifeless cinder floating in space.

Internal Structure
12.1 Earth’s
Explain how Earth acquired its layered structure.
In Chapter 1 you learned that Earth’s interior consists of three major layers defined by their chemical composition—the crust, mantle, and core. In addition, Earth’s three compositionally distinct
shells can be further subdivided into layers, based on physical properties that include whether the
layer is solid or liquid and how weak or strong it is. Knowledge of both types of layers is essential to
our understanding of basic geologic processes, such as volcanism, earthquakes, and mountain building (Figure 12.1).

Gravity and Earth’s Layers
If a bottle filled with clay, iron filings, water, and air were
shaken, it would appear to have a single, muddy composition. If that bottle were then allowed to sit undisturbed,
the different materials would separate and settle into
layers. The iron filings, which are the densest, would be
the first to sink to the bottom. Above the iron would be a
layer of clay, then water, and, finally, air.
The force of gravity is responsible for the layering
in the bottle of muddy water, as well as the layering we
detect in Earth’s interior.

Formation of Earth’s Layered Structure As material accumulated to form Earth (and for a short period
afterward), the high-velocity impact of nebular debris
and the decay of radioactive elements caused the temperature of our planet to steadily increase. During this
time of intense heating, Earth became hot enough that
elements including iron and nickel began to melt. Melting
produced liquid blobs of heavy metal that gravitationally sank toward the center of the planet. This process
occurred rapidly on the scale of geologic time and produced Earth’s dense iron-rich core.
The early period of heating resulted in another process of chemical differentiation, whereby melting formed
masses of less-dense, molten rock that buoyantly rose
toward the surface and solidified to produce a primitive
crust. These rocky materials were rich in oxygen and
“oxygen-seeking” elements, particularly silicon and aluminum, along with lesser amounts of calcium, sodium,
potassium, iron, and magnesium.

In addition, some heavy metals such as gold, lead,
and uranium, which have low melting points or were
highly soluble in the ascending molten masses, were
scavenged from Earth’s interior and concentrated in the
developing crust. This early period of chemical segregation established the three basic divisions of Earth’s interior: (1) the iron-rich core, (2) the thin primitive crust,
and (3) Earth’s largest layer, called the mantle, which
is located between the core and crust. It was from the
primitive mantle that less-dense materials rose to form
the crust and more dense metals sank to the core.

Horizontal Variations in Composition and Temperature In addition to Earth’s layers, there are
small horizontal variations in mineral composition and
temperature with depth. These differences, although
small, indicate that the interior of our planet remains
very dynamic. The rocks of the mantle and crust are in
constant motion, not only moving about through plate
tectonics but also continuously recycling between the
surface and the interior.
One surface manifestation of this ongoing process is
volcanism—which carries water and gases from Earth’s
interior to replenish our oceans and atmosphere, allowing
life to exist at the surface.

How Does Gravity Affect Density?
Gravity affects the density of rocks because rocks are
compressed by the weight of material above them. As a
result, the density of rocks increases with depth. Rocks in

365

12.1 Earth’s Internal Structure

Figure 12.1

Crust
(strong, rocky layer
5–70 km thick)

Earth’s layered structure
The properties of Earth’s
layers include the physical state of the material
(solid, liquid, or gas) as
well as how strong the
material is—for example,
the distinction between
the strong lithosphere
and weak asthenosphere.
Studies have shown that
Earth’s layers are mainly
determined by density,
with the heaviest materials
(iron) at the center and the
lightest ones (gases and
liquids) on the outside.

Upper mantle
(rocky, includes weak
and strong layers)

Lower mantle
(hot, but strong
because of high
pressure)

Mantle

Temperature
and pressure
increase with
depth

2900 km

Atmosphere
(gas)

Hydrosphere
(liquid)

Outer core
(liquid iron)

Oceanic
crust
Lithosphere
(strong,
rocky layers)
~100 km

Core

Inner
core
(solid
iron)

Upper
mantle

600 km

For example, at depths between 300 and 400 kilometers (190 and 250 miles), the intense pressure of the overlying rocks causes the mineral olivine, a common constituent in mantle rocks, to become unstable. As a result, the
atoms in olivine rearrange into a denser and more stable
crystalline structure. The increase in density of mantle
rocks with depth is due both to the compression of existing minerals and to the formation of new “high-pressure”
minerals that have greater density.

12.1

Continental
crust
Moho

Asthenosphere (hot,
weak, rocky layer)

5150 km

6371 km

the upper mantle have a density of about 3.3 grams per
cubic centimeter (g/cm3), whereas the density of rocks
with the same chemical composition found at the base
of the mantle is about 5.6 g/cm3 —nearly twice as great.
This increase in density occurs partly because atoms
(ions) shrink and occupy less space when subjected to
immense pressure.
However, not all atoms compress at the same rate.
For example, it is easier to compress negative ions than
positive ions. Negative ions have more electrons than
protons and tend to be “fluffier” than positive ions. As a
result, when rocks are squeezed, the negative ions (such
as O−2) compress more easily than the positive ions (such
as Si+4 and Mg+2), so the ratios of ionic sizes change. As
these ratios change, the atomic structure of a mineral
may become unstable, causing the atoms to rearrange
into a more stable and denser atomic structure. This
process was discussed in Chapter 3 and is called a phase
change.

Lithospheric mantle
(strong layer)

Concept Checks

1. List the three compositionally distinct layers of
Earth’s interior.
2. Describe the process that produced layering
during Earth’s formation.
3. What causes a mineral phase change?

366

CHAPTER 12

Earth’s Interior

12.2

Probing Earth’s Interior
Describe how seismic waves are used to probe Earth’s interior.

Discovering the structure and properties of Earth’s deep interior has not been easy. Light
does not travel through rock, so we must find other ways to “see” into our planet. The ideal way
to learn about Earth’s interior would be to dig or drill a hole and examine what is extracted.
Unfortunately, this is possible only at shallow depths. The deepest a drilling rig has ever penetrated
is only 12.3 kilometers (7.6 miles), which is about 1/500 of the way to Earth’s center. Although this
seems like a miniscule distance, it was an extraordinary accomplishment because the temperature
at the bottom of the drill hole reached 180°C (356°F).

“Seeing” Seismic Waves
When a magnitude 7.0 earthquake struck the small
Caribbean nation of Haiti in 2010, earthquake waves rippled through the island, destroying or severely damaging
280,000 buildings in and around the capital of Port-auPrince. Earthquake waves, such as those experienced in
the destructive Haitian event, provide a valuable tool for
studying Earth’s interior. The use of earthquake waves,
also called seismic waves, to study Earth’s interior has
been greatly enhanced during the past decade due to
the growing number of seismograph networks that can
detect these waves from distant earthquakes.
About 3000 earthquakes occur each year that are
large enough (about Mw 5.5) to travel all the way through
Earth and be recorded by seismographs at the other side
of the globe (Figure 12.2). The P and S waves from these
SmartFigure 12.2
Seismic waves provide
a way to “see” into our
planet Illustration of seismic waves traveling through
Earth’s interior, assuming
uniform materials along the
path. (https://goo.gl/crzMb0)

When traveling through Earth, seismic waves spread out from
an earthquake source (hypocenter) as circular features called
wave fronts.
Earthquake
Wave
fronts

strong earthquakes act like medical X-rays and provide
the means to “see” into our planet. Detailed studies of
these seismic waves using high-speed computers have
greatly improved our understanding of the nature of
Earth’s interior.

Seismic Velocities
Recall from Chapter 11 that seismic waves generated
by earthquakes travel at different speeds. In addition,
the speed at which P waves and S waves travel through
Earth’s interior depends largely on the properties of the
materials that transmit them. In general, seismic waves
travel fastest when rock is stiff (rigid) or less compressible. These properties of stiffness and compressibility
are used to interpret the composition and temperature
of the rock at various depths. When rock is heated, it
becomes less stiff (imagine warming a frozen chocolate bar), and earthquake waves travel through it more
slowly. Specifically, when P waves travel through molten or partially molten rock, they travel much slower
than if the rock was solid. Furthermore, when S waves
enter the outer core, which is liquid, the waves are not
Earthquake
Reflected
waves
Strongly
curved path

Diffracted
wave

Double
reflection

Refracted
wave

Rays
The paths taken by these waves can also be
considered seismic rays, lines drawn perpendicular
to the wave front as shown here.

Figure 12.3
Possible paths that seismic rays follow through Earth

367

12.2 Probing Earth’s Interior
When seismic waves (rays) encounter a
boundary between materials with
different properties, such as air and
water, the energy splits into reflected
and refracted (bent) waves.

When the velocity of seismic waves
increases as they pass from one layer
into another, the waves refract (bend)
toward the boundary separating the
layers.

When the velocity of seismic waves
decreases as they pass from one layer
into another, the waves refract (bend)
away from the boundary separating them.

Figure 12.4
Reflection and refraction

Reflected
wave
Rock
type 1

Rock
type 2

Rock
type 1

Refracted
wave

Rock
type 1
Refracted
wave

Rock
type 2

transmitted at all because S waves do not travel through
liquids (see Figure 12.6).
Likewise, waves travel at different speeds through
Earth materials that have different compositions. For
example, seismic waves travel faster through oceanic
crust, which is composed of basalt, than through the
continental crust, which has an overall composition
akin to that of granite. Thus, the speed at which seismic waves travel has helped researchers determine
both the types of rocks found within Earth and how
hot they are.

Interactions Between Seismic Waves
and Earth’s Layers
Interpreting the waves recorded on seismograms in
order to identify Earth’s layered structure is challenging.
Seismic waves do not travel along straight paths; instead,
they are reflected, refracted, and diffracted as they pass
through our planet (Figure 12.3). You are familiar with
reflected sound waves we call echoes. When a seismic
wave hits a boundary between different Earth materials,
such as the boundary between the crust and the mantle,
some of the waves are reflected back toward the surface (Figure 12.4). The remaining energy passes though
the boundary and is refracted (bent). This is similar to
how light is refracted (bent) as it passes from air to water.
Seismic waves can also bend when they pass by a curved
surface such as a boundary between two compositionally
different layers—a process called diffraction. These
different wave behaviors have been used to identify the
boundaries that exist within Earth.
One of the most noticeable behaviors of seismic
waves is that they follow strongly curved (refracted) paths
(Figure 12.5). This occurs because the velocity of seismic
waves generally increases with depth—the result of
increasing pressure that squeezes the rock into a more
compact, rigid material.

Refracted
wave

Rock
type 2

Within Earth’s interior, where there are both distinct
boundaries and gradual seismic velocity changes caused
by changes in mineral properties, the pattern of seismic
waves generated by an earthquake is complex. Nevertheless, researchers who study seismograms from large
earthquakes obtained from around the globe can identify
Earth’s major internal structures.

12.2

Concept Checks

1. What characteristic of seismic waves makes them
useful for probing Earth’s interior?
2. What do reflected waves tell us about the
composition of Earth’s interior?
3. Why do seismic waves travel along curved paths
through the mantle?

Earthquake

Mantle

Outer
core
Inner
core

These complicated ray
paths are due to sudden
increases in seismic
velocity caused by
mineral phase changes
in the upper mantle.

Figure 12.5
Paths of seismic waves
though the mantle The
rays follow curved (refracting) paths rather than
straight paths because the
seismic velocity of rocks
increases with depth as a
result of a steady increase
in pressure.

368

CHAPTER 12

Earth’s Interior

12.3

Earth’s Layers
List and describe each of the layers of Earth’s interior.

Combining the data obtained from seismological studies and mineral physics experiments has given
us a layer-by-layer understanding of Earth’s composition (see GEOgraphics 12.1). The variations
in seismic velocities with depth are shown in Figure 12.6. By examining the behavior of a variety of
rocks at the pressures corresponding to these depths, geologists have made important discoveries
about the compositions of Earth’s crust, mantle, and core.
SmartFigure 12.6

Continental crust averages about 40 kilometers (25
Depth (km)
0 miles) thick but can be more
410 than 70 kilometers (40 miles)
660 thick in mountainous regions
1000 such as the Himalayas and
the Andes. The thickest North
P waves
S waves
2000 American crust, beneath the
Lower
Rockies, is more than 50 kilomantle
3000 meters (30 miles) thick. By
contrast, the thinnest crust in
North America is beneath the
4000
Liquid
Basin and Range region in the
outer
western United States, where
core
5000 the crust is as thin as 20 kilometers (12 miles).
S waves
Continental crust has an
6000
average density of about
2
14
4
6
8
10
12
2.7 g/cm3, which is much
Velocity (km/sec)
lower than the density of manSolid
inner
tle rock. The low density of continents relaThe
inner
core
is
less
core
rigid than the mantle.
tive to the mantle explains why continents
are buoyant—acting like giant rafts, floating
atop tectonic plates—and why they cannot
Crust
be readily subducted into the mantle. Because contiThe crust is Earth’s relatively thin, rocky outer skin,
nental rocks cannot be easily recycled into the mantle,
and two types exist: continental crust and oceanic crust.
continental rocks that exceed 4 billion years in age have
Continental crust and oceanic crust have very different
been found.
compositions, histories, and ages. In fact, oceanic crust is
compositionally more similar to Earth’s mantle than to its Discovering Boundaries: The Moho The boundary
between the crust and mantle, called the Moho, was
continental crust.
one of the first features of Earth’s interior discovered
using seismic waves. In 1909, Croatian seismologist
Oceanic Crust The ocean crust is about 7 kilometers
Andrija Mohoroviĉi ć discovered this boundary that now
(4 miles) thick and forms along the mid-ocean ridge system. The rocks of the oceanic crust are younger (180 mil- bears his name. At the base of the continents, P waves
travel about 6 kilometers per second (km/s), but they
lion years old or less) and denser than continental rocks.
3
Ocean crust has a density of about 3.0 g/cm , and is com- abruptly increase in speed to 8 km/s at a slightly greater
depth.
posed of the dark igneous rocks basalt and gabbro. The
Mohoroviĉi ć cleverly used this large jump in seiscomposition and formation of ocean crust are discussed
mic
velocity
to make his discovery. He noticed that two
in greater detail in Chapter 13.
different sets of seismic waves were recorded at seismographs located within a few hundred kilometers of an
Continental Crust Unlike oceanic crust, which has a
earthquake. One set of waves moved through the ground
relatively homogeneous chemical composition, continental crust consists of many rock types. Although the upper at about 6 km/s, while the other set of waves traveled
crust has an average composition of a granitic rock called about 8 km/s—allowing Mohoroviĉi ć to correctly detergranodiorite, its composition and structure vary consider- mine that the different waves were traveling through two
different layers.
ably from place to place.

Average velocities of P and
S waves at each depth
Upper mantle
S waves are an indication
Transition zone
of how rigid (stiff) the material is; faster velocities indiAsthenosphere
cate greater rigidity. The
inner core is less rigid than Lithosphere
the mantle, and the liquid
outer core has no rigidity.
(https://goo.gl/8dP6DM)

The liquid core has no rigidity.

370

CHAPTER 12

Earth’s Interior

from an earthquake’s epicenter, the thickness of the crust
for any location can be calculated.
The difference between travel times for direct and
refracted waves is comparable to the difference between
driving to a destination on local roads versus on interstate
highways. For short distances, you typically arrive sooner
if you drive the most direct route, using local roads. For
long distances, the trip may take less time if you take a
less direct route that involves mostly interstate highways.
The cross-over point, where both routes take an equal
amount of time, is directly related to how far you must
drive before reaching the interstate highway. Applied
to determining the depth of the Moho, the cross-over
is related to how far seismic waves travel through the
Over a short distance the direct waves arrive first.
crust (slow layer) before they reach the
mantle (fast layer): The greater the
Seismographs
cross-over distance, the deeper
#1
#2
#3
Earthquake Direct wave
the Moho. The Moho lies
about 25 to 70 kilometers
Crust
(15 to 45 miles) beneath the
(P-wave velocity 6 km/sec)
Refracted
wave
continents and about 7 kiloMoho
meters (4 miles) below the
Upper mantle
(P-wave velocity 8 km/sec)
ocean floor.
A.

During a shallow earthquake, direct waves travel
along a nearly straight path through the crust, as
shown in Figure 12.7. Other seismic waves follow a path
through the crust and along the top of the mantle. These
are called refracted waves because they are bent, or
refracted, as they enter the mantle. Seismographs near
the epicenter record the direct waves first. However, seismographs farther from the epicenter record the refracted
waves first. The point at which both waves arrive at the
same time, called the cross-over, can be used to determine the depth of the Moho. Thus, using data from these
two sets of waves and seismographs at various distances
Figure 12.7
Determining the depth
of the Moho

For greater distances, the refracted waves arrive first.

Earthquake

Seismographs
#2
Direct wave

#1

#3
Refracted
wave
Moho

B.
At the cross-over point, both waves arrive at the same time. The distance to the
cross-over point increases as the depth of the Moho increases, and therefore
can be used to determine the thickness of the crust at different locations.

Earthquake

Seismographs
#1

Direct wave

#2

Refracted
wave

#3

Moho

C.

Beneath Earth’s crust lies
the mantle. More than 82
percent of Earth’s volume
is contained within the
mantle, a nearly 2900-kilometer- (1800-mile-) thick
shell extending from the base
of the crust (Moho) to the
liquid outer core (see Figure
12.1). Because S waves readily
travel through the mantle, we
know that it is a solid rocky
layer composed of silicate
minerals that are rich in iron
and magnesium. However,
despite its solid nature, rock
in the mantle is quite hot and
capable of flow, albeit at very
slow velocities.

The Upper Mantle

#1
Time

Direct wave

Refracted
wave

#1
Distance

D.

Mantle

#2

#3
#3

Earth’s upper mantle
extends from the Moho to a
depth of about 660 kilometers (410 miles) and can be
divided into three shells:
1.
_TT41


The uppermost mantle is
called the lithospheric
mantle, and it ranges in
thickness from only a few

371

12.3 Earth’s Layers

Figure 12.8

kilometers under the mid-oceanic
ridges to perhaps as much as 200 kilometers (125 miles) under the stable continental interiors. The uppermost mantle and the crust make up Earth’s rigid
outer shell, called the lithosphere.
2. Beneath the lithospheric mantle is a
weak layer called the asthenosphere.
The lithospheric mantle and asthenosphere are compositionally similar;
however, the uppermost mantle is
strong, whereas the asthenosphere is
weak, as a result of Earth’s temperature
structure—a topic we will consider
later.
3. The lower portion of the upper mantle,
at depths between 410 and 660 kilometers, is called the transition zone.
Rocks brought to the surface by volcanism and other
geologic processes have provided geologists with valuable information about the composition of the upper
mantle, which is composed mainly of the rock peridotite
(Figure 12.8). Peridotite is an ultramafic rock that consists
of the minerals olivine and pyroxene, minerals that are
rich in iron and magnesium. As a result, the mantle is
denser than either the continental crust or the oceanic
crust that lie above it.
At the depth (and pressures) of the transition zone,
olivine, which is stable in the uppermost mantle, is
subjected to greater pressure and collapses into denser
structures. In the top half of the transition zone, olivine
converts to a more compact structure similar to the
mineral spinel, and pyroxene converts to a garnet-like
structure.

The Lower Mantle The lower mantle lies between
the transition zone (660 kilometers) and the liquid core
(2900 kilometers). Within the lower mantle, both olivine
and pyroxene take the structure of a dense mineral called
perovskite (recently re-named bridgemanite) and other
related minerals. Because the lower mantle is undoubtedly Earth’s largest layer, occupying 56 percent of the
volume of the planet, perovskite-structured silicate minerals are the single most abundant material within Earth.
The D″ Layer In the lowest few hundred kilometers of
the mantle is a highly variable and unusual region called
D″ (pronounced “dee double-prime”). The D″ layer,
the boundary layer between the rocky mantle and the
liquid iron outer core, is thought to have large variations
in composition as well as temperature (Figure 12.9). Cool
areas in the D″ layer are thought to be the graveyard of
subducted oceanic lithosphere, whereas the hot areas are
the birthplace of deep mantle plumes.
The very base of D″, the part of the mantle in
direct contact with the hot liquid iron core, is like

Peridotite: A rock from
Earth’s mantle This
sample of peridotite (green
rock that is olivine rich) was
carried up from the mantle
and provides clues to the
composition of Earth’s interior. The mantle fragment
(xenolith) was contained
within a volcanic bomb
from Vulkaneifel, Germany.
€1 coin for scale. (Photo by
Woudloper)

Earth’s surface in that there are “upside-down mountains” of rock that protrude into the core. Furthermore,
in some regions of the core–mantle boundary, the base
of D″ may be hot enough to be partially molten. Evidence for partial melting comes from zones at the very
base of the mantle where S-wave velocities decrease
by 30 percent, an indication that the material there is
quite weak.

Discovering Boundaries: The Core–Mantle Boundary Evidence that Earth has a distinct central core
was uncovered in 1906 by British geologist Richard
Dixon Oldham. At locations beyond approximately
100 degrees from the epicenter of a large earthquake,
Oldham observed that P and S waves were absent or
very weak. In other words, Oldham found evidence
for a central core that produced a shadow zone for
seismic waves (Figure 12.10). In 1914, seismologist Beno
Figure 12.9
Hot spot

Subducting
oceanic
slab

Slab
graveyard

Mantle

D”

Outer core

Rising
mantle
plume

Partial
melting

The variable and unusual
D″ layer lies at the base of
the mantle The D″ layer
contains large, horizontal
variations in both temperature and composition. Many
geologists think that the
D″ layer is the graveyard of
subducted oceanic lithosphere and the birthplace
of some mantle plumes.

372

CHAPTER 12

SmartFigure 12.10
P- and S-wave shadow
zones A. The P waves that
travel through the core
are called PKP waves.
The “K” represents the
path through the core and
comes from the German
word for core, which is
kern. The increase in
seismic velocity at the
top of the inner core can
refract waves sharply, so
some arrive within the
shadow zone, shown here
as a single ray. B. Some S
waves are bent around the
core and are recorded on
the other side of the planet
within the S-wave shadow
zone. (https://goo.gl/B2PrC0)

Earth’s Interior
A. The P-wave shadow zone exists because P waves
interact with the low-velocity liquid iron of the outer
core, which causes their rays to be refracted downward.
This creates a shadow zone where no direct P waves
are recorded (although reflected P waves travel there).

B. The core is an obstacle to S waves, because they
cannot pass through liquids. Therefore, a large shadow
zone exists for direct S waves.
Earthquake

Earthquake

Direct
S waves

Direct
P waves
Inner
core
Outer
core

Inner
core
Mantle

Outer
core
Mantle

100°

100°

100°

P-wave
shadow
zone

140°
140°
180°

P waves
recorded

Gutenberg calculated 2900 kilometers (1800 miles) to
the core boundary depth, which remains the accepted
value.
As Oldham predicted, Earth’s core exhibits markedly
different properties from the mantle above, which causes
considerable refraction of P waves—similarly to how light
is refracted as it passes from air to water. In addition,
because the outer core is liquid iron, it blocks the transmission of S waves, which do not travel through liquids.
The locations of the P- and S-wave shadow zones and
how their paths are affected by the core are shown in
Figure 12.10. Whereas some P and S waves still arrive in
the shadow zone, they differ greatly from those expected
in a planet without a core.

Core
The composition of the core is thought to be an iron–
nickel alloy, with minor amounts of oxygen, silicon, and
sulfur. Because of the extreme pressure found in the
core, this iron-rich material has an average density of
more than 10 g/cm3 and is about 13 g/cm3 (13 times the
density of water) at Earth’s center.
The core accounts for only about one-sixth of Earth’s
volume but one-third of its mass. This difference is
because the core is composed mostly of iron, which has
the greatest density of the common elements. Furthermore, the core consists of two zones that have markedly
different strengths, the outer and inner core.

The Outer Core The outer core is a liquid iron-rich
layer 2270 kilometers (1410 miles) thick. The nature of

S-wave shadow zone
(weak diffracted waves)

the outer core was discovered when researchers noticed
that P wave velocities drop dramatically as they cross the
core–mantle boundary, and S waves do not penetrate the
outer core. Because S waves do not pass through liquids,
their absence in the outer core indicates its liquid state.
The movement of metallic iron within this zone generates
Earth’s magnetic field.

The Inner Core At Earth’s center lies the inner
core, a solid dense sphere with a radius of 1216 kilometers (754 miles). Because the inner core is a sphere,
whereas Earth’s other layers are shells, drawings make
the inner core appear much larger than it really is (see
Figure 12.1). The inner core is actually relatively small,
only 1/142 of the volume of Earth (less than 1 percent).
Despite its higher temperature, the iron in the inner core
is solid due to the immense pressures that exist in the
center of the planet.
The inner core did not exist early in Earth’s history,
when our planet was hotter. However, as Earth cooled,
iron began to crystallize at the center to form the solid
inner core. Even today, the inner core continues to grow
larger—at the expense of the outer core.
Separated from the mantle by the liquid outer core,
the solid inner core is free to rotate independently from
Earth’s outer layers. It is thought that the inner core
rotates faster than the crust and mantle, lapping them
every few hundred years (Figure 12.11).
A recent study found a distinct sphere within the
inner core that is about one-half the diameter of the
inner core. While the iron crystals in the outer-inner
core align in roughly a north–south direction, those in

12.4 Earth’s Temperature
1900

the inner-inner core align in an east–west direction. This
finding implies that some dramatic change may have
occurred during the formation of the inner core to flip its
orientation.

1996

Lithosphere
The fastest route
for seismic waves
is shifting eastward
over time, indicating
that the inner core
is rotating faster
than the rest of
the planet

Mantle
Liquid
outer
core

Solid
inner core

Discovering Boundaries: The Inner Core–Outer Core
Boundary The boundary between the solid inner core
and liquid outer core was discovered in 1936 by Danish
seismologist Inge Lehman. By examining seismograph
records, Lehman discovered that some P waves were
strongly refracted (bent) by a sudden increase in seismic
velocities at a boundary within Earth’s core. The waves
she observed were bent enough to arrive within the
P-wave shadow zone, as shown in Figure 12.10A.

12.3

Concept Checks

1. How do continental crust and oceanic crust
differ?
2. What is the Moho? How were seismic waves used
to discover the Moho and determine its depth?

Figure 12.11
The solid inner core moves independently of Earth’s other
layers Slight variations in the travel times of seismic waves
through the core, measured over many decades, suggest that
the inner core actually rotates faster than the mantle. The
reason for this is not yet understood.

12.4

3. List and briefly describe the composition and
physical properties of the layers of the mantle.
4. How are Earth’s inner and outer cores different?
How are they similar?

Earth’s Temperature
Describe the processes of heat transfer that operate within Earth’s interior and
where each of these processes dominates.

Deciphering Earth’s temperature structure and how temperature changes with depth are important for determining the movements of rock within our planet. As you are probably aware, heat
flows from hotter regions toward colder regions. Earth is about 5500°C at its center and 15°C at its
surface. As a result, heat flows toward Earth’s surface.
The rate at which Earth is cooling can be estimated
by determining the rate at which heat escapes Earth’s
surface—a mere 87 milliwatts per square meter. At
this rate, it would require all the energy emitted from
about 690 square meters, roughly the size of a baseball
diamond, to power one 60-watt light bulb. However,
because Earth’s surface is so large, heat leaves at a rate
about three times greater than the world rate of energy
consumption.
Figure 12.12 illustrates that heat does not escape
Earth’s surface at the same rate in all locations. Heat
flow is highest near mid-ocean ridges, where hot magma
is consistently rising toward the surface. The rate of heat
flow is also high in continental regions, where the rocks
are enriched in radioactive isotopes. Heat flow is lowest in
the deep abyssal plains, which are areas of old, cold oceanic seafloor.

How Did Earth Get So Hot? Like all other planets in our solar system, Earth has experienced two
thermal stages (Figure 12.13). The first stage occurred
during Earth’s formation and lasted about 50 million
years—a relatively short time span in geologic terms—
and involved a rapid increase in internal temperature.
The second stage has been the very slow process of
cooling over the remaining 4.5 billion years of Earth
history.
Several factors contributed to the early increase in
temperature. Earth formed through a very violent process involving the collisions of countless planetesimals
(“baby planets”) during the birth of our solar system.
With each collision, the kinetic energy of motion was
converted into thermal energy. As the early Earth grew
in size, its temperature rapidly increased. Our young
planet also contained many short-lived radioactive
_TT42


373

374

CHAPTER 12

Figure 12.12
Rate of heat flow at
Earth’s surface A map of
the rate of heat flow out of
Earth as it gradually cools
over time, measured in milliwatts per square meter.

Earth’s Interior

isotopes, such as aluminum-26 and calcium-41. As
these isotopes decayed to
stable forms, they released a
great deal of energy, called
radiogenic heat.
Another significant
event that heated our planet
was the collision of a Marssized object with Earth
that led to the formation of
the Moon. At that time the
entire core and most, if not
all, of the mantle was molten. From that point—about
4.5 billion years ago—to the
present, Earth has gradually
cooled.
If Earth’s only heat had
Low
High
come from its early formation
0
40
60
85
120
180
240
350
and the decay of short-lived
Heat flow in mW/m2
radioactive isotopes, our
planet would have cooled
to a frozen cinder long ago. However, the mantle and
crust also contain long-lived radioactive isotopes that keep
our planet cooking as if on a slow burner. As shown in
Table 9.1 (page 290), the half-lives of the four main
isotopes—uranium-235, uranium-238, thorium-232, and
potassium-40—are billions of years long.
The young Earth was hot because of the heat
Radioactivity plays two vital roles in geology. It is the
generated by countless collisions with planetesimals,
means for determining the ages of rocks, as discussed in
and because of heat released by the decay of
Chapter 9. More importantly, it is the source of radioshort-lived radioactive isotopes.
genic heat that drives mantle convection and, ultimately,
the movement of Earth’s tectonic plates.

Earth loses most of its heat near
mid-ocean ridges, where magma rises
to fill the cracks formed when tectonic
plates pull apart.

SmartFigure 12.13
Earth’s thermal history
through time (https://goo.gl/
roXiv2)

Continents emit more heat than old
oceanic seafloor because they contain
higher amounts of heat-producing
radioactive isotopes.

Earth’s temperature

Hot
If Earth’s only source of
internal heat was
generated during its
early formative period,
our planet would have
cooled to a frozen cinder
long ago. However, the
mantle and crust also
contain long-lived
radioactive isotopes that
keep our planet cooking
as if on a slow burner.

U235

Heat Flow
Heat travels from Earth’s interior to space via three different mechanisms: convection, conduction, and radiation. The layers where these mechanisms contribute
significantly to the outward flow of thermal energy are
shown in Figure 12.14. Only two of these processes, convection and conduction, operate within Earth’s interior.
The third, radiation, transports heat away from Earth’s
surface and eventually back to space.

Convection The transfer of heat in a fluid-like manEnergy output
of long-lived
radioactive isotopes
through time.
U238

Cool

Th232
0

K40
1

2

3

4

Time (billions of years since origin)

5

ner, where hot materials displace cooler materials (or
vice versa), is called convection. It is the primary
means of heat transfer within Earth. You are familiar
with convection if you have ever watched boiling water
in a pot. The water appears to be rolling—rising in the
middle and sinking down the sides of the pot. This pattern, called a convection cycle, occurs within Earth’s
mantle and outer core, and possibly within the inner
core as well.

12.4 Earth’s Temperature

Lithosphere

Radiation
Conduction

Mantle
(rock)
Convection

D”

Conduction
Outer core
(liquid iron)
Conduction
and
convection

Inner core
(solid iron)
Conduction

Figure 12.14
Dominant types of heat transfer at various depths Heat travels from Earth’s interior to the surface through the processes
of convection and conduction. However, Earth ultimately loses
its heat to space through radiation.

375

flow as easily as water but can still flow. For example,
ketchup flows, although it is thousands of times more
viscous than water. Rock in the lower mantle is 10 trillion trillion (1025) times more viscous than water, but
yet it flows.
Temperature differences between the top and bottom of a convection cycle determine how vigorous the
convection will be. Earth’s surface is extremely cold
compared to the interior, so newly formed oceanic
lithosphere cools rapidly (Figure 12.15). This causes
oceanic lithosphere to contract, become denser and
heavier, and, in time, sink back into the mantle at
subduction zones. As these cold sinking slabs descend,
they absorb heat. Some of this crustal material eventually becomes warm and buoyant enough to return to
the surface. Cool oceanic lithosphere can therefore be
thought of as the top of the mantle convection cycle,
whereas rising mantle rock below spreading centers
and the warm buoyant rocks called mantle plumes
are the upward-flowing arms of this convection cycle
(see Figure 12.15).
Convection sometimes occurs when differences
in density arise through chemical rather than thermal
means. Chemical convection is an important mechanism
operating in the outer core. As iron crystallizes and sinks
to form the solid inner core, it leaves behind a molten
material that contains a higher percentage of lighter
elements. Because this liquid is more buoyant than the
surrounding iron-rich material, it rises and contributes to
convective flow in the outer core.

Conduction The flow of heat through a material is
Convection occurs because of several factors:
called conduction. Heat conducts in two ways: (1)
thermal expansion, gravity-induced buoyancy, and fluthrough the collisions of atoms and (2) through the flow
idity. When water at the bottom of a pot is heated, it
of electrons. In rocks, atoms are locked in place but are
expands and rises, replacing the cooler, denser water
constantly oscillating. If one side of a rock is heated,
at the top. Gravity is the driving force for convection.
the atoms on that side will oscillate more energetiHot water is less dense (more buoyant) than cold water, cally. This increases the intensity of the collisions with
so it rises, and the cold water sinks to take its place. If
neighboring atoms, and in a domino effect, the energy
you tried to boil water in outer space, where there is
no strong gravity, you would find that the pot of water
would not convect.
Figure 12.15
Oceanic ridge
Materials must
Whole-mantle convection
Hot
also be weak enough to
Cool
spot
According
to this model, the
descending
flow. Scientists usually
oceanic
entire mantle is in motion,
measure a material’s
plate
driven by the sinking of cold
Upper mantle
fluidity in terms of
oceanic lithosphere back
Hot
Cool
its resistance to flow,
into the deep mantle. This is
rising
descending
called its viscosity.
mantle
like stirring a pot of stew with
oceanic
plume
plate
Water flows easily and
downward strokes of a spoon.
The upward flow of rock likely
has a low viscosity. The
occurs through a combination
liquid iron of Earth’s
of mantle plumes and a broad
outer core likely has a
Hot
return flow of rock to replace
rising
viscosity similar to that
mega-plume
the oceanic lithosphere that
of water, and it convects
leaves the surface at subduction
Core
easily as well. Materials
zones. Not all scientists agree
that are viscous do not
with this model.

376

CHAPTER 12

Earth’s Interior

slowly propagates through the rock. Conduction occurs
much more quickly in metals than in rocky substances.
Although the atoms in metals are also locked in place,
some of their electrons are free to move through the
material, and these electrons can carry heat quickly
from one side of a metallic object to another.
Materials conduct at vastly different rates. For
example, heat conducts about 40,000 times more easily
through a diamond than through air. Most rocks are poor
conductors of heat, so conduction is not an efficient way
to move heat through most of Earth. However, it is an
important mechanism in places such as the lithosphere,
the D″ layer, and the core.

Heat Flow in Earth’s Interior The dominant types of
heat transfer by layer in Earth’s interior are illustrated
in Figure 12.14. Conduction is thought to be the most
important process in the solid inner core. When heat conducts from the inner core to the outer core, convection
begins to play a more significant role in carrying heat to
the top of the core.
Convective flow in the outer core is thought to be
driven by three main mechanisms:
1.

As heat conducts out of the core into the overlying
mantle, the material in the outermost core cools, becomes denser, and sinks. This is a form of top-down,
thermally driven convection.
2. Crystallization of solid iron near the bottom of the
outer core sinks to form the inner core and leaves behind fluids that are less dense because they are depleted of iron. As this buoyant fluid rises, away from
the inner core boundary, it drives a type of chemical
convection.
3. There are thought to be radioactive isotopes, such as
potassium-40, within the core that could provide additional heat to drive thermal convection.
The transfer of energy from the core to the mantle
occurs by conduction because the iron-rich material of the
core is too dense to intrude (convect) into the less-dense
mantle rocks. For thermal energy to leave the core, it must
conduct across the core–mantle boundary and up through
the D″ layer. Once it reaches the lower mantle, thermal
energy is carried toward the surface through slow, sluggish
mantle convection.
Most of the thermal energy that reaches the upper
mantle makes its final journey to the surface by slowly
conducting across the stiff, rigid lithosphere. The remaining energy is carried to the surface along divergent plate
boundaries and other sites of volcanic activity where rising molten rock erupts.

Earth’s Temperature Profile
The profile of Earth’s average temperature at each
depth is called the geothermal gradient, or geotherm

(Figure 12.16A). Within the crust, temperatures increase
rapidly—as much as 30°C per kilometer of depth. The
deepest diamond mines in South Africa are more than
3 kilometers below Earth’s surface, where temperatures
exceed 50°C (120°F). However, temperature increases
do not continue at this rapid rate; if they did, our planet
would be molten ball surrounded by a 100-kilometerthick outer shell.
At the base of the lithosphere, about 100 kilometers
down, the temperature is roughly 1400°C. You would
need to descend to nearly the bottom of the mantle
before the temperature doubled to 2800°C. For most
of the mantle, the temperature increases very slowly—
about 0.3°C per kilometer. The exception to this pattern is within the thin D″ layer, which acts as a thermal
boundary, where temperatures increase by more than
1000°C from top to bottom.
Determining temperatures deep within Earth is
difficult, and uncertainties remain. The temperature at
Earth’s center has been estimated to be between 5000°
and 8000°C. For our discussion, we use 5500°C as the
temperature at Earth’s center.
Figure 12.16A shows the geotherm (average temperature at each depth) as well as the curve for the melting point of material at each depth. Note that the melting
point curves generally increase gradually with depth as a
result of the continual increase in pressure exerted by the
overlying material. Squeezing a material makes it more
difficult to melt because in their liquid form, materials
usually take up more volume than in their solid form.
As a result, higher pressures result in higher melting
temperatures.
Considered together, the geotherm and the melting point curve are valuable tools for investigating the
behavior of Earth’s materials. In layers where the geotherm (temperature at depth) is greater than the melting
temperature, the material is molten. As shown in Figure
12.16A, this situation occurs in the outer core.
The relationship between the geotherm and the
melting temperature not only determines whether a
material is molten but also indicates its stiffness, or viscosity. Notice how viscosity, shown in Figure 12.16B, is
directly related to the proximity of the geotherm curves
to the melting point curves in Figure 12.16A. When
rock approaches its melting point, it begins to soften and
weaken. Low-viscosity regions, such as the asthenosphere
and D″, are weak. High-viscosity regions, such as the
lithosphere, are rigid.
Most of the lower mantle is very stiff, so rock moves
sluggishly there (see Figure 12.16B). Researchers have
determined that convective flow is several times slower
in the lower mantle than in the upper mantle. However,
at the very base of the mantle, temperature increases
rapidly with depth. As a result, rock in the D″ layer is
relatively weak, flows more easily, and may experience
some melting.
_TT43


378

CHAPTER 12

Earth’s Interior

12.5

Earth’s Three-Dimensional Structure
Discuss what studies of Earth’s gravity, seismic tomography, and Earth’s magnetic
field have revealed about variations in the layers of our planet.

As you have discovered in this chapter, Earth is not perfectly layered. At the surface, a variety of
compositional and structural differences exist: oceans, continents, mountains, valleys, trenches, and
mid-ocean ridges. Geophysical observations show that horizontal variations are not limited to the
surface; they also occur within Earth and are directly related to the process of mantle convection
and plate tectonics. Three-dimensional structures within Earth have been identified by studying
variations in Earth’s gravitational and magnetic fields and imaging called seismic tomography.

Earth’s Gravity
Earth’s rotation is the most significant cause for the differences in the force of gravity observed at the surface. Because
Earth rotates around its axis, the acceleration due to gravity*
is less at the equator (9.78 m/s2) than at the poles (9.83 m/s2).
Two reasons account for this phenomenon. Earth’s rotation causes a centrifugal force that is in proportion to the
distance from the axis of rotation. In a manner similar to the
force that throws you sideways in a vehicle going too quickly
around a curve or corner, centrifugal force acts to throw
objects outward at the equator, where the force is greatest.
Earth’s shape is also affected by its rotation—with the
equator slightly further from Earth’s center (6378 kilometers) than the poles (6357 kilometers) (Figure 12.17). Earth,
Polar
flattening
(radius = 6357 km)

Fisherman at
the poles
weighs 200 lbs

Perfect
sphere

Equatorial
bulge
(radius = 6378 km)

therefore, is not a perfect sphere but instead bulges at the
equator—a shape called an oblate ellipsoid. This difference causes the force of gravity to be slightly weaker at the
equator than at the poles because gravitational attraction
is less when objects are further apart. In fact, your body
weight is 0.5 percent less at the equator than at the poles.
Gravity measurements show that there are other
variations that cannot be explained by Earth’s rotation.
For instance, when a large body of unusually dense rock
is underground, the increase in mass will cause a largerthan-average gravitational force at the surface directly
above. Because metals and metal ores tend to be much
denser than silicate rocks, local gravity anomalies (differences from the expected) have long been used to help
prospect for ore deposits.
A map of regional gravity anomalies for the United
States is shown in Figure 12.18. A narrow positive gravity anomaly (stronger than expected) that runs down
the middle of the country is the mid-continent rift (red),
where thick, dense volcanic rocks filled a rupture in the
crust more than 1 billion years ago. The negative gravity
anomaly (blue) in the Basin and Range region is a result
of warm, low-density crust being stretched and thinned
as it was intruded by hot buoyant magma bodies.
Some large-scale differences in density deep beneath
the surface have been detected using satellites. These
gravity anomalies result from the large upwellings and
downwellings of mantle convection. Areas of upwelling are
associated with hot mantle plumes, whereas downwelling
occurs where cold oceanic slabs descend into the mantle.

Seismic Tomography

Figure 12.17
Earth is not a sphere but
an oblate spheroid
Because Earth rotates, it
bulges at the equator and
flattens at the poles.

Earth’s axis
of rotation
Same fisherman
at the equator
weighs 199 lbs

The three-dimensional changes in composition and density that are detected with gravity measurements can also
be viewed using seismology. The technique, called seismic tomography, involves collecting signals from many
different earthquakes recorded at many seismograph stations, in order to “see” all parts of Earth’s interior. Seismic
tomography is similar to medical tomography, in which
doctors use technology such as CT scans to make threedimensional images of humans’ internal organs.
*The force of gravity causes objects, such as apples, to accelerate as they fall to
the ground, hence the expression “acceleration due to gravity.”

The negative anomaly (blue) in the
Basin and Range Province is the result
of hotter, less dense, and tectonically
active crust (rifting and volcanoes).

The narrow positive anomaly (red) that runs
in a line down the middle of the country is the
mid-continent rift, where dense volcanic
rocks entered the crust more than a billion
years ago.

379
Figure 12.18

Ap
pa
la

Mi

Basin
and
Range

ch
ian
s

d-c
on
Rif tinen
t
t

Gravity anomalies beneath
the continental United States

Rocky
Mountains

Figure 12.19

–160 –120
mGal

–80

–40

0

The western United States is
tectonically active, making
that portion of the continent
warmer and weaker (shown by
the color red), which slows
S waves.

The large blue structure
extending far beneath
North America is likely
a sheet of cold, dense,
ancient Pacific seafloor
that is sinking toward
the base of the mantle.

rica
Ame
h
t
r
No
2

Mid
-At
lan
t ic

3

Fa

ral
l

Older portions of continents,
North America and Africa,
are cold and strong—the
blue color indicates fast
S wave speeds.

4

on
pla
te

Ri
dg
e

Mantle

1

5

Core

a
Afric

Seismic tomography identifies regions where P or S
waves travel faster or slower than average for a particular
depth. These seismic velocity anomalies are then interpreted as variations in material properties such as temperature, composition, mineral phase, or water content.
For instance, increasing the temperature of rock about
100°C can decrease S-wave velocities about 1 percent, so
images from seismic tomography are often interpreted in
terms of temperature variations.
A seismic tomography cross section for the mantle
centered beneath North America is shown in Figure 12.19.
Regions where waves travel slower than average (negative
anomalies) are red, and regions where waves travel faster
than average (positive anomalies) are blue. Significant
patterns can be observed in this diagram. For example,
the lithosphere beneath the interiors of North America
and Africa exhibits faster seismic velocities than oceanic
lithosphere because continental lithosphere is older and
has been cooling for billions of years. Seismic imaging
also shows that continental lithosphere (deep blue areas)
can be quite thick, extending more than 300 kilometers
(180 miles) into the mantle. Conversely, oceanic ridges
such as the Mid-Atlantic Ridge exhibit slow seismic velocities because they are extremely hot (see Figure 12.19).
In the mantle beneath North America, you can
see a sloping zone of fast seismic velocities (blue/green)
representing a sheet of descending oceanic lithosphere
known as the Farallon plate. The segment of this former
slab of seafloor seen in Figure 12.19 is currently sinking and warming as it moves toward the core–mantle
boundary. Given enough time, this slab may become hot
and buoyant enough to begin to rise back to the surface.

Oc
ea
n

–200

fic

–240

The negative anomalies (blue)
beneath the Rockies and
Appalachians show us that the
crust has deep roots made up of
less dense rock beneath the
mountains.

Pac
i

–280

A seismic tomographic
slice, showing the
structure of the mantle
Colors show variations in
the speed of S waves from
their average value. Cool,
strong rock produces fast
S waves and is shown in
blue, while warm, weak
rock produces slow S
waves and is shown in red.

African
superplume
The large orange structures beneath
western Africa and the Pacific Ocean are
thought to be superplumes of warm
material that are rising toward the surface.
1

2

3

4

5

Percent variations in S wave velocity
from average values
–1.5% –1.0% –0.5%
Slow

0

0.5%

1.0%

1.5%
Fast

380

CHAPTER 12

Earth’s Interior

Earth’s Magnetic Field

Figure 12.20
How Earth’s magnetic
field is generated in the
liquid, iron-rich outer core

Convection of liquid iron in the outer core is vigorous,
which makes the outer core appear uniform when viewed
with seismic waves. In reality, however, patterns of flow
in the outer core create variations in Earth’s magnetic
field that are measurable at the surface and tell a different story.

1. Earth’s
rotation causes
spiral flow
in the iron-rich
liquid outer
core that
aligns with
the spin
axis.

Figure 12.21
Similarities between
Earth’s magnetic field
and an electromagnet

The Geodynamo Earth’s magnetic field has a complex structure that reflects the processes that generate it.
As iron-rich fluid in the outer core rises, its path becomes
twisted because of Earth’s rotation. As a result, the fluid
moves in spiraling columns that align with Earth’s axis
of rotation (Figure 12.20). Because this iron-rich fluid is
electrically charged and flowing, it generates a magnetic
field—a phenomenon called a geodynamo. This process
is similar to how an electromagnet generates a magnetic
field. When a wire is wrapped around an iron nail and
an electric current passes through it, the nail becomes
a magnet that generates a magnetic field that resembles
2. The electrically-charged spiral flow in
the one surrounding a bar magnet (Figure 12.21A). This
the outer core generates Earth's magnetic field.
type
of magnetic field is called a dipolar field because
This is similar to how an electromagnet works.
it has two poles (north and south magnetic poles). The
magnetic field that emanates from Earth’s outer core has
The large region of slow seismic velocities beneath
the same dipolar form (Figure 12.21B).
Africa (the large reddish orange region at the lower right
However, the convection in the outer core is considof Figure 12.19) is called the African superplume—a
erably
more complex. More than 90 percent of Earth’s
region of upward flow in the mantle. These slow velocimagnetic
field is dipolar, but the remainder is a result of
ties are likely due to both unusually high temperatures
more
complicated
patterns of convection. In addition,
and rock that is highly enriched in iron. The rising rock
some
of
the
features
of Earth’s magnetic field change
cannot easily break through the thick African crust, so
over
time.
For
centuries,
sailors have used compasses to
it seems to be deflected to both sides of the continent,
navigate,
primarily
keeping
track of the direction toward
perhaps supplying magma to both the Mid-Atlantic and
which
compass
needles
point.
From compass observations,
Indian Ocean spreading centers.
it was determined that the positions of the magnetic poles
gradually change. Understanding this phenomenon
It was once thought that Earth's core acted like a
requires an examination of
large bar magnet. Now scientists think that Earth's
magnetic field is similar to that produced by an
how the magnetic field is
This simple electromagnet consists of
electromagnet. The cylinders of spiraling liquid iron
measured.
Inner
core

a nail wrapped in a coil of wire that
has an electrical current traveling
through it.

shown in Figure 12.20 behave like the electric
current passing through the coil wire of an
electromagnet.

N

N
Magnetic
field

+

North
Rotation
magnetic
axis
pole

Wire
coil

–

S
A. Electromagnet (Dipolar field)

Magnetic
field

S

B. Earth’s magnetic field (Dipolar field)

Measuring Earth’s
Magnetic Field and Its
Changes Anywhere
on Earth’s surface, the
direction of the magnetic
field is measured with two
angles, called declination and inclination. The
declination measures the
direction to the magnetic
north pole with respect
to the direction to the
geographic North Pole
(Earth’s axis of rotation).
The inclination measures
the downward tilt of the
magnetic lines of force
at any location—what a

381

12.5 Earth’s Three-Dimensional Structure

Figure 12.23

es
of
f

or
c

S
N

Geographic
North Pole

160°E

S

Lin

N

Magnetic
Pole

180°W North

Northern latitudes

2015
°N

85

Magnetic
North
Pole

Locations of the north
magnetic pole over
time The patterns of
convection within the outer
core change fast enough
that we can see the
strength and position of the
magnetic field change significantly over our lifetimes.

e

2010

°W

0
16

°N
80

2005
2001

60

°N

1984

S

1962
1948

Equator
Equatorial latitude

70

°N
_TT44


Figure 12.22

1904

N

North America

compass would show if tilted on its side. At the magnetic
north pole, the field points directly downward, while at
the equator, it is horizontal (Figure 12.22). In the central
United States it tilts downward at an intermediate angle.
Recent studies have shown that the locations of the
magnetic poles change significantly over time. Earth’s
magnetic north pole was previously located in Canada
but moved northward into the Arctic Ocean during
the past decade. Currently, it is moving northwestward
at over 70 kilometers (40 miles) per year (Figure 12.23).
While the magnetic north pole has been moving toward
the geographic North Pole, the magnetic south pole has
been moving away from the geographic South Pole, passing from Antarctica to the Pacific Ocean.

100°W

65°

80°W

°W

Inclination or dip of the magnetic field at different locations
Although a compass measures only the horizontal direction of
the magnetic field (the declination), at most locations, the field
also dips in or out of the surface at various angles (inclination).

°W

W

75

120

Magnetic
South
Pole

1994

0°
14

N

Greenland

Figure 12.24

N

N

S

Magnetic Reversals Although the pattern of convection in the core changes over time, causing the magnetic
poles to move, the locations of the magnetic poles averaged over thousands of years align with Earth’s axis of
rotation (geographic poles). One major exception occurs
during periods of magnetic reversals. At apparently
random times, Earth’s magnetic field reverses polarity
so that the north needle on a compass points south. (The
importance of these reversals in the study of paleomagnetism is described in Chapter 2.) During a reversal,
the strength of the magnetic field decreases to about 10
percent of normal, and the locations of the poles begin to
wander, going so far as to cross the equator (Figure 12.24).
When the strength of the magnetic field returns to normal levels, the field is regenerated with reverse polarity.
The entire process takes only a few thousand years.

S
A. Normal orientation of
magnetic field

B. Magnetic field weakens and
poles begin to wander
S

S

N
C. Poles wander across the
equator

N
D. Reversal complete with
north pole pointing south

Computer simulations
showing how Earth’s magnetic field might reverse
direction The white circle
represents the core–mantle
boundary, and the dashed
white line represents the
projected position of the
equator. The arrows point
to the north (N) and south
(S) magnetic poles. During
a reversal, the strength of
the magnetic field weakens, and the poles begin
to wander greatly, going so
far as to cross the equator.
When the strength of the
field returns to normal levels, the field is regenerated
with reverse polarity.

382

CHAPTER 12

Earth’s Interior

The rate at which the magnetic field reverses provides evidence that convection patterns in the outer core
change over relatively short time spans. This complex
process is now being modeled using high-speed computers. In addition, Figure 12.24 illustrates how the magnetic field lines twist in a complex manner before returning to a more uniform, simpler dipolar pattern.
The existence of magnetic reversals has been
extremely important to geoscientists in providing the
foundation for the theory of plate tectonics. However,
magnetic reversals have potentially harmful consequences for Earth’s land dwellers. An atmospheric
magnetic layer, known as the magnetosphere, surrounds
our planet and protects Earth’s surface from bombardment by ionized particles, called solar wind, emitted by
the Sun. If the strength of the magnetic field decreases
significantly during a reversal, the increased amounts of
ionized particles reaching Earth’s surface could cause
health hazards for humans and other life-forms.

Global Dynamic Connections The layers of planet
Earth are not isolated from one another; rather, they are
connected by their thermally driven motions. These connected motions do not necessarily interact in a predictable, steady manner; instead, they tend to occur episodically or in pulses. One example is the possible connection
between magnetic reversals, hot-spot volcanism, and the
breakup of the supercontinent Pangaea.
Pangaea began to break up about 200 million years
ago, and the accompanying increase in plate motion
resulted in the subduction of large amounts of seafloor.
About 80 million years later, the magnetic reversal process shut down, preventing Earth’s magnetic field from
reversing for 35 million years. During this period, several

enormous outpourings of lava have been linked to the
arrival of new hot-spot mantle plumes at the surface.
In one hypothesis, these three events are closely
connected. In the 80 million years following the breakup
of Pangaea, a large amount of subducted lithosphere is
thought to have plunged to the base of the mantle. This
would have displaced hot rock at the base of the mantle,
causing much of it to rise toward the surface and erupt
as flood basalts. India’s Deccan Traps are an example
of such a process. At the same time, the sudden infusion of comparatively cold oceanic lithosphere next to
the hot core at the core–mantle boundary would have
chilled the uppermost core. This would have increased
the temperature gradient—hotter at the bottom, cooler
at the top—in the outer core. The result would have been
more vigorous convection that prevented the magnetic
field from weakening and reversing. This hypothesis, if
accurate, is an important reminder that Earth is a complex, churning, pulsing planet that is active in a variety of
geologic functions.

12.5

Concept Checks

1. Is the force of gravity the same over Earth’s entire
surface? Explain why or why not.
2. Give examples of tectonic features of Earth’s
three-dimensional structure that are revealed by
seismic tomography.
3. What is thought to produce Earth’s magnetic field?
4. Describe how the positions of the magnetic poles
change through time.

13
Origin and
Evolution of
the Ocean
Floor

Aerial view of Bora Bora, an island in French Polynesia
that is a remanent of an extinct volcano surrounded by
a barrier reef. (Photo by Michel Renaudeau/AGE Fotostock)

T

he ocean is Earth’s most prominent feature, covering more
than 70 percent of its surface. Yet, prior to the 1950s, information about the ocean
floor was extremely limited. With the development of modern instruments, our understanding of the diverse topography of the ocean floor improved dramatically. Particularly
significant was the discovery of the global oceanic ridge system, a broad elevated landform that stands 2 to 3 kilometers higher than the adjacent deep-ocean basins and is
the longest topographic feature on Earth.
In this chapter we will examine the topography of the ocean floor and look at the
processes that generate its varied features.

13.1

An Emerging Picture of the Ocean Floor
Define bathymetry and describe the various bathymetric techniques used to map
the ocean floor.

If all water could be drained from the ocean basins, a great variety of features would be observed,
including volcanic peaks, deep trenches, extensive plains, linear ridges, and large plateaus. In fact,
the topography would be nearly as diverse as that on the continents.

Mapping the Seafloor
The complex nature of ocean-floor topography did not
unfold until the historic 3½-year voyage of the HMS
Challenger (Figure 13.1). From December 1872 to May
SmartFigure 13.1
HMS Challenger
The first systematic bathymetric survey of the ocean
was made aboard the
HMS Challenger during its
historic 3½-year voyage.
(Photo courtesy of the Library of
Congress) (https://goo.gl/F3dYJ2)

1876, the Challenger expedition made the first comprehensive study of the global ocean ever attempted. During the 127,500-kilometer (79,200-mile) voyage, the
ship and its crew of scientists traveled to every ocean

389

13.1 An Emerging Picture of the Ocean Floor

Figure 13.2

except the Arctic. Throughout the voyage, they sampled a multitude of ocean properties, including water
depth, which was accomplished by laboriously lowering
long weighted lines overboard. The HMS Challenger
measured the depth of the deepest spot on the seafloor
in 1875. Today, this spot is called the Challenger Deep
and is about 10,994 meters (36,070 feet) deep.

Echo sounder An echo
sounder determines the
water depth by measuring
the time interval required
for an acoustic wave to
travel from a ship to the
seafloor and back.
Outgoing
signal

Modern Bathymetric Techniques The measurement of ocean depths and the charting of the shape or
topography of the ocean floor is known as bathymetry
(bathos = depth, metry = measurement). Today, sound
energy is often used to measure water depths. The basic
approach employs sonar, an acronym for sound navigation and ranging. The first devices that used sound
to measure water depth, called echo sounders, were
developed early in the twentieth century. Echo sounders
work by transmitting a sound wave (called a ping) into
the water in order to produce an echo when it bounces
off any object, such as a large marine organism or the
ocean floor (Figure 13.2). A sensitive receiver intercepts
the reflected echo, and a clock precisely records the
travel time to fractions of a second. Using the speed of
sound waves in water—about 1500 meters (4900 feet)
per second—and measuring the time required for the
energy pulse to reach the ocean floor and return, the
depth can be calculated: Depth = ½ (1500 m/sec ×
echo travel time). Bathymetry determined from continuous monitoring of these echoes is plotted to obtain
a profile of the ocean floor. By laboriously combining
numerous profiles, a detailed chart of the seafloor has
been produced.
Following World War II, the U.S. Navy developed
sidescan sonar to look for explosive devices that had
been deployed in shipping lanes (Figure 13.3A). Torpedoshaped instruments towed behind ships send out a fan

of sound extending on either side of the ship’s path. By
combining swaths of sidescan sonar data, oceanographers produced the first photograph-like images of the
seafloor (Figure 13.4).
Although sidescan sonar provides valuable views
of the seafloor, it does not provide bathymetric (water
depth) data. This drawback was resolved with the development of high-resolution multibeam instruments (see
Figure 13.3A). These systems use hull-mounted sound
sources that send out a fan of sound and then record
reflections from the seafloor through a set of narrowly
focused receivers aimed at different angles. Rather than
obtain the depth of a single point every few seconds,
this technique allows a survey ship to map a swath of

A. Sidescan sonar and multibeam sonar operating from the
same research vessel.

B. Color-enhanced perspective map of the seafloor and coastal
landforms in the Los Angeles area of California.

Reflected
signal

Seafloor

Los Angeles
Continental
shelf
Sidescan
sonar
(towfish)

Long Beach

Multibeam
sonar
Shaded Relief
Bathymetry

Seafloor

0

7.5

15

22.5

0

4

8

12

Continental
shelf
30 Kilometers
16 Nautical Miles

Continental
slope
Continental
rise

Figure 13.3
Sidescan and multibeam
sonar

390

CHAPTER 13

Origin and Evolution of the Ocean Floor

Arctic Ocean
Abyssal
plain
Aleutian
Trench
Kurile
Trench

Oceanic
plateau

ou n t

Abyssal
plain
North
America
Oceanic
plateau
Caribbean
Plateau

s

Ryukyu
Trench

m
or Sea
Emper

Japan
Trench

Juan de
Fuca
Ridge

Haw
aiia
n Ch
ain

Mariana Trench

Philippine
Trench

Pacific Ocean
Challenger Deep

Oceanic
plateau

Tonga Trench
Australia

South
America

fic R
ise

Ontong-Java
Plateau

East
Paci

Sunda
(Java)
Trench

Central
America
Trench

Peru-Chile
Trench

Oceanic
plateau
Kermadec Trench
Transform
faults
Oceanic
plateau

Abyssal plain
Key: Lighter blues are shallower water
Darker blues are deeper water

Figure 13.4
Major features of the
seafloor

ocean floor tens of kilometers wide. In addition, these
systems collect bathymetric data of such high resolution that they can distinguish depths that differ by less
than 1 meter (3 feet). When multibeam sonar is used to
map sections of seafloor, the ship travels in a regularly
spaced back-and-forth pattern known as “mowing the
lawn.”

Despite their greater efficiency and enhanced detail,
research vessels equipped with multibeam sonar travel
at a mere 10 to 20 kilometers (6 to 12 miles) per hour. It
would take at least 100 vessels outfitted with this equipment hundreds of years to map the entire seafloor. This
explains why only about 5 percent of the seafloor has
been mapped in detail (Figure 13.3B).

391

13.1 An Emerging Picture of the Ocean Floor

Arctic Ocean

Eurasia
Transform
fault
Abyssal
plain
Puerto-Rico
Trench

Atlantic
Ocean
Mid

Abyssal
plain

At

la
nti
cR

i

e
dg

Africa

ian Rid g e
Ind
d-

Mi
Transform
fault

South
America
Abyssal
plain

e

dg
Ri

st

Kerguelen
Plateau

South Sandwich
Trench

Abyssal
plain
Antarctica

Mapping the Ocean Floor from Space Another technological breakthrough that led to an enhanced understanding of the seafloor involves measuring the shape of
the ocean surface from space. After compensating for
waves, tides, currents, and atmospheric effects, scientists
discovered that the water’s surface is not perfectly “flat.”
Because massive structures such as seamounts and ridges

ea

th
Sou

st
we

ian
Ind

Abyssal
plain

uth
So

Oceanic
plateau

Indian
Ocean

exert stronger-than-average gravitational attraction, they
produce elevated areas on the ocean surface. Conversely,
canyons and trenches create slight depressions.
Satellites equipped with radar altimeters are able
to measure subtle differences in sea level by bouncing
microwaves off the sea surface (Figure 13.5). These devices
can measure variations as small as a few centimeters.

Ind
ia

n Ri
dge

392

Origin and Evolution of the Ocean Floor

CHAPTER 13

Provinces of the Ocean Floor

Figure 13.5
Satellite

Satellite altimeter A satellite altimeter measures the
variation in sea-surface
elevation, which is caused
by gravitational attraction
and mimics the shape
of the seafloor. The seasurface anomaly is the
difference between the
measured ocean surface
and the theoretical ocean
surface.

Satellite orbit
Radar altimeter

Outgoing
radar pulses

Return pulses
from sea
surface

Theoretical
ocean
surface

Oceanographers studying the topography of the ocean
floor identify three major areas: continental margins,
deep-ocean basins, and oceanic (mid-ocean) ridges.
The map in Figure 13.6 outlines these provinces for the
North Atlantic Ocean, and the profile at the bottom
shows the varied topography. Profiles of this type usually have their vertical dimension exaggerated many
times (40 times, in this case) to make topographic
features more conspicuous. Vertical exaggeration,
however, makes slopes appear much steeper than they
actually are.

13.1

Concept Checks

Anomaly
1. Define bathymetry.
2. Assuming that the average speed of sound waves
in water is 1500 meters (4900 feet) per second,
determine the water depth if the signal sent out
by an echo sounder requires 6 seconds to strike
bottom and return to the recorder.

Seafloor

3. Describe how satellites orbiting Earth can
determine features on the seafloor without being
able to directly observe them beneath several
kilometers of seawater.

Such data have added greatly to our knowledge of oceanfloor topography. Combined with traditional sonar depth
measurements, the data are used to produce detailed
ocean-floor maps, such as the one in Figure 13.4.

4. What are the three major topographic provinces
of the ocean floor?

Figure 13.6
Major topographic
divisions of the
North Atlantic The
accompanying profile
extends from New England
to the coast of North Africa
and provides a glimpse
of the various structures
found across the Atlantic
basin.

A

A

Mid
-oc
ea

North
America

ge
rid

n

B
Africa

Mid-ocean ridge

Deep-ocean
basin

Continental
margin

Deep-ocean
basin

Continental
margin

1

11
10

6

2
3

0

4

5

1000

7

2000

3000

4000

8

9

5000

Distance (kilometers)

1. Continental shelf
2. Continental slope
3. Continental rise

4. Seamount
5. Abyssal plain

6. Rift valley
7. Abyssal plain

8. Seamount
9. Continental rise

10. Continental slope
11. Continental shelf

B
0 km
5 km
10 km

393

13.2 Continental Margins

Margins
13.2 Continental
Compare and contrast a passive continental margin with an active continental
margin and list the major features of each.

As the name implies, the continental margins are the outer margins of the continents, where
continental crust transitions to oceanic crust. Two types of continental margin have been identified—passive and active. Nearly the entire Atlantic Ocean and a large portion of the Indian Ocean
are surrounded by passive continental margins (see Figure 13.4). By contrast, most of the Pacific
Ocean is bordered by active continental margins (subduction zones), as shown in Figure 13.7. Notice
that some of those active subduction zones lie far beyond the margins of the continents.

Passive
Continental
Margins

Figure 13.7
Alaska
Nankai

Aleutian
Kuril

Cascadia

Passive continental marJapan
Ryukyu
Puerto Rico
gins are geologically inac(Lesser
Antilles)
tive regions located some
Mariana
distance from plate boundPhilippine
aries. As a result, they are
Central
Solomon
America
not associated with strong
Vanuatu
earthquakes or volcanic
Sunda
activity. Passive continenPeru
(Java)
Tonga
tal margins develop when
Chile
Kermadec
continental blocks rift apart
and are separated by continued seafloor spreading.
As a result, the continental
blocks are firmly attached
South
to the adjacent oceanic
Sandwich
crust.
Most passive margins
shelf is only about one-tenth of 1 degree, a slope so slight
are relatively wide and are sites where large quantities
that it would appear to an observer to be a horizontal
of sediments are deposited. The features comprising
surface.
passive continental margins include the continental
The continental shelf tends to be relatively featureshelf, the continental slope, and the continental rise
less; however, some areas are mantled by extensive glacial
(Figure 13.8).
deposits and thus are quite rugged. In addition, some
continental shelves are dissected by large valleys running
Continental Shelf The gently sloping, submerged
from the coastline into deeper waters. Many of these
surface that extends from the shoreline toward the
deep-ocean basin is called
CONTINENTAL
the continental shelf. It
Shelf
Slope
Rise
consists mainly of continental crust, capped with
Submarine
sedimentary rocks and sedicanyons
ments eroded from adjacent
landmasses.
Shelf break
Deep-sea fan
The continental shelf
varies greatly in width. The
Abyssal plain
shelf is almost nonexistent
along some continents, and it
Continental crust
Oceanic crust
extends seaward more than 1500 kilometers (930 miles) along others. The
average inclination of the continental

Distribution of Earth’s
subduction zones Notice
that most of Earth’s active
subduction zones surround
the Pacific basin.

SmartFigure 13.8
Passive continental
margins The slopes shown
for the continental shelf and
continental slope are greatly
exaggerated. The continental
shelf has an average slope of
one-tenth of 1 degree, while
the continental slope has
an average slope of about
5 degrees. (https://goo.gl/
FkqFPL)

394

CHAPTER 13

Origin and Evolution of the Ocean Floor

shelf valleys are the seaward extensions of river valleys on
the adjacent landmass. They were eroded during the last
Ice Age (Quaternary period), when enormous quantities
of water were stored in vast ice sheets on the continents,
which lowered sea level by at least 100 meters (330 feet).
Because of this sea-level drop, rivers extended their
courses, and land-dwelling plants and animals migrated
to the newly exposed portions of the continents. Dredging off the coast of North America has retrieved the
ancient remains of numerous land dwellers, including
mammoths, mastodons, and horses—providing further
evidence that portions of the continental shelves were
once above sea level.
Although continental shelves represent only 7.5
percent of the total ocean area, they have economic and
political significance because they contain important
reservoirs of oil and natural gas (discussed in Chapter
23) and support important fishing grounds.

Continental Slope Marking the seaward edge of the
continental shelf is the continental slope, a relatively
steep structure that marks the boundary between continental crust and oceanic crust. Although the inclination of the continental slope varies greatly from place to
Figure 13.9
Active continental margins

place, it averages about 5 degrees and in places exceeds
25 degrees.

Continental Rise The continental slope merges into a
more gradual incline known as the continental rise,
which may extend seaward for hundreds of kilometers.
The continental rise consists of a thick accumulation of
sediment that has moved down the continental slope
and onto deep-ocean floor. Most of the sediments
are delivered to the seafloor by turbidity currents,
mixtures of sediment and water that periodically flow
down submarine canyons (see Figure 7.29, page
234). When these muddy slurries emerge from the
mouth of a canyon onto the relatively flat ocean floor,
they deposit sediment that forms a deep-sea fan (see
Figure 13.8). As fans from adjacent submarine canyons
grow, they merge to produce a continuous wedge of
sediment at the base of the continental slope, forming
the continental rise.

Active Continental Margins

Active continental margins are located along convergent plate boundaries, where oceanic lithosphere is being
subducted beneath the leading edge of a continent (Figure
13.9A). Deep-ocean trenches are the major topographic
expression
at convergent plate boundaries. Most of these
A. Active continental margins are located along
deep, narrow furrows surround the Pacific
convergent plate boundaries where oceanic
Continental
lithosphere is being subducted beneath the
basin. One exception is the Puerto
volcanic arc
leading edge of a continent.
Rico trench, which forms the
boundary between the CaribTrench
bean Sea and the Atlantic
Ocean (Figure 13.10).
Along some subduction
Oceanic crust
zones,
sediments from the
Continental
ocean floor and pieces of ocecrust
Continental
anic crust are scraped from
lithosphere
the descending oceanic plate
100 km
Su
and
plastered against the edge
bd
uc
tin
of
the
overriding plate (Figure
g
lith
Asthenosphere
Melting
osp ocea
).
This
chaotic accumula13.9B
200 km
n
he
ic
re
tion of deformed sediment
Shallow
Deep
and scraps of oceanic crust
ge
ary wed
trench
trench
etion
r
c
is called an accretionary
c
A
Continental
crust
wedge (ad = toward, crescere
Continental
=
to grow). Prolonged plate
Erosion
crust
subduction can produce massive accumulations of sediSubducting
oceanic
ment along active continental
lithosphere
margins.
Subducting oceanic
lithosphere
The opposite process,
known as subduction erosion, characterizes many
C. Subduction erosion occurs where
B. Accretionary wedges develop along
other subduction zones (see
sediment and rock scraped off the bottom of
subduction zones where sediments from the
Figure 13.9B). Rather than
the overriding plate are carried into the
ocean floor are scraped from the descending
sediment
accumulating along
mantle by the subducting plate.
oceanic plate and pressed against the edge
the front of the overriding plate,
of the overriding plate.

Atlantic Ocean

sediment and rock are scraped off the bottom of the
overriding plate and transported down into the mantle
by the subducting plate. Subduction erosion is particularly effective where cold, dense oceanic lithosphere
subducts at a steep angle, as exemplified by the Mariana trench. Sharp bending of the subducting plate
causes faulting in the ocean crust and a rough surface,
as shown in Figure 13.9C.

13.2

395

Puerto Rico
Trench

Cuba

N

Figure 13.10
The Puerto Rico trench
This trench separates the
Caribbean Sea from the
Atlantic Ocean. (Photo by

North American
plate

Hispaniola Puerto
Rico
Caribbean Sea

USGS)

Puerto Rico Trench

Concept Checks
Hispaniola

1. List the three major features of a passive
continental margin. Which of these features is
considered a flooded extension of the continent?
Which one has the steepest slope?
2. Describe the differences between active
and passive continental margins and give a
geographic example of each.

Puerto
Rico

Virgin
Islands

Carbbean plate

3. How are active continental margins related to
plate tectonics?
4. Briefly explain how an accretionary wedge forms.
5. What is meant by subduction erosion?

E Y E ON E A R T H

13.1

T

his perspective view of the Pacific margin
is looking southwest toward the Palos
Verdes Peninsula, with Los Angeles in the
background.
QUESTION 1 Match the features labeled 1 to
4 with the following terms: continental shelf,
continental slope, continental rise, and submarine
canyon.

1

2

3

4

Palos Verdes
Peninsula

QUESTION 2 Based on the features shown,
describe the type of continental margin in the
image.
Pacific basin

NOAA

Origin and Evolution of the Ocean Floor

13.3

Features of Deep-Ocean Basins
List and describe the major features of the deep-ocean basins.

Between the continental margin and the oceanic ridge lies the deep-ocean basin (see Figure 13.6).
The size of this region—almost 30 percent of Earth’s surface—is roughly comparable to the percentage of land above sea level. This region contains deep-ocean trenches, which are extremely deep linear depressions in the ocean floor; remarkably flat areas known as abyssal plains; tall volcanic peaks
called seamounts and guyots; and large, elevated flood basalt provinces called oceanic plateaus.
Another ocean feature with a biological origin is the coral atoll, featured in GEOgraphics 13.1.

Deep-Ocean Trenches

ts

Deep-ocean trenches are long, narrow creases in the
seafloor that are the deepest parts of the ocean floor.
Most trenches are located along the margins of the
Pacific Ocean, where many exceed 10 kilometers
(6 miles) in depth (see Figure 13.4). The Challenger
Deep, located in the Mariana trench, has been measured at 10,994 meters (36,069 feet) below sea level,
making it the deepest known part of the world ocean
(Figure 13.11). Only two trenches are located in the
Atlantic—the Puerto Rico trench adjacent to the
Lesser Antilles arc (see Figure 13.10) and the South
Sandwich trench.
Although deep-ocean trenches represent a very
small portion of the area of the ocean floor, they are
nevertheless significant geologic features. Trenches
are sites of plate convergence where slabs of oceanic
lithosphere subduct and plunge back into the mantle.
In addition to generating earthquakes as one plate
“scrapes” against another, plate subduction also triggers volcanic activity. As a result, most trenches run
parallel to an arc-shaped row of active volcanoes called
a volcanic island arc (see Figure 2.18, page 52). Furthermore, continental volcanic arcs, such as those
making up portions of the Andes and the Cascades, are
located parallel to subduction zones that lie adjacent
to continental margins. The volcanic activity associated with the trenches that surround the Pacific Ocean
explains why this region is called the Ring of Fire.

oun

a Trench
ian

Saipan

ar

Guam

M

CHAPTER 13

M ariana Seam

396

NOAA

Seamounts

Abyssal Plains
Abyssal plains (a = without, byssus = bottom) are
flat features of the deep-ocean floor; in fact, they are
likely the most level places on Earth (see Figure 13.4).
The abyssal plain found off the coast of Argentina, for
example, has less than 3 meters (10 feet) of relief over
a distance exceeding 1300 kilometers (800 miles). The
monotonous topography of abyssal plains is occasionally
interrupted by the protruding summit of a partially buried volcanic peak (seamount).
Using seismic reflection profilers, researchers
have determined that the relatively featureless topography of abyssal plains is due to thick accumulations of
sediment that have buried an otherwise rugged ocean
floor (Figure 13.12). The nature of the sediment indicates
that these plains consist primarily of three materials:

eep

nger D

Challe

NOAA

Figure 13.11
The Challenger Deep Located near the southern end of
the Mariana trench, the Challenger Deep is the deepest
place in the global ocean, about 10,994 meters deep. Film
director James Cameron (Titanic and Avatar) made news in
March 2012 as the first person to dive to the bottom of the
Challenger Deep in more than 50 years.

397

13.3 Features of Deep-Ocean Basins

(1) fine sediments transported far out to sea by turbidity currents, (2) mineral matter that has precipitated out
of seawater, and (3) shells and skeletons of microscopic
marine organisms.
Abyssal plains are found in all oceans. However,
the Atlantic Ocean has the most extensive abyssal plains
because it has few trenches to act as traps for sediment
carried down the continental slope.

Figure 13.12

Seismic reflection profile
2800

3600 fathoms
0

10 miles

20

30

40

50

60

of Charles Hollister, Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution)

Volcanic Structures on the Ocean Floor
Dotting the seafloor are numerous volcanic structures
of various sizes. Many occur as isolated features that
resemble volcanic cones on land. Others occur in nearly
linear chains that stretch for thousands of kilometers,
while still others are massive structures that cover areas
the size of Texas.

Seamounts and Volcanic Islands Submarine volcanoes, called seamounts, may rise hundreds of meters
above the surrounding topography. It is estimated that
more than a million seamounts exist. Some grow large
enough to become oceanic islands, but most do not
have a sufficiently long eruptive history to build a structure above sea level. Although seamounts are found on
the floors of all the oceans, they are most common in
the Pacific.
Some, like the Hawaiian Island–Emperor Seamount chain, which stretches from the Hawaiian
Islands to the Aleutian trench, form over volcanic hot
spots (see Figure 2.27, page 59). Others are born near
oceanic ridges.
If a volcano grows large enough before plate motion
carries it away from its magma source, the structure
may emerge as a volcanic island. Examples of volcanic islands include Easter Island, Tahiti, Bora Bora, the
Galapagos Islands, and the Canary Islands.
Guyots Inactive volcanic islands are gradually but
inevitably lowered to near sea level by the forces of
weathering and erosion. As a moving plate slowly carries volcanic islands away from the elevated oceanic
ridge or hot spot over which they formed, they gradually sink and disappear below the water surface. Submerged, flat-topped seamounts that formed in this
manner are called guyots.*
*The term guyot is named after Arnold Guyot, Princeton University’s first
geology professor. It is pronounced “GEE-oh” with a hard g, as in “give.”

Seismic profile of the
ocean floor This seismic
cross section and matching
sketch across a portion of
the Madeira abyssal plain
in the eastern Atlantic
Ocean show the irregular
oceanic crust buried by
sediments. (Image courtesy

Oceanic Plateaus The ocean floor also contains several
massive oceanic plateaus. Resembling the flood basalt
provinces found on continents, oceanic plateaus are
thought to form when the bulbous head of a rising mantle
plume melts, producing a vast outpouring of basaltic lava
(see Figure 5.33, page 173).
Some oceanic plateaus appear to have formed
quickly in geologic terms. Examples include the Ontong
Java Plateau, which formed in less than 3 million years,
and the Kerguelen Plateau, which formed in 4.5 million
years (see Figure 13.4).

13.3

Concept Checks

1. Explain how deep-ocean trenches are related to
plate boundaries.
2. Why are abyssal plains more extensive on the floor
of the Atlantic than on the floor of the Pacific?
3. How does a flat-topped seamount, called a guyot,
form?
4. What features on the ocean floor most resemble
flood basalt provinces on the continents?

Explaining Coral Atolls:
Darwin’s Hypothesis

Coral atolls are ring-shaped structures that
often extend from slightly above sea level to
depths of several thousand meters. What
causes atolls to form, and how do they attain
such great thicknesses?

TENTACLE

POLYP

Reef-building corals only grow in warm, clear sunlit water. The depth of most active reef growth is limited
to warm tropical water no more than about 45 meters (150 feet) deep. The strict environmental conditions
required for coral growth create an interesting paradox: How can corals—which require warm, shallow,
sunlit water no deeper than a few dozen meters—create massive structures such as coral atolls that
extend to great depths?

Most corals secrete a hard external skeleton made of
calcium carbonate. Colonies of these corals build large
calcium carbonate structures, called reefs, where new
colonies grow atop the strong skeletons of previous
colonies. Sponges and algae may attach to the reef,
further enlarging the structure.

Mark A. Wilson

GEO GRAPHICS 13.1

2.0 cm

MOUTH
Corals: Tiny colonial animals Corals are marine
animals that typically live in compact colonies of
many identical organisms called polyps.

NOAA

CALCIUM CARBONATE
SUPPORT STRUCTURE

STOMACH

NOAA

Reinhard Dirsherl/AGE Fotostock

401

Rift
valley

E Y E ON E A R T H

SmartFigure 13.15
Rift valleys The axes of
some segments of the
oceanic ridge system
contain deep down-faulted
structures called rift valleys
that may exceed 30 to 50
kilometers in width and
500 to 2500 meters in
depth. (https://goo.gl/fFLJ9V)

Oceanic crus
t

Oceanic
lithosphere
Partial
melting

ge
id

Europe

c

R

Asthenosphere

Mi
d-A
tla
nti

implies, but have widths from 1000 to 4000 kilometers
(600 to 2500 miles) and the appearance of broad, elongated swells that exhibit varying degrees of ruggedness.
Furthermore, the ridge system is broken into segments
that range from a few tens to hundreds of kilometers in
length. Each ridge segment is offset from the adjacent
segment by a transform fault.
Oceanic ridges are as high as some mountains
on the continents, but the similarities end there.
Whereas most mountain ranges on land
form when the compressional forces
North
associated with continental colliAmerica
sions fold and metamorphose thick
sequences of sedimentary rocks,
oceanic ridges form where
upwelling from the mantle
generates new oceanic crust.
Oceanic ridges consist of
layers and piles of newly
formed basaltic rocks that
are buoyantly uplifted by
the hot mantle rocks from
which they formed.
Along the axis of some segments of the oceanic
ridge system are deep, down-faulted structures called
rift valleys because of their striking similarity to the
continental rift valleys found in East Africa (Figure
13.15). Some rift valleys, including those along the rugged Mid-Atlantic Ridge, are typically 30 to 50 kilometers (20 to 30 miles) wide and have walls that tower 500
to 2500 meters (1600 to 8200 feet) above the valley
floor. This makes them comparable to the deepest and
widest part of Arizona’s Grand Canyon.
_TT45


Africa

Lith
osp
here
Asth
eno
sph
ere

Upwelling

13.4

Concept Checks

1. Briefly describe the oceanic ridge system.
2. Although oceanic ridges can be as tall as some
mountains found on the continents, list some
ways in which the features are different.
3. Where do rift valleys form along the oceanic ridge
system?

13.2

O

ffshore drilling rigs are used to tap oil and natural gas reserves on the continental
shelf and beyond. Notable offshore fields are found in the Gulf of Mexico, the
North Sea, and the Persian Gulf, as well as off the coasts of West Africa, Brazil,
and Newfoundland. Drilling rigs can be fixed to the seafloor or may float. The latter
group includes semi-submersibles, anchored platforms that are partially filled with
seawater, and drill ships that typically use dynamic positioning to remain over the
drilling location.

QUESTION 1 What was the name of the drilling rig that caused a major oil spill in the
Gulf of Mexico and sank in 2010?
QUESTION 2 One of the world’s deepest platforms, the Perdito, located in the Gulf of
Mexico, is floating in 2,438 meters (7997 feet) of water. Explain at least one logistic
issue or difficulty posed by drilling in water this deep.

Peter Bowater/Photo
Researchers, Inc.

402

CHAPTER 13

Origin and Evolution of the Ocean Floor

Oceanic Ridges and Seafloor Spreading

13.5

Write a statement describing how spreading rates affect ridge topography.

The greatest volume of magma (more than 60 percent of Earth’s total yearly output) is produced
along the oceanic ridge system in association with seafloor spreading. As plates diverge, fractures
created in the oceanic crust fill with molten rock that gradually wells up from the hot mantle below.
This molten material slowly cools and crystallizes, producing new slivers of seafloor. This process
repeats in episodic bursts, generating new lithosphere that moves away from the ridge crest in a
conveyor belt fashion.

Figure 13.16
Topography of slow and
fast spreading centers

Seafloor Spreading

Why Are Oceanic Ridges Elevated?

Harry Hess of Princeton University formulated the
concept of seafloor spreading in the early 1960s. Later,
geologists were able to verify Hess’s view that seafloor
spreading occurs along the crests of oceanic ridges,
where hot mantle rock rises to replace the material that
has shifted horizontally (see Figure 13.15). Recall from
Chapter 4 that as rock rises, it experiences a decrease
in confining pressure that may lead to decompression
melting.
Partial melting of ultramafic mantle rock produces
basaltic magma that has a surprisingly consistent chemical composition. The newly formed melt separates from
the mantle rock and rises toward the surface. Along some
ridge segments, the melt collects in small, elongated reservoirs located just beneath the ridge crest. Eventually,
about 10 to 20 percent of the melt migrates upward along
fissures and erupts as lava flows on the ocean floor, while
the remainder crystallizes at depth to form the lower
crust. This activity continuously adds new basaltic rock
to diverging plate margins, temporarily welding them
together; they are then broken as spreading continues.
Along some ridges, outpourings of pillow lavas build
submerged shield volcanoes (seamounts) as well as elongated lava ridges. At other locations, more voluminous
lava flows pave the surface to create a relatively subdued
topography.

The primary reason for the elevated position of the ridge
system is that newly created oceanic lithosphere is hot
and therefore less dense than cooler rocks of the deepocean basin. As the newly formed basaltic crust travels
away from the ridge crest due to seafloor spreading, it
is cooled from above as seawater circulates through the
pore spaces and fractures in the rock. Further cooling
occurs as it gets farther and farther from the zone of hot
mantle upwelling. As a result, the lithosphere gradually cools, contracts, and becomes denser. This thermal
contraction accounts for the greater ocean depths that
occur away from the ridge. After about 80 million years
of cooling and contraction, rock that was once part of an
elevated ocean-ridge system becomes part of the deepocean basin.
As lithosphere is displaced away from the ridge
crest, cooling also causes a gradual increase in lithospheric thickness. This happens because the boundary between the lithosphere and asthenosphere is a
thermal (temperature) boundary. Recall from Chapter
12 that the lithosphere is Earth’s cool, stiff outer layer,
whereas the asthenosphere is a comparatively hot and
weak layer. As material in the uppermost asthenosphere ages (cools), it becomes stiff and rigid. Thus,
the upper portion of the asthenosphere is gradually
converted to lithosphere simply by cooling. Oceanic

A. At slow spreading rates a prominent central rift valley
develops along the ridge crest, and the topography of the
ridge is typically rugged.

B. Along fast spreading centers, medial rift
valleys do not develop and the topography is
comparatively smooth.
Swell
Volcanoes

Volcanoes

Rift valley

Oceanic crust

Oceanic crust
Partial
melting

Magma
chamber poorly
developed

Partial
melting

Magma
chamber well
developed

403

13.5 Oceanic Ridges and Seafloor Spreading

lithosphere continues to
thicken until it is about 80
to 100 kilometers (50 to 60
miles) thick. Thereafter,
its thickness remains relatively unchanged until it is
subducted.

Spreading
Rates and Ridge
Topography

Figure 13.17

Ridges that have fast spreading rates are characterized by smooth topography, gently
sloping flanks, and a central swell.
3 million year
old crust

Swell

1 km
Gentle slope

2 km
3 km

0

50

4 km
100 km

Ridges that have intermediate spreading rates are characterized by small rift valleys (less
than 500 meters deep) and moderately sloping flanks.
1 km
3 million year
3 million year
6 million year
old crust
old crust
2 km
old crust
3 km

When researchers studied
4 km
various segments of the oceanic ridge system, it became Ridges that have slow spreading rates are characterized by rugged topography,
clear that there were topowell-developed rift valleys (500-2500 meters deep) and steeply sloping flanks.
graphic differences. These
12 million year
Steep slope
old crust
differences appear to result
3 million
3 million
6 million 9 million 1 km
year old
year old
from differences in spread9 million 6 million
year
old
year old year old 2 km
crust
crust
year old
ing rates—which largely
crust
crust
crust
crust
determine the amount of
3 km
melt generated at a rift
4 km
zone. More magma wells
up from the mantle at fast
spreading centers than at slow spreading centers. This
the ridge crest with volcanic rocks (see Figure 13.16B).
difference in output causes differences in the structure
In addition, because the depth of the ocean depends
and topography of various ridge segments.
largely on the age of the seafloor, ridge segments that
Oceanic ridges that exhibit slow spreading rates from exhibit faster spreading rates tend to have more gradual
1 to 5 centimeters per year have prominent rift valleys
profiles than ridges that have slower spreading rates
and rugged topography (Figure 13.16A). The Mid-Atlantic
(Figure 13.17). Because of these differences in topogand Mid-Indian Ridges are examples. The vertical disraphy, the gently sloping, less rugged portions of fastplacement of large slabs of oceanic crust along normal
spreading ridges are called rises.
faults is responsible for the steep walls of the rift valleys.
Furthermore, volcanism produces numerous cones in the
rift valley, which enhance the rugged topography of the
ridge crest.
By contrast, along the Galapagos Ridge, an inter1. What is the source of magma for seafloor
mediate spreading rate of 5 to 9 centimeters per year
spreading?
is the norm. As a result, the rift valleys that develop
are relatively shallow—often less than 200 meters (660
2. What is the primary reason for the elevated
position of the oceanic ridge system?
feet) deep. In addition, their topography is more subdued compared to ridges that have slower spreading
3. Why does the lithosphere thicken as it moves
rates.
away from the ridge as a result of seafloor
At fast spreading centers (greater than 9 centimespreading?
ters per year), such as along much of the East Pacific
4. Compare and contrast a slow spreading center
Rise, rift valleys are generally absent (Figure 13.16B).
such as the Mid-Atlantic Ridge with one that
Instead, the ridge axis is elevated. These elevated strucexhibits a faster spreading rate, such as the East
tures, called swells, are built from lava flows up to 10
Pacific Rise.
meters (30 feet) thick that have incrementally paved

13.5

Concept Checks

Ridge segments that
exhibit fast, intermediate,
and slow spreading rates

404

CHAPTER 13

Origin and Evolution of the Ocean Floor

13.6

The Nature of Oceanic Crust
List the four layers of oceanic crust and explain how oceanic crust forms and how
it differs from continental crust.

An interesting aspect of oceanic crust is that its thickness and structure are remarkably consistent
throughout the entire ocean basin. Seismic soundings indicate that its thickness averages only about
7 kilometers (5 miles). Furthermore, it is composed almost entirely of mafic rocks that are underlain
by a layer of the ultramafic rock peridotite, which forms the lithospheric mantle.
Although most oceanic crust forms out of view, far below
sea level, geologists have been able to examine the structure of the ocean floor firsthand. In locations such as
Newfoundland, Cyprus, Oman, and California, slivers
of oceanic crust and underlying mantle have been thrust
high above sea level. From these exposures and core
samples collected by deep-sea drilling ships, researchers
have concluded that the ocean crust consists of four distinct layers (Figure 13.18):
r Layer 1. The upper layer is a sequence of deep-sea
sediments or sedimentary rocks. Sediments are very
thin near the axes of oceanic ridges but may be several kilometers thick next to continents.
r Layer 2. Below the layer of sediments is a rock unit
composed mainly of basaltic lavas that contain abundant pillowlike structures called pillow lavas.
r Layer 3. The middle, rocky layer is made up of
numerous interconnected dikes that have a nearly
vertical orientation, called the sheeted dike complex.
These dikes are former pathways where magma rose
to feed pillow basalts on the ocean floor.
Figure 13.18
ROCK TYPE
Layer #1
Deep-sea sediment

Oceanic crust

Layer #2
Pillow lavas
(basaltic)

Layer #3
Sheeted dike
complex

Layer #4
Gabbro
Layered gabbro
Mantle

Ophiolite complex:
Structure of the oceanic
crust This view of the
layered structure of
oceanic crust is based on
data obtained from ophiolite complexes, seismic
profiling, and core samples
obtained from deep-sea
drilling expeditions.

Mantle
Peridotite and
related rocks

r Layer 4. The lowest unit is mainly gabbro, the
coarse-grained equivalent of basalt, which crystallized deeper in the crust without erupting.
When fragments of oceanic crust and the underling
mantle are discovered on land, they are called an ophiolite complex. From studies of various ophiolite complexes
around the globe and related data, geologists have pieced
together a scenario for the formation of the ocean floor.

How Does Oceanic Crust Form?
The molten rock that forms new oceanic crust originates
from partial melting of the ultramafic mantle rock. This
process generates basaltic melt that is less dense than
the surrounding solid rock. The newly formed melt rises
through the upper mantle along thousands of tiny conduits that feed into a few dozen larger, elongated channels, perhaps 100 meters (300 feet) or more wide. These
structures, in turn, feed lens-shaped magma chambers
located directly beneath the ridge crest. The addition of
melt from below steadily increases the pressure inside the
magma chambers. As a result, the rocks above these reservoirs periodically fracture, allowing the melt to ascend
along numerous vertical fractures that develop in the
ocean crust. Some of the melt cools and solidifies to form
dikes. New dikes intrude older dikes, which are still warm
and weak, to form a sheeted dike complex. This portion
of the oceanic crust is usually 1 to 2 kilometers thick.
Roughly 10 to 20 percent of the melt eventually erupts
on the ocean floor. Because the surface of these submarine lava flows is chilled quickly by seawater, these flows
generally travel no more than a few kilometers before
completely solidifying. The forward motion occurs as
lava accumulates behind the congealed margin and then
breaks through. This process occurs repeatedly, as molten
basalt is extruded—like toothpaste from a tightly squeezed
tube (see Figure 5.6, page 148). The result is protuberances resembling large bed pillows stacked one atop the
other, hence the name pillow lavas (Figure 13.19).
In some settings, pillow lavas may build volcano-size
mounds that resemble shield volcanoes, whereas in other
situations they form elongated ridges tens of kilometers
long. These structures are eventually separated from
their supply of magma as they are carried away from the
ridge crest by seafloor spreading.
_TT46


405

13.7 Continental Rifting: The Birth of a New Ocean Basin

The lowest unit of the ocean crust develops
from crystallization within the central magma
chamber itself. The first minerals to crystallize are
olivine, pyroxene, and occasionally chromite (chromium oxide), which settle through the magma to
form a layered zone near the floor of the reservoir.
The remaining melt tends to cool along the walls
of magma chambers to form massive amounts of
coarse-grained gabbro. This portion accounts for
up to 5 of the 7 kilometers (3 to 4.5 miles) of ocean
crust thickness.
Although molten rock rises continuously from
the mantle toward the surface, seafloor spreading occurs in pulse-like bursts. As the melt begins
to accumulate in the lens-shaped reservoirs, it is
blocked from continuing upward by the stiff overlying rocks. As the amount of melt entering the magma reservoirs increases, pressure rises. Periodically, the pressure
exceeds the strength of the overlying rocks, which fracture
and initiate a short episode of seafloor spreading.

Interactions Between Seawater and
Oceanic Crust
In addition to serving as a mechanism for dissipating
Earth’s internal heat, the interaction between seawater and the newly formed basaltic crust alters both the
seawater and the crust. The permeable and highly fractured lava of the upper oceanic crust allows seawater to
penetrate to depths of 2 to 3 kilometers (1 to 2 miles).
Seawater circulating through the hot crust is heated and
chemically reacts with the basaltic rock in a process called
hydrothermal (hot water) metamorphism (see Figure
8.22, page 257). This alteration causes the dark silicates
(olivine and pyroxene) in basalt to form new metamorphic
minerals such as chlorite and serpentine. Simultaneously,
the hot seawater dissolves ions of silica, iron, copper, and
occasionally silver and gold from the hot basalts. When the
water temperature reaches a few hundred degrees Celsius,

13.7

Figure 13.19
Cross-sectional view of
pillow lava This pillow lava
is exposed along a sea cliff
at Cape Wanbrow, New
Zealand. Notice that each
“pillow” shows an outer
dark glassy layer created
by rapid cooling enclosing
a dark gray basalt interior.
(Photo by GR Roberts/Photo
Researchers, Inc.)

these mineral-rich fluids buoyantly rise along fractures
and eventually spew out on the ocean floor.
Studies conducted by submersibles along several
segments of the oceanic ridge have photographed these
metallic-rich solutions gushing from the seafloor to
form particle-filled clouds called black smokers (see
GEOgraphics 13.2). As the hot liquid (up to 400°C
[750°F]) mixes with the cold, mineral-laden seawater, the
dissolved minerals precipitate to form massive metallic
sulfide deposits, some of which are economically important. Occasionally these deposits grow upward to form
underwater chimney-like structures equivalent in height
to skyscrapers.

13.6

Concept Checks

1. Briefly describe the four layers of the ocean crust.
2. How does a sheeted dike complex form?
3. How does hydrothermal metamorphism alter the
basaltic rocks that make up the seafloor? How is
seawater changed during this process?
4. What is a black smoker?

Continental Rifting: The Birth of a New Ocean Basin
Outline the steps by which continental rifting results in the formation of new ocean
basins.

The breakup of Pangaea nearly 200 million years ago opened a new ocean basin—the Atlantic.
Although geoscientists still debate what initiated this event, the breakup of Pangaea illustrates that
ocean basins originate when large landmasses break apart.

Evolution of an Ocean Basin
The opening of a new ocean basin begins with the formation of a continental rift, an elongated depression along
which the entire lithosphere is stretched and thinned.
Where the lithosphere is thick, cool, and strong, rifts

tend to be narrow—often less than a few hundred kilometers wide. Modern examples of narrow continental
rifts include the East African Rift, the Rio Grande Rift
(southwestern United States), the Baikal Rift (southcentral Siberia), and the Rhine Valley (northwestern

408

CHAPTER 13

Origin and Evolution of the Ocean Floor

Europe). By contrast, where the crust is thin, hot, and
weak, rifts can be more than 1000 kilometers (600 miles)
wide, as exemplified by the Basin and Range region in
the western United States.
In settings where rifting continues, the rift system
evolves into a young, narrow ocean basin, such as the
present-day Red Sea. Continued seafloor spreading eventually results in the formation of a mature ocean basin
bordered by rifted continental margins. The Atlantic
Ocean is such a feature.

East African Rift The East African Rift is a continental

rift that extends through eastern Africa for approximately
3000 kilometers (2000 miles). It consists of several interconnected rift valleys that split into eastern and western
sections around Lake Victoria (Figure 13.20). Whether this
rift will eventually develop into a spreading center, with
the Somali subplate separating from the rest
of the continent of Africa, is uncertain.
The most recent period of rifting began
about 20 million years ago, as upwelling in the
mantle intruded the base of the lithosphere
(Figure 13.21A). Buoyant uplifting of the heated
lithosphere led to doming and stretching of
the crust. Consequently, the upper crust was
Arabian Peninsula
broken along high-angle normal faults, producing down-faulted blocks, or grabens, while
the lower crust deformed by ductile stretching
(Figure 13.21B).
In the early stages of rifting, magma genAden
erated
by decompression melting of the rising
f
o
f
Afar Gul
mantle rocks intruded the crust. OccasionLowlands
ally, some of the magma migrated upward
along fractures and erupted at the surface.
This activity produced extensive basaltic flows
within the rift as well as volcanic cones—
Eastern
some forming more than 100 kilometers (60
Branch
miles) from the rift axis. Examples include
Indian Ocean
Mount Kenya and Mount Kilimanjaro, the
Mt. Kenya
highest point in Africa, which rises almost
Mt. Kilimanjaro
6000 meters (20,000 feet) above the Serengeti
Plain.

SmartFigure 13.20
East African Rift Valley
A. Map showing the extent
of the East African Rift
Valley, as well as the rifted
valley that is now occupied by the Red Sea. B.
Satellite-generated image
of a small section of the
eastern branch of the rift
valley located west of Mount
Kilimanjaro. Higher uplifted
areas appear reddish brown
and include Serengeti
National Park, which
supports the world’s greatest concentration of large
mammals. The dark green
areas and the large lakes are
situated on the floor of the
rift valley. Volcanoes formed
during the rifting can also be
seen, including the caldera
of the volcano Ngorongoro
that is thought to be extinct.

What follows is an overview of ocean basin evolution, using modern examples to represent the various
stages of rifting.

Africa

ea

dS
Re

EAST
AFRICAN
RIFT
Western
Branch

Lake
Victoria

(https://goo.gl/7fRZzy)

Tanzania

Red Sea Gradually, a rift

Sarengeti NP
Volcanoes
?
Fault scarp
(long steep cliffs

A.

si

e
Lak

B.

Eya

Fault
scarp

valley will lengthen and
deepen, eventually extending to the margin of the continent (Figure 13.21C). At this
point, the continental rift
becomes a narrow linear sea
with an outlet to the ocean,
similar to the Red Sea.
The Red Sea formed
when the Arabian Peninsula
rifted from Africa beginning about 30 million years
ago (see Figure 13.20A).
Steep fault scarps that rise
as much as 3 kilometers (2
miles) above sea level flank
the margins of this water
body. Thus, the escarpments

409

13.7 Continental Rifting: The Birth of a New Ocean Basin

A. Tensional forces and buoyant uplifting of the heated lithosphere cause the upper
crust to be broken along normal faults, while the lower crust deforms by ductile
stretching.

Illustration of the separation of South
America and Africa to form the South
Atlantic.

Upwarping
Continental
crust

Mantle
upwelling
B. As the crust is pulled apart, large slabs of rock sink, generating a rift valley.
Rift
valley

C. Further spreading generates a narrow sea.
Linear sea

D. Eventually, an expansive ocean basin and ridge system are created.
Mid-ocean
ridge
Ocean basin
Continental crust
Oceanic crust

surrounding the Red Sea are similar to the steep cliffs
that border the East African Rift. Although the Red Sea
reaches oceanic depths (up to 5 kilometers [3 miles]) in
only a few locations, symmetrical magnetic stripes indicate that typical seafloor spreading has been occurring
for at least the past 5 million years.

Atlantic Ocean If spreading continues, the Red Sea will
grow wider and develop an elevated oceanic ridge similar
to the Mid-Atlantic Ridge (Figure 13.21D). The Atlantic

Ocean shows what the Red Sea could eventually become
over tens of millions of years. As the Atlantic formed,
new oceanic crust was added to the diverging plates, and
the rifted continental margins gradually receded from
the region of upwelling. As a result, they cooled, contracted, and sank.
Over time, continental margins subsided below sea
level, and material that had eroded from the adjacent
highlands blanketed this once-rugged topography. The
result was a passive continental margin on both sides of

SmartFigure 13.21
Formation of an ocean
basin (https://goo.gl/rkXCfv)

410

CHAPTER 13

Origin and Evolution of the Ocean Floor

Figure 13.22
Midcontinent rift
Map showing the location
of a failed rift extending from the Great Lakes
region to Kansas.

of supercontinents, is called the supercontinent cycle
and is described in detail in Chapter 22.
The supercontinent cycle must involve major changes
in the direction and nature of the forces that drive plate
motion. In other words, over long periods of geologic
time, the forces that drive plate motions tend to organize
crustal fragments into a single supercontinent, only to
change directions and disperse them again. Mechanisms
that are thought to contribute to continental rifting
include plumes of hot mobile rock rising from deep in
the mantle, upwelling from shallow levels in the asthenosphere, and forces that arise from plate motions.

ND
MN
SD

Mid-continent
(Keweenawan)
Rift

WI
MI
IL

OH

IN

IA
NE
MO
KS

Key

Mantle Plumes and Hot-Spot Volcanism
Volcanic rocks

At least two supercontinents existed in the geologic past.
Pangaea, the most recent, was assembled into a supercontinent between 450 and 230 million years ago, only
to break up shortly after it formed. Geologists have concluded that the formation of supercontinents followed by
continental splitting is an integral part of plate tectonics.
This process, which involves the formation and dispersal

A mantle plume consists of hotter-than-normal mantle
rock that has a large mushroom-shaped head hundreds of
kilometers in diameter attached to a long, narrow, trailing tail. As the plume head nears the base of the rigid
lithosphere, it spreads laterally. Decompression melting
within the plume generates huge volumes of basaltic
magma that rises and triggers hot-spot volcanism at the
surface.
Research suggests that mantle plumes tend to concentrate beneath a supercontinent because once assembled, a large landmass forms an insulating “blanket”
that traps heat in the mantle. The resulting temperature
increase leads to the formation of mantle plumes that
serve to dissipate heat.
Evidence that mantle plumes play a role in the
breakup of at least some landmasses can be observed in
modern passive continental margins. In several regions on
both sides of the Atlantic, continental rifting was preceded
by crustal uplift and massive outpourings of basaltic lava.
Examples include the Etendeka flood basalts of southwest
Africa and the Paraná basalt province of South America.
About 130 million years ago, when South America
and Africa were a single landmass, vast outpourings of
lava produced a large continental basalt plateau (Figure
13.23A). Next, the South Atlantic began to open, splitting
the basalt province into two parts—the Etendeka and

A. Location of these flood-basalt plateaus 130 million years
ago, just before the South Atlantic began to open.

B. Relationship of the Paraná and Etendeka basalt plateaus to
the Tristan da Cunha hotspot.

into full-fledged spreading centers. In the central United
States, a failed rift extends from Lake Superior into Kansas (Figure 13.22). This once-active rift valley is filled with
clastic sedimentary and basaltic rocks that were extruded
onto the crust more than a billion years ago. Why one rift
valley develops into a full-fledged active spreading center
while others fail to develop is not fully understood.

Mechanisms for Continental Rifting

Figure 13.23
The role that mantle
plumes might play in
continental rifting

India

Mid-Atlantic Ridge

Africa

South
America

South
America
Paraná

Etendeka

Se
am

Antarctica

Paraná

ou

nt c
hain

Se

Tristan
da Cunha

Key
Flood basalts

Africa

ch

Failed Rifting Not all continental rift valleys develop

nt

the Atlantic, consisting of rifted continental crust that
has been covered by a thick wedge of relatively undisturbed sediment and sedimentary rock.

ou

Sedimentary rocks

am

Etendeka
ain

411

13.7 Continental Rifting: The Birth of a New Ocean Basin
Approximate surface location of mantle plumes prior to the
breakup of Pangaea. The location of the plume that produced
the Central Atlantic Province is unknown and may have
involved a superplume that was deflected by the unusually
thick lithosphere beneath western Africa. The Central Atlantic
Province includes lava flows, sills, and dikes in northeastern
South America, northwestern Africa, southwestern Europe, and
eastern North America.

Timing of the breakup of Pangaea along various rift zones and
the plume volcanism that was associated with each period of
continental fragmentation. In most cases, volcanism appears to
precede breakup by a few million years, or more.

Figure 13.24
The possible role of
mantle plumes in the
breakup of Pangaea (Data
after Courtillot et al.)

Most intense
volcanism
Continental
breakup

Karoo Province
Central Atlantic
Province

Europe
Paraná-Etendeka
Province
Deccan Plateau
North Atlantic Province
(Iceland plume ~55 Ma)

North Atlantic Province

North America
Ethiopian Plateau
0

Central
Atlantic
Province
(~200 Ma)
St. Helena
hot spot
(~140 Ma)

Africa

South
America

Paraná-Entendeka
Province
(~135 Ma)

Ethiopian
Plateau
(Afar plume
~30 Ma)
India

Deccan
Plateau
(~65 Ma)

Antarctica
Karoo Province
(~180 Ma)

Australia

Paraná basalt plateaus. As the ocean basin grew, the tail
of the plume produced a string of seamounts on each side
of the newly formed ridge (Figure 13.23B). The modern
area of hot-spot activity is centered around the volcanic
island of Tristan da Cunha, on the Mid-Atlantic Ridge.
When hot, buoyant mantle plumes reach the base of
the lithosphere, they cause the overlying crust to dome
and weaken. Doming—of
perhaps as much as 1000
meters (3300 feet)—tends
to produce three rifts, or
arms, that join in the area
above the rising plume,
called a triple junction.
Frequently, continental
breakup and the formation of an ocean basin
occur along two of the rift
arms, whereas the third
arm may be less developed
and constitute a failed rift
that becomes filled with
sediments. For example,
the Afar plume, associated with the split of the
Arabian Peninsula from
Africa, is located beneath
a region of northeastern

50

100

150
Age (Ma)

200

250

300

Ethiopia called the Afar Lowlands, an area of extensive
volcanism (see Figure 13.20). This plume generated a
typical rift system consisting of three arms that meet at
a triple junction. Two of these rifts, the Red Sea and the
Gulf of Aden, are active spreading centers. The third arm
is the East African Rift, which may represent the initial
stage in the breakup of a continent, as described earlier,
or it may be destined to become a failed rift.
Figure 13.24 illustrates the location of a few mantle
plumes that have generated large flood basalt plateaus
and were presumably involved in the breakup of Pangaea.
One mantle plume is currently located beneath Iceland,
near the crest of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge (Figure 13.25).
Vast outpourings of basaltic lava began about 55 million
years ago; evidence of these outpourings occurs in eastern
Greenland, as well as across the Atlantic, in the Hebrides
Islands of northern Scotland. The oldest magnetic stripes
Figure 13.25
Eruption of fluid
basaltic lava, Iceland,
2010 Iceland is located
over a mantle plume that
began to build this large
volcanic island more than
20 million years ago. (Photo
by Pakos Photography/Alamy)

412

CHAPTER 13

Origin and Evolution of the Ocean Floor

between Greenland and Europe are the same age, supporting the connection between the emergence of the Icelandic plume and seafloor spreading in the North Atlantic.
It is important to note that hot-spot volcanism does
not necessarily lead to rifting. For example, vast outpourings of basaltic lava that constitute the Columbia
River basalts in the Pacific Northwest, as well as Russia’s
Siberian Traps, are not associated with continental fragmentation. Furthermore, along some rifted continental
margins, stretching and thinning of the lithosphere was
not accompanied by large-scale volcanism and melting.
Consequently, other forces that contribute to continental
fragmentation must exist.

Role of Tensional Stress Continental rifting requires
tensional stresses that are sufficiently strong to tear the
lithosphere. In the Basin and Range region, where the
lithosphere is thin, hot, and weak, small stresses are sufficient to cause spreading. During the past 20 million
years, a broad zone of upwelling within the asthenosphere is thought to have caused considerable stretching
and thinning of the crust in this region (see Figure 14.17,

13.8

page 434). In such settings, rifting is accompanied by
large-scale melting and volcanism.
Tensional stresses resulting from plate motions are
also thought to be particularly significant in continental
rifting. In settings where a continent is attached to a subducting slab of oceanic lithosphere, the continental crust
is pulled along by the descending slab. However, this
continental lithosphere is thick and tends to resist being
towed, which creates tensional stresses that may be sufficient to tear the landmass. The zones of rifting in the
fragmentation of a supercontinent may be influenced by
a preexisting weakness, such as sutures—the sites where
continents once collided to form the supercontinent.

13.7

Concept Checks

1. Name a modern example of a continental rift.
2. Briefly describe each of the four stages in the
evolution of an ocean basin.
3. What role do hot spots and mantle plumes play in
the breakup of a supercontinent?

Destruction of Oceanic Lithosphere
Compare and contrast spontaneous subduction and forced subduction.

Although new lithosphere is continually being produced at divergent plate boundaries, Earth’s surface area is not growing larger. In order to balance the amount of newly created lithosphere, there
must be a process whereby oceanic lithosphere is destroyed.

Why Oceanic Lithosphere Subducts
The process of plate subduction is complex, and the ultimate fate of oceanic lithosphere is still being debated.
Does subducted oceanic crust pile up at the boundary
between the upper mantle and the lower mantle, where it
Figure 13.26

Old, cold, dense
lithosphere subducts
at a steep angle

The angle of plate subduction depends on its
density A. In parts of the
Pacific, some oceanic lithosphere exceeds 180 million
years in age and descends
into the mantle at angles
approaching 90 degrees.
B. Young oceanic lithosphere is warm and buoyant, and it tends to subduct
at a low angle.

Trench

Oceanic
ridge

is assimilated into the mantle? Or do most plates descend
to the core–mantle boundary, where they are heated and
eventually rise back toward Earth’s surface as mantle
plumes?
What is known with some certainty is that oceanic
lithosphere will resist subduction unless its overall density is greater than that of the underlying asthenosphere.
It takes at least 15 million years for a young slab of oceanic lithosphere to cool sufficiently to become denser
than the supporting asthenosphere.

Old,
col
d

Spontaneous Subduction Subduction zones can be

A.

divided into two basic types, based on the nature of the
subducting plate. The first
Young, warm, buoyant
lithosphere subducts type, referred to as a MariAsthenosphere
ana-type subduction zone, is
at a low angle
characterized by old, dense
Trench
lithosphere sinking into the
Oceanic
mantle by its own weight.
ridge
The lithosphere entering
here
p
s
o
the Mariana trench is about
th
ic li
n
a
e
185 million years old, some
oc
arm
w
,
of the oldest and densest
g
Youn
lithosphere in today’s oceans.
Along this trench, the subAsthenosphere
ducting
slab descends into the
B.

anic lithosphere
oce

413

13.8 Destruction of Oceanic Lithosphere

mantle at a steep angle that approaches 90 degrees (Figure
13.26A). Steep subduction angles produce deep trenches,
which account in part for the depth of the Challenger
Deep, located at the southern limb of the Mariana
trench. The Mariana and most of the other subduction
zones in the western Pacific involve cold, dense lithosphere and therefore exhibit spontaneous subduction.
It is important to note that the lithospheric mantle,
which makes up about 80 percent of the descending oceanic slab, drives subduction. Even when the oceanic crust
is quite old, its density is still less than that of the underlying asthenosphere. Subduction, therefore, depends on
lithospheric mantle that is colder and therefore denser
than the underlying asthenosphere.
When an oceanic slab descends to about 400 kilometers (250 miles), mineral phase changes (transitions from
low-density mineral to high-density mineral; see Chapter
12) enhance subduction. At this depth, the transition
of olivine to its compact, much denser spinel structure
increases the density of the slab, which helps pull the
plate into the subduction zone.

Forced Subduction The second type of subduction
zone, called the Peru–Chile–type subduction, is characterized by younger, hotter, and less-dense lithosphere
that dips at shallower angles (Figure 13.26B). Along Peru–
Chile–type boundaries, the lithosphere is too buoyant to
subduct spontaneously; rather, it is forced beneath the
overlying plate by compressional forces.
In areas where forced subduction occurs, a strong
coupling develops between the overlying plate and the
subducting plate, which can result in particularly strong
and frequent earthquakes. Stated another way, plate
motion generates horizontal compressional forces that
cause the upper plate and underlying plate to grind
against each other. The result can be folding and thickening of the upper plate and sometimes the formation
of mountainous terrains like we see today in the Andes.

Shallow subduction and strong coupling have also been
observed in the past decade along the Sunda subduction
zone, off the coast of Sumatra, another region that has
experienced several major earthquakes.
Researchers have also determined that unusually
thick units of oceanic crust, those that approach
30 kilometers (20 miles) in thickness, are likely to resist
subduction. The Ontong Java Plateau, for example, is a
thick oceanic plateau, about the size of Alaska, located
in the western Pacific (see Figure 13.4). About 20 million years ago, this plateau reached the trench that forms
the boundary between the subducting Pacific plate and
the overriding Australian–Indian plate. Apparently too
buoyant to subduct, the Ontong Java Plateau clogged the
trench. We will consider the fate of crustal fragments
that are too buoyant to subduct in the next chapter.

Subducting Plates: The Demise
of Ocean Basins
In the 1970s, geologists began using magnetic stripes
and fracture zones on the ocean floor to reconstruct the
past 200 million years of plate movement. This research
showed that parts of, or even entire, ocean basins have
been destroyed along subduction zones. For example,
during the breakup of Pangaea shown in Figure 2.23 on
page 56, notice that the African plate moved northward,
eventually colliding with Eurasia. During this event,
the floor of the intervening Tethys Ocean was almost
entirely consumed into the mantle, leaving behind a few
small remnants—the Eastern Mediterranean Sea and the
Black Sea.
Reconstructions of the breakup of Pangaea also
helped investigators understand the demise of the Farallon plate—a large oceanic plate that once occupied much
of the eastern Pacific basin. At the time of the breakup
of Pangaea, the Farallon plate was situated on the eastern side of a spreading center, as shown in Figure 13.27A.

SmartFigure 13.27
The demise of the Farallon
plate Because the Farallon
plate was subducting faster
than it was being generated, it continually got
smaller and smaller. The
remaining fragments of
the once-mighty Farallon
plate are the Juan de Fuca,
Cocos, and Nazca plates.
(https://goo.gl/dnxck4)

Queen Charlotte Fault

North
American
plate

North
American
plate
Farallon
plate

Subduction
zone
Future
Los Angeles

Spreading
center

Pacific plate

Future
Los Angeles

Cascadia
subduction
zone

North
American
plate

Subduction
zone

Farallon
plate

Queen Charlotte Fault

Farallon
plate

Future
Los Angeles

Juan de Fuca
plate

Los Angeles
San Andreas
Fault

Spreading
center

Pacific plate

North
American
plate

Pacific plate

Pacific plate

Gulf of
California

Cocos
plate
A. 56 million years ago

B. 30 million years ago

C. 20 million years ago

D. Today

414

CHAPTER 13

Origin and Evolution of the Ocean Floor

Figure 13.28
The separation between
the Baja Peninsula and
North America (SeaWiFS
Project/ORBIGMAGE/NASA/
Goddard Space Flight Center)

San Andreas Fault
(transform fault)

North
American
plate

Spreading
centers
B

aj

a

P

en

Transform
faults
in

su

la

G

ul

f

of

C

al

if

or

ni

Pacific plate

The spreading center, which generated both the Farallon
and Pacific plates, is the East Pacific Rise.
Beginning about 180 million years ago, the Americas were propelled westward as Pangaea broke up and
the Atlantic Ocean started to open. As a result, the
Farallon plate began subducting beneath the Americas faster than it was being generated, causing it to
decrease in size (Figure 13.27B). The three remaining
fragments of the once-extensive Farallon plate include
the modern Juan de Fuca, Cocos, and Nazca plates.
The westward migration of North America also
caused a section of the East Pacific Rise to enter the
subduction zone that once lay off the coast of California (see Figure 13.27B). As this spreading center subducted, it was destroyed and replaced by a transform

13.8

a

fault system that currently
accommodates the differential motion between
the North American and
Pacific plates. Because of
this change in plate geometry, the Pacific plate
has captured a sliver of
North America (the Baja
Peninsula and a portion of
southern California) and
is carrying it northwestward toward Alaska at a
rate of about 6 centimeters (2.5 inches) per year.
As more of the ridge
subducted, the transform
fault system, which we
now call the San Andreas
Fault, increased in length
(Figure 13.27C). Today, the
southern end of the San
Andreas Fault connects to
a young spreading center
that is generating the Gulf
of California (Figure 13.28).
A similar event generated
the Queen Charlotte transform fault, located off the
west coast of Canada and
southeastern Alaska.

Concept Checks

1. Explain why oceanic lithosphere subducts even
though the oceanic crust is less dense than the
underlying asthenosphere.
2. Compare spontaneous subduction and forced
subduction. Provide examples of places where
each operates.
3. What role do mineral phase changes play in plate
subduction?
4. Explain what happened when the spreading
center that generated the Farallon plate collided
with the North American plate.

14
Mountain
Building

Mount Rundle consists mainly of limestones and shales that
were trust over younger rocks during the formation of the
Canadian Rockies. Mount Rundle is located in Banff National
Park overlooking the town of Banff, Canada. (Photo by Mike
Grandmaison/AGE Fotostock)
_TT47


M

ountains provide some of the most spectacular scenery
on our planet. Poets, painters, and songwriters have captured their splendor. Geologists
understand that at some time, all continental regions were mountainous masses and that
continents grow through the addition of mountains to their flanks. As geologists unravel the
secrets of mountain formation, they gain a deeper understanding of the evolution of Earth’s
continents. If continents do indeed grow by adding mountains to their flanks, then why do
mountains exist in the interior of landmasses? To answer this and related questions, this
chapter pieces together the sequence of events that generate these lofty structures.

Mountain Building
14.1 Locate
and name Earth’s major mountain belts on a world map.

Earth’s major mountain
belts Notice the east–west
trend of major mountain
belts in Eurasia in contrast
to the north–south trend
of the North and South
American Cordillera.
The shields and stable
platforms shown are
composed of old crustal
rocks that have been
highly deformed during
ancient mountainbuilding events. These are
discussed in Chapter 21.

In addition to these young mountain belts, there are several
chains of Paleozoic-age mountains on Earth. Although
these older mountain belts are deeply eroded and topographically less prominent, they exhibit the same structural
features found in younger mountains. The Appalachians in

Greenland
shield

Ca
l

Canadian
shield

North A

an Belt
oni
ed
Baltic
shield

dil
Cor
an
ric
me

la
pa
Ap

s
ian
ch

Alps

Altay-Sayan
Caucasus

Atlas

Zagros

l er

a
Orinoco
shield

Stable platforms (shields
covered by sedimentary rock)

Tien
Shan

H im a

layas

African
shield

Brazilian
shield
Australian
shield

Great
ing Rang
e
vid
Di

Shields

un
s Mo tains
de
An

Old mountain belts

Angara
shield

Indian
shield

Key
Young mountain belts (less
than 100 million years old)

the eastern United States and the Urals in Russia are classic
examples of this group of older, well-worn mountain belts.
The term for the processes that collectively produce
a mountain belt is orogenesis (oros = mountain, genesis
= to come into being). Most major mountain belts display

Urals

Figure 14.1

Mountain building has occurred in the recent geologic past at several locations around the world.
Young mountain belts include the American Cordillera (cordillera means “spine” or “backbone”), which
runs along the western margin of the Americas from Cape Horn at the tip of South America to Alaska
and includes the Andes and Canadian Rockies; the Alpine–Himalaya chain, which extends along the
margin of the Mediterranean, through Iran to northern India and into Indochina; and the mountainous terrains of the western Pacific, which include volcanic island arcs that comprise Japan, the
Philippines, and Sumatra. Most of these young mountain belts have come into existence within the past
100 million years (Figure 14.1). Some, including the Himalayas, began their growth as recently as 50 million years ago. The connection between convergent plate boundaries and young mountain belts can be
observed by comparing Figure 14.1 with the map of plate boundaries shown in Figure 2.11 (page 45).

421

14.2 Subduction Zones

striking visual evidence of great
Highly deformed sedimentary strata exposed on the face of Alberta’s
Mount Kidd. These sedimentary rocks are continental shelf deposits
compressional forces that have
that were folded and displaced toward the interior of Canada by
shortened the crust horizontally
low-angle thrust faults.
while thickening it vertically.
These compressional mountains contain large quantities
of preexisting sedimentary and
crystalline rocks that have been
faulted and contorted into a series
of folds (Figure 14.2). Although
folding and thrust faulting are
often the most conspicuous signs
of orogenesis, varying degrees
of metamorphism and igneous
activity are always present.
How do mountain belts
form? Since the time of the
ancient Greeks, this question
has intrigued philosophers and
Callan Bentley
scientists. One early proposal
suggested that mountains are
simply wrinkles in Earth’s crust,
produced as the planet cooled
from its original semimolten state.
According to this idea, Earth
contracted and shrank as it lost
heat, which caused the crust to
deform in a manner similar to how
an orange peel wrinkles as the
fruit dries out. However, neither this nor any other early
process of subduction has driven mountain building
hypothesis withstood scientific scrutiny.
around the globe.
The theory of plate tectonics provides a model
for orogenesis with excellent explanatory power and
accounts for the origin of virtually all the present mountain belts and most of the ancient ones. According to
1. Define orogenesis.
this model, the tectonic processes that generate Earth’s
major mountainous terrains occur along convergent
2. In the plate tectonics model, which type of plate
plate boundaries, where oceanic lithosphere subducts
boundary is most directly associated with Earth’s
into the mantle. We will first look at the nature of conmajor mountain belts?
vergent plate boundaries and then examine how the

14.1

Concept Checks

Zones
14.2 Subduction
List and describe the four major features associated with subduction zones.
In their ongoing quest to unravel the events that produce mountains, researchers examine ancient
mountain belts as well as sites where orogenesis is currently active. Of particular interest are convergent plate boundaries, where lithospheric plates subduct (see Figure 13.7, page 393). The subduction of oceanic lithosphere generates Earth’s strongest earthquakes and most explosive volcanic
eruptions, and it plays a pivotal role in generating most of Earth’s mountain belts.

Features of Subduction Zones
Subduction zones can be roughly divided into four
regions: (1) a volcanic arc, which is built on the overlying
plate; (2) a deep-ocean trench, which forms where subducting slabs of oceanic lithosphere bend and descend
into the asthenosphere; (3) a forearc region, which is

located between a trench and a volcanic arc; and (4) a
back-arc region, which is located on the side of the volcanic arc opposite the trench.

Volcanic Arcs Perhaps the most obvious structure
generated by subduction is a volcanic arc (Figure 14.3A).

SmartFigure 14.2
Mount Kidd, Alberta,
Canada (https://goo.gl/cPwoXR)

422

CHAPTER 14

Mountain Building

Figure 14.3
Development of two
types of volcanic arcs
A. Volcanic island arcs form
where one slab of oceanic
lithosphere is subducted
beneath another slab of
oceanic lithosphere.
B. Continental volcanic
arcs are generated when a
slab of oceanic lithosphere
subducts beneath a block
of continental crust.

Trench

Forearc

Sediment

Volcanic
island arc

Sediment

Subduc
100 km

plate subducts at a very low angle. Trench depth is also
related to the availability of sediments. A massive amount
of sediment from the Columbia River basin fills most of
what would otherwise be a shallow trench in this subduction zone—about 3 kilometers (2 miles) deep.

Back-arc

Sediment
Oceanic lithosphere

ting

oce
a

nic
lith
osp
h

200 km

Melting
ere

Asthenosphere
(mantle)

A. Convergent plate boundary involving two slabs of
oceanic lithosphere.
Trench

Forearc
region

Sediment

Sediment

Subduc
100 km

Continental volcanic arc

ting

oce
a

Back-arc
region

Sediment

Continental
lithosphere

nic
lith
osp
h

200 km

Melting
ere

Asthenosphere
(mantle)

B. Convergent plate boundary where oceanic lithosphere is
subducting beneath continental lithosphere.

In settings where two oceanic slabs converge, one is subducted beneath the other, initiating partial melting of the
mantle wedge located above the subducting plate. This
molten rock rises and eventually leads to the growth of
a volcanic island arc, or simply an island arc, on the
ocean floor. Examples of active island arcs include the
Mariana, Tonga, and Aleutian arcs in the Pacific (see Figure 2.18, page 52).
By contrast, when oceanic lithosphere is subducted
beneath a continental block, a continental volcanic
arc results (Figure 14.3B). Continental volcanic arcs build
on the topography of older, thicker continental blocks,
resulting in volcanic peaks that may reach 6000 meters
(nearly 20,000 feet) above sea level. The Cascade Range
of the Pacific Northwest is a classic example.

Deep-Ocean Trenches

Deep-ocean trenches are
created where oceanic lithosphere bends as it descends
into the mantle. Trench depth is strongly related to the
age, and therefore the temperature and density, of the
subducting oceanic slab. In the western Pacific, where
oceanic lithosphere is cold and dense, oceanic slabs
descend into the mantle at steep angles, producing
trenches with average depths of about8 kilometers
(5 miles) below sea level. A well-known example is the
Mariana trench, where the deepest area is an amazing
10,994 meters (36,069 feet) below sea level.
By contrast, the Cascadia subduction zone off the
coasts of Washington and Oregon lacks a well-defined
trench, partly because the warm, buoyant Juan de Fuca

Forearc

The forearc region of a subduction zone is
located between a deep-ocean trench and the associated
volcanic arc (see Figure 14.3). Here pyroclastic material
from the volcanic arc, as well as sediments eroded from
the adjacent landmass, accumulate. Ocean-floor sediments are also carried to forearc regions by subducting
plates.
The amount of sediment carried to a forearc region
varies. The forearc region adjacent to the Mariana
trench, for example, contains minimal sediment, partially because of its distance from a significant source
of sediment. By contrast, the forearc region adjacent to
the Cascadia subduction zone is choked with sediment
derived from the nearby outlet of the Columbia River.
In addition, forearc width can vary significantly.
Where an oceanic slab subducts at a steep angle, the
forearc region is quite narrow, but when the angle of subduction is low, the forearc tends to be broad.

Back-Arc Another site where sediments and volcanic
debris accumulate is the back-arc, which is located on
the backside of the volcanic arc when viewed from the
trench (see Figure 14.3). In these regions tensional forces
tend to prevail, causing Earth’s crust to stretch and thin
and resulting in the formation of a down-faulted basin.
The reason for this development is considered in the next
section.
Back-arc regions associated with volcanic island arcs
tend to be long linear seas, such as the Sea of Japan and
the Java Sea. In continental settings, the back-arc regions
are located landward of the continental volcanic arc.
Here stretching of the crust usually results in subsidence,
forming basins that quickly fill with volcanic ash and
sediments derived from the growing volcanic structures.

Extension and Back-Arc Spreading
Because subduction zones form where two plates converge, it is logical to assume that large compressional
forces deform the plate margins. However, convergent
margins are not necessarily regions dominated by compressional forces. As mentioned above, tensional stresses
act on the overlying plates along some convergent plate
margins and cause extension—stretching and thinning—
of the crust. But how do extensional processes operate
where two plates are moving together?
The age of the subducting oceanic slab is thought to
play a significant role in determining the dominant forces
acting on the overriding plate. When a relatively cold,
dense slab subducts, it does not follow a fixed path into

423

14.3 Subduction and Mountain Building
A. Subduction and “roll back” of an oceanic slab creates
flow in the mantle, called slab suction, that “pulls” the
upper (non-subducting) plate toward the retreating trench.
Island arc

B. Slab suction causes the overlying plate to become
elongated and thinned, often resulting in the formation of
a basin and spreading center behind the volcanic arc.
Extension
Trench
rollback

Trench

Asthenosphere

Slab
motion
through
mantle

Su

bd

uc

tio

n

the asthenosphere (Figure 14.4A). Rather, it sinks vertically as it descends along an angled path. This causes the
trench to retreat, or “roll back,” as shown in Figure 14.4B.
As the subducting plate sinks, it creates a flow in the
asthenosphere called slab suction that “pulls” the upper
plate toward the retreating trench. (Visualize what would
have happened if you were in a lifeboat, unable to move
away from the Titanic as it sank!)
Slab suction, in turn, produces tensional stress that
elongates and thins the overriding plate, most often creating a basin in the region behind the volcanic arc (Figure
14.4C). Thinning of the crust results in upwelling of hot
mantle rock and accompanying decompression melting. Continued extension may initiate seafloor spreading, which increases the size of the newly formed basin.
Basins of this type within a back-arc region are termed
back-arc basins (see Figure 14.4C). Seafloor spreading
is currently enlarging the back-arc basins found landward
of the Mariana and Tonga volcanic island arcs.
_TT48


Su

bd

Slab
motion
through
mantle

uc

tio

n

Asthenosphere

C. Some back-arc basins develop into well-developed
spreading centers that generate a deep ocean basin
behind the volcanic arc.
Continued
Back-arc basin
trench
rollback

Slab
motion
through
mantle

Su

14.2

bd

uc

tio

n

Asthenosphere

Concept Checks

1. List the four major features of subduction zones.
2. Briefly describe how back-arc basins form.

and Mountain Building
14.3 Subduction
Sketch a cross-section of an Andean-type mountain belt and describe how its
major features are generated.

The subduction of oceanic lithosphere is the driving force in orogenesis. Oceanic lithosphere
subducting beneath an oceanic plate results in a volcanic island arc and related tectonic features.
Subduction beneath a continental block, on the other hand, forms a continental volcanic arc and
mountainous topography along the margin of a continent. In addition, volcanic island arcs and other
crustal fragments “drift” across the ocean basin until they reach a subduction zone, where they
collide and become welded to another crustal fragment or a larger continental block. If subduction
continues long enough, it can ultimately lead to the collision of two continental blocks, triggering a
major mountain-building event.

Island Arc–Type Mountain Building
Island arcs result from the steady subduction of oceanic
lithosphere, which may last for 200 million years or more.

Periodic volcanic activity, the emplacement of igneous
plutons at depth, and the accumulation of sediment that
is scraped from the subducting plate gradually increase
the volume of crustal material capping the upper plate

Figure 14.4
Formation of a back-arc
basin

424

CHAPTER 14

Figure 14.5
Andean-type mountain
building

Mountain Building
A. Passive continental margin with an extensive platform of
sediments and sedimentary rocks.
Passive
continental
margin

Andean-Type Mountain Building
Continental
lithosphere

Asthenosphere

B. Plate convergence generates a subduction zone, and
partial melting produces a continental volcanic arc.
Compressional forces and igneous activity further deform
and thicken the crust, elevating the mountain belt.
Continental
Accretionary
volcanic arc
wedge
Magma
chambers
Trench
Subducti

ng o

Subduction of plate
and formation of
accretionary wedge

c ea

Pluton
nic
Partial
lith
o sp
melting
he
re

Asthenosphere

Water
driven from
subducting
slab

C. Subduction ends and is followed by a period of uplift.
Batholith
Forearc
basin

Andean-type mountain building is characterized by
subduction beneath a continent rather than oceanic
lithosphere. Subduction along these active continental
margins is associated with long-lasting magmatic activity
that builds continental volcanic arcs. The result is crustal
thickening, with the crust reaching thicknesses of more
than 70 kilometers (45 miles).
The first stage in the development of Andean-type
mountain belts, named after the Andes Mountains of
South America, occurs along passive continental margins
(Figure 14.5A). Recall that passive continental margins are
geologically inactive regions located some distance from
plate boundaries. Passive continental margins develop
when continental blocks rift apart and are separated
by seafloor spreading that occurs along a mid-ocean
ridge. The margins on both sides of the Atlantic provide
modern examples of passive continental margins, where
continued deposition of sediments has produced a thick
platform of shallow-water sandstones, limestones, and
shales (see Figure 13.6, page 392).
The formation of an Andean-type mountain begins
when the forces that drive plate motions change and a
subduction zone develops along the margin of a continent. In order for a new subduction zone to form, oceanic
lithosphere must be old and dense enough to create a
downward force capable of shearing the lithosphere.
Alternatively, strong compressional forces tear off the
oceanic lithosphere along a continental margin, thereby
initiating subduction.

Building Volcanic Arcs
Plutons

Uplifted
accretionary
wedge

they become involved in large-scale mountain-building
episodes.

Uplifting and erosion
exposes batholith
consisting of
numerous plutons
Asthenosphere

(see Figure 14.3A). Some large volcanic island arcs, such
as Japan, owe their size to having been built on fragments
of continental crust that have rifted from a large landmass or the joining of multiple island arcs over time.
The continued growth of a volcanic island arc can
generate mountainous topography consisting of nearly
parallel belts of igneous and metamorphic rocks. This
activity, however, is viewed as just one phase in the
development of Earth’s major mountain belts. As you will
see later, some volcanic arcs are carried by subducting
plates to the margin of large continental blocks, where

Recall that as oceanic lithosphere descends into the mantle, increasing temperatures
and pressures drive volatiles (mostly water and carbon
dioxide) from the crustal rocks. These mobile fluids
migrate upward into the wedge-shaped region of mantle
between the subducting slab and upper plate. At a depth
of about 100 kilometers (60 miles), these water-rich fluids
sufficiently reduce the melting point of hot mantle rock
to trigger some melting (Figure 14.5B). Partial melting of
the ultramafic rock peridotite generates primary magmas,
with mafic (basaltic) compositions. Because these newly
formed basaltic magmas are less dense than the rocks
from which they originated, they will buoyantly rise. Upon
reaching the base of the low-density materials of the continental crust, they typically collect, or pond.
Continued ascent through the thick continental crust
is generally achieved through magmatic differentiation, in
which heavy ferromagnesian minerals crystallize and settle
out of the magma, leaving the remaining melt enriched in
silica and other “light” components (see Chapter 4). Hence,
through magmatic differentiation, a comparatively dense

425
Figure 14.6

basaltic magma can generate low-density, buoyant secondary magma of intermediate and/or
felsic composition.

Torres del Paine National
Park, Chile This mountainous area, east of the
high southern Andes,
consists mainly of large
granite plutons (light color)
between layers of sedimentary and metamorphic
rocks (dark color). Magma
intruded and metamorphosed the adjacent sedimentary host rock to form
these rock bodies that were
uplifted and exhumed by
erosional forces. (Photo by

Emplacement of Batholiths Because of
its low density and great thickness, continental
crust significantly impedes the ascent of molten
rock. Consequently, a high percentage of the
magma that intrudes the crust never reaches
the surface; instead, it crystallizes at depth to
form massive igneous plutons called batholiths
(see Figure 4.28C, page 130). The result of this
activity is thickening of Earth’s crust.
Eventually, uplifting and erosion exhume
the batholiths consisting of numerous interconnected
plutons (Figure 14.5C). The American Cordillera contains
several large batholiths, including the Sierra Nevada of
California, the Coast Range Batholith of western Canada,
and several large igneous bodies in the Andes (Figure 14.6).
Most batholiths consist of intrusive igneous rocks that
range in composition from granite to diorite.

Michael Collier)

Development of an Accretionary Wedge During the

Figure 14.7
Tectonic structures of
California generated by an
Andean-type subduction
zone
nto
me
cra ey
Sa Vall

Sie

Basin and Range

rra
Ne

da
n
qui
Joa y
San Valle

y
s
le
ge
al
an
t V
st R
Coa

va

ea

San
Francisco

Gr

upward, it tends to act as a barrier to the movement of sediment from the volcanic arc to the trench. As a result, sediments begin to collect between the accretionary wedge
and the volcanic arc. This region, which is composed of
relatively undeformed layers of sediment and sedimentary rocks, is called a forearc basin (see Figure 14.5C).
Subsidence and continued sedimentation in forearc basins
can generate a sequence of nearly horizontal sedimentary
strata that can attain thicknesses of several kilometers.

California’s Sierra Nevada, Coast Ranges, and Great
Valley are excellent examples of the tectonic structures
typically generated along an Andean-type subduction
zone (Figure 14.7). These structures were produced by the

es
ang

Forearc Basins As an accretionary wedge grows

Sierra Nevada, Coast Ranges,
and Great Valley

st R
Coa

development of volcanic arcs, unconsolidated sediments
that are carried on the subducting plate, as well as fragments of oceanic crust, may be scraped off and plastered
against the edge of the overriding plate. The resulting
chaotic accumulation of deformed and thrust-faulted sediments and scraps of ocean crust is called an accretionary
wedge (see Figure 14.5B). The processes that deform
these sediments are comparable to a wedge of soil being
scraped and pushed in front of an advancing bulldozer.
Some of the sediments that comprise an accretionary wedge are muds that accumulated on the ocean floor
and were subsequently carried to the subduction zone by
plate motion. Additional materials are derived from an
adjacent continent or volcanic arc and consist of volcanic
debris and products of weathering and erosion.
In regions where sediment is plentiful, prolonged
subduction may thicken a developing accretionary wedge
sufficiently that it protrudes above sea level. This has
occurred along the southern end of the Puerto Rico
trench, where the Orinoco River basin of Venezuela is a
major source of sediments. The resulting wedge emerges
to form the island of Barbados. By contrast, some subduction zones have small accretionary wedges or none at all.

Los Angeles

426

CHAPTER 14

Mountain Building

E Y E ON E A R T H

14.1

T

hese interbedded layers of chert and shale have
been strongly folded during the growth of an
accretionary wedge. A recent period of uplift has
exposed these deformed strata near Marin Headlands,
north of San Francisco, California.

QUESTION 1 What is the nature of the stress that
most likely generated these highly folded strata:
compressional or tensional?
QUESTION 2 Along what type of plate boundaries do
accretionary wedges form?
QUESTION 3 What type of plate boundary is found today
in the San Francisco Bay area?

subduction of a portion of the Pacific basin (the Farallon
plate) under the western margin of California (see Figure
13.28, page 414). The Sierra Nevada Batholith is a remnant of the continental volcanic arc that was produced by
many surges of magma during a time span that exceeded
100 million years. The Coast Ranges were built from the
vast accumulation of sediments (accretionary wedge) that
collected along the continental margin, or perhaps an
island arc that lay offshore.
Beginning about 30 million years ago, subduction
gradually ceased along much of the margin of North
America, as the spreading center that produced the Farallon plate entered the California trench. The uplifting
and erosion that followed removed most of the evidence
of past volcanic activity and exposed a core of crystalline
igneous and associated metamorphic rocks that make up
the Sierra Nevada (see Figure 14.5C). The Coast Ranges
were uplifted only recently, as evidenced by the young,
unconsolidated sediments that currently blanket portions
of these highlands.
California’s Great Valley is a remnant of the forearc
basin that formed between the Sierra Nevada and the

14.4

0

1

Meter

Michael Collier

accretionary prism and trench that lay offshore. Throughout much of its history, portions of the Great Valley lay
below sea level. This sediment-laden basin contains thick
marine deposits and debris eroded from the adjacent
continental volcanic arc.

14.3

Concept Checks

1. The formation of mountainous topography at a
volcanic island arc is considered just one phase in
the development of a major mountain belt. Explain.
2. How do mantle-derived magmas that have a
basaltic composition generate magmas that
exhibit an intermediate to felsic composition?
3. What is a batholith? In what modern tectonic
setting are batholiths being generated?
4. What is an accretionary wedge? Briefly describe
its formation.
5. In what ways are the Sierra Nevada and the
Andes ranges similar?

Collisional Mountain Belts
Compare and contrast the formation of a Cordilleran-type mountain belt with that
of an Alpine-type mountain belt.

Most major mountain belts are generated when one or more buoyant crustal fragments collide with
a continental margin as a result of subduction. Whereas oceanic lithosphere, which is relatively
dense, readily subducts, continental lithosphere contains significant amounts of low-density crustal
rocks and is therefore too buoyant to undergo subduction. Consequently, the arrival of a crustal
fragment at a trench results in a collision and usually ends further subduction.
_TT49


427

14.4 Collisional Mountain Belts

Cordilleran-Type Mountain Building
A Cordilleran-type orogeny, named after the North
American Cordillera, is associated with a Pacific-like
ocean—in that unlike the Atlantic, the Pacific may never
close. The rapid rate of seafloor spreading in the Pacific
basin is balanced by a high rate of subduction. In this
setting, it is highly likely that island arcs or small crustal
fragments will be carried along until they collide with an
active continental margin. The process of collision and
accretion (joining together) of comparatively small crustal
fragments to a continental margin has generated many
of the mountainous regions that rim the Pacific. Geologists call these accreted crustal blocks terranes. The term
terrane is used to describe a crustal fragment consisting
of a distinct and recognizable series of rock formations
that has been transported by plate tectonic processes. By
contrast, the term terrain is used when describing the
shape of the surface topography, or “lay of the land.”

A. A microcontinent and a volcanic island arc are being carried
toward a subduction zone.
Microcontinent

Inactive
island arc

Trench

Subducting oceanic lit
ho

sph

ere

B. The volcanic island arc is sliced off the subducting plate and
thrust onto the continent.
Microcontinent

Accretion of
island arc
to continent

Continent

Accretion and Orogenesis As oceanic plates move,
they carry embedded oceanic plateaus, volcanic island
arcs, and microcontinents to an Andean-type subduction
zone. When an oceanic plate contains small seamounts,
these structures are generally subducted along with the
descending oceanic slab. However, large, thick units of
oceanic crust, such as the Ontong Java Plateau, which is
the size of Alaska, or an island arc composed of abundant
“light” igneous rocks, render the oceanic lithosphere too
buoyant to subduct. In these situations, a collision between
the crustal fragment and the continental margin occurs.
The sequence of events that happen when small
crustal fragments reach a Cordilleran-type margin is
shown in Figure 14.8. Rather than subduct, the upper
crustal layers of these thickened zones are “peeled” from
the descending plate and thrust in relatively thin sheets
on the adjacent continental block. Convergence does not
generally end with the accretion of a crustal fragment.
Rather, new subduction zones typically form, and they
can carry other island arcs or microcontinents toward
a collision with the continental margin. Each collision
displaces earlier accreted terranes further inland, adding
to the zone of deformation as well as to the thickness and
lateral extent of the continental margin.

Collision and accretion of
small crustal fragments
to a continental margin
(https://goo.gl/RtF14w)

The Nature of Terranes What is the nature of crustal
fragments, and where did they originate? Research suggests
that prior to their accretion to a continental block, some of
these fragments may have been microcontinents similar
to the modern-day island of Madagascar, located east of
Africa in the Indian Ocean. Many others were island arcs
similar to Japan, the Philippines, and the Aleutian Islands.
Still others may have been submerged oceanic plateaus
created by massive outpourings of basaltic lavas associated with mantle plumes (see Figure 13.4, pages 390–391).
More than 100 of these relatively small crustal fragments,
most of which are in the Pacific, are known to exist.

SmartFigure 14.8

Asthenosphere
C. A new subduction zone forms seaward of the old subduction
zone.
Microcontinent Trench

Continent

Asthenosphere
D. The accretion of the microcontinent to the continental
margin shoves the remnant island arc further inland and grows
the continental margin seaward.
Accretion of
microcontinent
Continent

Asthenosphere

The North American Cordillera

The correlation
between mountain building and the accretion of crustal
fragments arose primarily from studies conducted in the
North American Cordillera (Figure 14.9). Researchers
determined that some of the rocks in the orogenic belts
of Alaska and British Columbia contain fossil and paleomagnetic evidence indicating that these strata previously
lay much closer to the equator.

428

CHAPTER 14

Mountain Building

SmartFigure 14.9
Terranes that have
been added to western
North America during
the past 200 million
years Paleomagnetic studies and fossil evidence
indicate that some of these
terranes originated thousands of kilometers to the
south of their present locations. (After D. R. Hutchinson

ARCTIC
OCEAN

A LA S K A
Wrangellia

Yukon-Tanana

NOR

and others) (https://goo.gl/bIIxpx)

TH
Stikini

a

ng

Eastern limit
of Cordilleran
deformation

el

lia

CANADA

COR

OCEAN

Wra

A M E RICAN

PA C I F I C

Cache Creek

DI
L
Francisc

LERA

UNITED
STATES

an

Oceanic terranes
Area deformed by the
accretion of terranes
Other colored areas
are accreted terranes

It is now known that many of the terranes that
make up the North American Cordillera were scattered
throughout the eastern Pacific, like the island arcs and
oceanic plateaus currently distributed in the western
Pacific. During the breakup of Pangaea, the eastern portion of the Pacific basin (Farallon plate) began to subduct
under the western margin of North America. This activity
resulted in the piecemeal addition of crustal fragments to
the entire Pacific margin of the continent—from Mexico’s
Baja Peninsula to northern Alaska (see Figure 14.9).
Geologists expect that many modern microcontinents will
likewise be accreted to active continental margins surrounding the Pacific, producing new orogenic belts.

Alpine-Type Mountain Building:
Continental Collisions
Alpine-type orogenies, named after the Alps that have
been intensively studied for more than 200 years, occur

where two continental masses collide. This type of orogeny
may also involve the accretion of continental fragments or
island arcs that occupied the ocean basin that once separated the two continental blocks. Mountain belts formed by
the closure of major ocean basins include the Himalayas,
Appalachians, Urals, and Alps (see Figure 14.1). Continental collisions result in the development of mountains
characterized by shortened and thickened crust, achieved
through folding and large-scale thrust faulting.
The zone where two continents collide and are
“welded” together is called the suture. This portion
of the mountain belt often preserves slivers of oceanic
lithosphere, or ophiolites, that were trapped between the
colliding plates. The unique structure of these pieces of
oceanic lithosphere (see Figure 13.18, page 404) helps
identify the collision boundary.
Noteworthy features of most collisional mountain
ranges are fold-and-thrust belts. These mountainous
zones result from the deformation of thick sequences of
shallow marine sedimentary rocks, like those currently
found along passive continental margins of the Atlantic.
During continental collisions, sedimentary rocks are
pushed inland, away from the core of the developing mountain belt and over the stable continental interior. In essence,
crustal shortening is achieved by displacement along thrust
faults where once relatively flat-lying strata are “sliced” into
thick layers that are eventually stacked one upon another.
During this displacement, material caught between the
thrust faults is often folded, thereby forming the other
major structure of a fold-and-thrust belt. Excellent examples of fold-and-thrust belts are found in the Appalachian
Valley and Ridge province, the Canadian Rockies, the
Lesser (southern) Himalayas, and the northern Alps.
In the next section we take a closer look at two
examples of collisional mountains: the Himalayas and the
Appalachians. The Himalayas, Earth’s youngest collisional
mountains, are still rising. By contrast, the Appalachians
are a much older mountain belt, in which active mountain
building ceased about 250 million years ago.

The Himalayas
The mountain-building episode that created the
Himalayas began roughly 50 million years ago, when
India began to collide with Asia. Prior to the breakup
of Pangaea, India was located between Africa and
Antarctica in the Southern Hemisphere. As Pangaea fragmented, India moved rapidly, geologically speaking, a few
thousand kilometers in a northward direction.
The subduction zone that facilitated India’s northward migration was near the southern margin of Asia
(Figure 14.10A). Continued subduction along Asia’s margin
created an Andean-type plate margin containing a welldeveloped continental volcanic arc and an accretionary
wedge. India’s northern margin, on the other hand, was a
passive continental margin consisting of a thick platform
of shallow-water sediments and sedimentary rocks.

429

14.4 Collisional Mountain Belts
Thick sequence
of shallow marine
sedimentary rocks

Developing
accretionary
wedge

Continental
volcanic arc

India

SmartFigure 14.10
Asia

Oceanic
crust
A. Prior to the collision of
India and Asia, India’s
northern margin consisted
of a thick platform of
continental shelf sediments,
whereas Asia’s was an
active continental margin
with a well developed
accretionary wedge and
volcanic arc.

Continental
crust

Continental
crust

Subduct
in g

oce

an
ic

Asthenosphere

Himalayas

India

lit

ho
sp
he
re

Tibetan Plateau
Oceanic lithosphere
(ophiolite)
Suture

B. The continental collision
folded and faulted the
crustal rocks that lay along
the margins of these
continents to form the
Himalayas. This event was
followed by the gradual
uplift of the Tibetan Plateau
as the subcontinent of India
was shoved under Asia.

Continental
crust
Eurasian plate
Indian–Australian plate

Asthenosphere

Geologists have determined that one or perhaps
more small crustal fragments were positioned on the
subducting plate somewhere between India and Asia.
During the closing of the intervening ocean basin, a
small crustal fragment, which now forms southern Tibet,
reached the trench. This event was followed by the docking of India to Eurasia. The tectonic forces involved in
the collision of India with Asia were immense, causing
the more deformable materials located on the seaward
edges of these landmasses to become highly folded and
faulted (Figure 14.10B). The shortening and thickening of
the crust elevated great quantities of crustal material,
thereby generating the spectacular Himalaya Mountains
(Figure 14.11). As a result, tropical marine limestones that
formed along the continental shelf now lie at the summit
of Mount Everest.
In addition to uplift, crustal shortening caused
rocks at the “bottom of the pile” to become deeply
buried—an environment where these rocks experienced elevated temperatures and pressures (see Figure 14.10B). Partial melting within the deepest and

most-deformed region of the developing mountain belt
produced magmas that intruded the overlying rocks.
These environments generate the metamorphic and
igneous cores of collisional mountains.
The formation of the Himalayas was followed by a
period of uplift that raised the Tibetan Plateau. Seismic
evidence suggests that a portion of the Indian subcontinent was thrust beneath Tibet—a distance of perhaps
400 kilometers (250 miles). If this occurred, the added
crustal thickness would account for the lofty landscape
of southern Tibet, which has an average elevation higher
than Mount Whitney, the highest point in the contiguous
United States.
The collision with Asia slowed but did not stop the
northward migration of India, which has since penetrated at least 2000 kilometers (1200 miles) into the
mainland of Asia. Crustal shortening accommodated
some of this motion. Much of the remaining penetration into Asia caused lateral displacement of large
blocks of the Asian crust by a mechanism described
as continental escape. As shown in Figure 14.12, when

Continental collision,
the formation of the
Himalayas These diagrams
illustrate the collision of
India with the Eurasian
plate that produced the
spectacular Himalayas.
(https://goo.gl/WQCj6g)

430

CHAPTER 14

Figure 14.11
Bold peaks of the
Karakoram Range,
part of the “Greater
Himalayas” The second
highest peak in the
world, K2, is located in
the Karakoram Range.
(Photo by Jimmy Chin/National
GeographicSociety/Getty Images)

India continued its northward trek, parts of Asia were
“squeezed” eastward, out of the collision zone. These
displaced crustal blocks include much of Southeast Asia
(the region between India and China) and sections of
China.
Why was the interior of Asia deformed to such
a large extent, while India has remained essentially
intact? The answer lies in the nature of these diverse
crustal blocks. Much of India is a continental shield
composed mainly of Precambrian rocks (see Figure
14.1). This thick, cold slab of crustal material has been
Figure 14.12
India’s continued northward migration severely
deformed much of China
and Southeast Asia

intact for more than 2 billion years and is mechanically strong as a result. By contrast, Southeast Asia was
assembled more recently, from the collision of several
smaller crustal fragments. Consequently, it is still relatively “warm and weak” from recent periods of mountain building.
_TT50


The Appalachians

d
an

inl

Ma

The Appalachian Mountains provide great scenic
beauty near the eastern margin of North America, from
Alabama to Newfoundland. Mountain belts of similar origin that formed during the same period and
Map view showing the southeastward displacement of China and the
mainland of Southeast Asia as India plowed into Asia.
were once contiguous are found in the British Isles,
Scandinavia, northwestern Africa, and Greenland
(see Figure 2.6, page 41). The orogeny that generMongolia
ated this extensive mountain system lasted a few
hundred million years and was one of the stages in
assembling the supercontinent of Pangaea. Detailed
studies of the Appalachians indicate that the formaTibet Plateau
Hi
tion of this mountain belt was complex and resulted
ma
CHINA
lay
from three distinct episodes of mountain building.
aM
ountains
Our simplified overview begins roughly 750
million years ago, with the breakup of a supercontinent called Rodinia that predates Pangaea.
Similar to the breakup of Pangaea, this episode of
INDIA
continental rifting and seafloor spreading generated
a new ocean between the rifted continental blocks.
Located within this developing ocean basin was
an active volcanic arc that lay off the coast of what
would later become North America and a microcontinent situated closer to Africa (Figure 14.13A).
sia

A
E.

S.

431

14.4 Collisional Mountain Belts
North
America

SmartFigure 14.13

Avalonia
(microcontinent)

Taconic
volcanic arc

Africa
Closing of an Ocean Basin
About 600 million years ago, the
precursor to the North Atlantic
began to close. Located within
this ocean basin was an active
volcanic arc that lay off the coast
of North America and a microcontinent situated closer to Africa.

A.
North
America

Avalonia

Taconic Orogeny

Africa
Taconic Orogeny Around 450
million years ago, the marginal
sea between the volcanic island
arc and North America closed.
The collision, called the Taconic
Orogeny, thrust the island arc
over the eastern margin of North
America.

B.
North
America

Acadian Orogeny

Acadian Orogeny A second
episode of mountain building,
called the Acadian Orogeny,
occurred about 350 million years
ago and involved the collision of
a microcontinent with North
America.

C.
Alleghanian Orogeny

Africa

Alleghanian Orogeny The final event, the Alleghanian Orogeny,
occurred between 250 and 300 million years ago, when Africa
collided with North America. The result was the formation of the
Appalachian Mountains, perhaps once as majestic as the
Himalayas. The Appalachians lay in the interior of the newly
assembled supercontinent of Pangaea.

D.
Appalachian
Plateau

Ben Avraham, Jack Oliver, Larry
Brown, and Frederick Cook)
(https://goo.gl/b2Deug)

Africa
Ancestral
Atlantic

North
America

Formation of
the Appalachian
Mountains The
Appalachians formed
during the closing of a
precursor to the Atlantic
Ocean. This event involved
three separate stages of
mountain building that
spanned more than 300
million years. (Based on Zve

Valley
and Ridge

Blue
Ridge

Piedmont

Coastal
Plain

Developing
North Atlantic

Remnant
of Africa
E.

About 600 million years ago, for reasons geologists
do not completely understand, plate motion changed
dramatically, and the ancient ocean basin began to close.
This led to three main orogenic events that culminated in
the collision of North America and Africa.

Taconic Orogeny Around 450 million years ago, the
marginal sea between the volcanic island arc and ancestral North America began to close. The collision that

Africa

Rifting of Pangaea About 180 million
years ago, Pangaea began to break into
smaller fragments, a process that
ultimately created the modern Atlantic
Ocean. Because this new zone of rifting
occurred east of the suture that formed
when Africa and North America collided,
remnants of African crust remain “welded”
to the North American plate.

ensued, called the Taconic Orogeny, caused the volcanic
arc along with ocean sediments located on the upper
plate to be thrust over the larger continental block. The
remnants of this volcanic arc and oceanic sediments are
recognized today as the metamorphic rocks found across
much of the western Appalachians, especially in New
York (Figure 14.13B). In addition to the pervasive regional
metamorphism, numerous magma bodies intruded the
crustal rocks along the entire continental margin.

432

CHAPTER 14

Mountain Building

SmartFigure 14.14
The Valley and Ridge province This region of the
Appalachian Mountains consists of folded and
faulted sedimentary strata that were displaced
landward along thrust faults as a result of the collision of Africa with North America. (NASA/GSFC/JPL,
MISR Science Team) (http://goo.gl/sMnjA6)

Appalachian
Plateau

Valley and Ridge

Acadian Orogeny

A second episode of mountain
building, called the Acadian Orogeny, occurred about 350
million years ago. The continued closing of this ancient
ocean basin led to the collision of a microcontinent with
North America (Figure 14.13C). This orogeny involved
thrust faulting, metamorphism, and the intrusion of several large granite bodies. In addition, this event added
substantially to the width of North America.

Alleghanian Orogeny

The final orogeny, called
the Alleghanian Orogeny, occurred between 250 and
300 million years ago, when Africa collided with North
America. The material that was accreted earlier was displaced by as much as 250 kilometers (155 miles) toward
the interior of North America. This event also displaced
and further deformed the shelf sediments and sedimentary rocks that had once flanked the eastern margin of
North America (Figure 14.13D). Today these folded and
thrust-faulted sandstones, limestones, and shales make
up the largely unmetamorphosed rocks of the Valley and
Ridge province (Figure 14.14). Outcrops of the folded and
thrust-faulted structures that characterize collisional
mountains are found as far inland as central Pennsylvania
and West Virginia.
With the collision of Africa and North America,
the majestic Appalachians were located in the interior of Pangaea. Then, about 180 million years ago,
this newly formed supercontinent began to break into
smaller fragments, a process that ultimately created

Blue Ridge

Piedmont

Coastal
Plain

the modern Atlantic Ocean. Because this new zone of
rifting occurred east of the suture that formed when
Africa and North America collided, remnants of Africa
remain “welded” to the North American plate (Figure
14.13E). The crust underlying Florida is an example.
Other mountain ranges that exhibit evidence of
continental collisions include the Alps and the Urals.
The Alps formed as Africa and at least two smaller
crustal fragments collided with Europe during the
closing of the Tethys Sea. Similarly, the Urals were
uplifted during the assembly of Pangaea, when northern Europe and northern Asia collided, forming a
major portion of Eurasia.

14.4

Concept Checks

1. Differentiate between terrane and terrain.
2. During the formation of the Himalayas, the
continental crust of Asia was deformed more than
India proper. Why was this the case?
3. How does the plate tectonics theory help explain
the existence of fossil marine life in rocks atop
compressional mountains?
4. How can the Appalachian Mountains be considered
a collision-type mountain range when the nearest
continent is 5000 kilometers (3000 miles) away?

433

14.5 Fault-Block Mountains

14.5

Fault-Block Mountains
Summarize the stages in the formation of a fault-block mountain range.

Most mountain belts form in compressional environments, as evidenced by the predominance of large
thrust faults and folded strata. However, other tectonic processes, such as continental rifting, can also
produce mountainous terrain. Recall that continental rifting occurs when tensional forces stretch and
thin the lithosphere, resulting in upwelling of hot mantle rock. Upwelling heats the thinned lithosphere, which becomes less dense (more buoyant) and rises. This accounts, in part, for the elevated
topography associated with continental rifts. Simultaneously, stretching elongates the rigid upper
crust, which breaks into large crustal blocks that are bounded by high-angle normal faults. Continued
rifting causes the blocks to tilt, with one edge rising as the other drops (see Figure 10.18, page 314).
Mountains that form in these tectonic settings are termed fault-block mountains.

rt

es

WA

ad

he

OR

R

Plateau

Ca

n

r

Columbia

sc

Figure 14.16

No

The Teton Range in western Wyoming is an excellent
example of fault-block mountains. This lofty structure
was faulted and uplifted along its eastern flank as the
block tilted downward to the west. Looking west from
Jackson Hole, Wyoming, the eastern front of this mountain rises more than 2 kilometers (1.2 miles) above the
valley, making it one of the most imposing mountain
fronts in the United States (Figure 14.15).

MT

o

ck

ie

s

ID
NV
WY

Sie
Reno

rra

Ne

t

Basin

Salt Lake
City

and

UT

CO

lle

s

y

Range
Colorado

a

ge

vad

Va

Ran

Located directly east of the Sierra Nevada is the Basin
San
and Range province—one of Earth’s largest regions of Francisco
fault-block mountains. This region extends in a roughly
north–south direction for nearly 3000 kilometers (2000
miles) and encompasses all of Nevada and portions of
the surrounding states, as well as a large area of western
Mexico (Figure 14.16). In the Basin and Range province,
Earth’s brittle upper crust has been broken into hundreds of fault blocks. Uplifting and tilting of these faulted

Grea

Coast

The Basin and Range Province

Plateau

CA
Los Angeles

Flagstaff
AZ

NM

Pheonix

A.
Grand Teton
Range
Jackson Hole
Valley

B.

Figure 14.15
Wyoming’s Teton Range, an example of fault-block
mountains (Photo by Rob Marmion/Shutterstock)

structures produced nearly parallel mountain ranges,
averaging about 80 kilometers (50 miles) in length, which
rise above adjacent sediment-filled basins (see Figure
10.18, page 314).
Geologists have proposed several hypotheses to
explain the events that generated the Basin and Range
region. The most widely accepted view is that a change
in the nature of the plate boundary along California’s
western margin led to the formation of this region
(Figure 14.17). About 30 million years ago, the dominant
forces acting on the western margin of North America
were compressional, caused by the buoyant subduction
of a segment of the Farallon plate (see Figure 14.17A).
Starting about 25 million years ago, subduction gradually ceased along the California coast as the spreading center that separated the Farallon plate from the
Pacific began to subduct beneath North America.

Map of the Basin and
Range province in the
United States

434

Mountain Building

CHAPTER 14
Farallon
plate

Juan
de Fuca
plate

Farallon
plate

North
American
plate

North
American
plate

San
Andreas
Fault

San Andreas
Fault

Pacific plate

Bouy
ant
sub
d uc

Pacific plate

Pacific plate

Sierra
Nevada

Rocky
Mountains

San Andreas
Fault

North
American
plate

Sierra
Nevada

Sierra
Nevada

Rocky
Mountains

of Faral
lon

Figure 14.17
Proposed model for the
formation of the Basin and
Range province The Basin
and Range region consists
of more than 100 faultblock mountains generated
during the past 20 million
years. Upwelling of hot
mantle rock and gravitational collapse (crustal sliding) may have contributed
to considerable stretching
and thinning of the crust.

San Andreas
Fault

Plate

A.

B.

This event spawned the San Andreas Fault, with its
strike-slip motion, that currently separates the Pacific
plate from the North American plate (see Figure 14.17B).
According to this hypothesis, the northwestward
motion of the Pacific plate produced tensional forces
that stretched and fractured the crust of the North
American plate to produce the fault-block mountains
of the Basin and Range province (see Figure 14.17C).
Stretching and thinning of the lithosphere also led to
mantle upwelling, which accounts for the higher-thanaverage elevation of this region.
Another model contends that about 20 million years
ago, the cold, dense lithospheric mantle located beneath
the Basin and Range region decoupled (separated)
from the overlying crustal layer and slowly sank into the
mantle. This process, called delamination, resulted in
upwelling and lateral spreading of hot mantle rock that
produced tensional forces that stretched and thinned the

14.6

Rocky
Mountains

Extension

Compression

ti on

Basin and
Range

Upwelling

C.

overlying crust. According to this view, these elevated
crustal blocks began to gravitationally slide from their
lofty perches to generate the fault-block topography of
the Basin and Range province.

14.5

Concept Checks

1. Name one process that accounts for the
elevated topography of at least some fault-block
mountains.
2. In what way does the formation of fault-block
mountains differ from the processes that
generate most other major mountain belts?
3. Briefly describe the basic structure of the Basin
and Range province and identify its geographic
extent.

What Causes Earth’s Varied Topography?
Suggest several processes other than tectonic activity that can affect the elevation
of a region.

The causes of Earth’s varied topography are complex and cumulative; see, for example, GEOgraphics
14.1. Geologists know that colliding plates provide the tectonic forces that thicken and elevate
crustal rocks during mountain building. Adjustments in Earth’s gravitational balance can affect elevation, and up-and-down motions within the mantle can also change the elevation of a region. Furthermore, whenever land is uplifted, weathering and erosion sculpt Earth’s surface into a vast array
of landforms. In this section large-scale regional uplift and subsidence are discussed; the specific
ways in which weathering and erosion alter Earth’s surface are covered in subsequent chapters.

435

14.6 What Causes Earth’s Varied Topography?

The Principle of Isostasy

SmartFigure 14.18

During the 1840s, researchers discovered that Earth’s
low-density crust “floats” on top of the high-density,
deformable rocks of the mantle. The concept of a floating crust in gravitational balance is called isostasy. The
principle of isostasy helps us understand many large-scale
variations on Earth’ surface—from towering mountains
to deep-ocean basins.
One way to explore the concept of isostasy is to
envision a series of wooden blocks of different heights
floating in water, as shown in Figure 14.18. Note that the
thicker wooden blocks float higher than the thinner
blocks. Similarly, compressional mountains stand high
above the surrounding terrain because crustal thickening
creates buoyant crustal “roots” that extend deep into the
supporting material below. Thus, lofty mountains such as
the Himalayas are much like the thicker wooden blocks
shown in Figure 14.18.

The principle of isostasy This drawing shows
how wooden blocks of
different thicknesses
float in water. In a similar
manner, thick sections of
crustal material float higher
than thinner crustal slabs.

rises in response to the reduced load (Figure 14.19). The
processes of uplift and erosion continue until the mountain block reaches “normal” crustal thickness. When this
occurs, these once-elevated structures will be near sea
level, and the once–deeply buried interior of the mountain will be exposed at the surface. In addition, as mountains are worn down, the eroded sediment is deposited
on adjacent landscapes, causing these areas to subside
(see Figure 14.19).

(https://goo.gl/ZmEpW3)

Mountain range

SmartFigure 14.19

Compressional
stress

How Is Isostasy
Related to Changes in
Elevation?

When compressional mountains
are young they are
composed of thick,
low density crustal
rocks that float on
the denser mantle
below.

Visualize what would happen if
another small block of wood were
placed atop one of the blocks in Figure 14.18. The combined block would sink until
it reached a new isostatic (gravitational) balance.
At this point, the top of the combined block would
be higher than before, and the bottom would be
lower. This process of establishing a
new level of gravitational balance
As erosion lowers
by loading or unloading is called
the mountains, the
crust rises in
isostatic adjustment.
response to the
Applying the concept of isostatic adjustment, we should expect reduced load in
order to maintain
that when weight is added to the
isostatic balance.
crust, it will respond by subsiding and will rebound when weight
is removed. (Visualize what happens when a
ship’s cargo is loaded or unloaded.) Evidence for
crustal subsidence followed by crustal rebound
is provided by Ice Age glaciers. When continental ice sheets occupied portions of
Erosion and uplift
North America during the Pleiscontinue until the
tocene epoch, the added weight
mountains reach
of 3-kilometer- (2-mile-) thick
“normal” crustal
masses of ice caused downwarpthickness.
ing of Earth’s crust by hundreds of
meters. In the 8000 years since this last ice sheet
melted, gradual uplift of more than 300 meters
(1000 feet) has occurred in Canada’s Hudson Bay
region, where the thickest ice had accumulated.
One of the consequences of isostatic adjustment
is that, as erosion lowers a mountain range, the crust

Continental
crust

The effects of isostatic
adjustment and erosion
on mountainous topography This sequence illustrates how the combined
effects of erosion and
isostatic adjustment result
in a thinning of the crust
in mountainous regions.
(https://goo.gl/hZNghV)

Mantle flow

Mantle flow
Erosion

Deposition
Deposition

Sinking

Continental
crust

Isostatic
uplift

Mantle flow

Mantle flow

Old mountain remnant

Continental crust

Mantle flow

Mantle flow

438

CHAPTER 14

Figure 14.20
Gravitational collapse
Without compressional
forces to support them,
mountains gradually
collapse under their own
weight. Gravitational
collapse involves normal
faulting in the upper, brittle
portion of the crust and
ductile spreading in the
warm, weak rocks at depth.

Mountain
Building
Compression
causes
shortening and thickening
of the crust

buoyancy of hot rising material accounts for
broad upwarping in the overlying lithosphere,
whereas downward flow causes downwarping.

Uplift

Compressional stress
Subsidence
A. Horizontal compressional forces dominate
T

Subsidence

I
M
E

Ductile spreading
Uplift
B. Gravitational forces dominate

How High Is Too High?
Where compressional forces are great, such as those
driving India into Asia, lofty mountains such as the
Himalayas result. Is there a limit on how high a mountain
can rise? As mountaintops are elevated, gravity-driven
processes such as erosion and mass wasting are accelerated, carving the deformed strata into rugged landscapes.
Equally important, however, is the fact that gravity also
acts on the rocks within these massive structures. The
higher the mountain, the greater the downward force on
rocks near the base. Eventually, the rocks deep within
the developing mountain, which are relatively warm and
weak, begin to flow laterally, as shown in Figure 14.20.
This is analogous to what happens when a ladle of very
thick pancake batter is poured onto a hot griddle. Similarly, mountains are altered by a process called gravitational collapse, which involves ductile spreading at
depth and normal faulting and subsidence in the upper,
brittle portion of Earth’s crust.
Considering these factors, a seemingly logical question follows: “What keeps the Himalayas standing?”
Simply, the horizontal compressional forces that are
driving India into Asia are greater than the vertical force
of gravity. However, when India’s northward trek ends,
the downward pull of gravity, as well as weathering and
erosion, will become the dominant forces acting on this
mountainous region.

Mantle Convection: A Cause of
Vertical Crustal Movement
Based on studies of Earth’s gravitational field, it became
apparent that up-and-down convective flow in the mantle
also affects the elevation of Earth’s major landforms. The

Uplifting Whole Continents Southern
Africa is one region where large-scale vertical
motion is evident. The topography of the region
consists of an expansive plateau that has an average elevation of nearly 1500 meters (5000 feet)—
much higher than what would be predicted for a
stable continental platform.
Gravitational collapse results
Evidence from seismic
in stretching and thinning
tomography
(see Figure
of the crust
12.19, page 379) indicates
that a large mass of hot
mantle rock is centered below the
southern tip of Africa. This structure, called a superplume, extends
upward about 2900 kilometers
(1800 miles) from the core–mantle
boundary and has a lateral expanse
of a few thousand kilometers.
Researchers have determined that the
upward flow associated with this huge mantle plume is
sufficient to elevate southern Africa.
Crustal Subsidence Extensive areas of downwarping also occur at Earth’s surface. In the United States,
large, nearly circular basins are found in Michigan and
Illinois. Similar structures are known on other continents as well.
The cause of the downwarping that created these
basins may be linked to the subduction of slabs of
oceanic lithosphere. One proposal suggests that when
subduction ceases, the descending slab detaches from
the trailing lithosphere and continues its descent into
the mantle. As this detached lithospheric slab sinks,
it creates a downward flow in its wake that tugs at the
base of the overriding continent. In some settings, the
crust is apparently pulled down sufficiently to produce
a large basin that eventually fills with sediments. As the
oceanic slab sinks deeper into the mantle, the pull of
the trailing wake weakens, and the continent “floats”
back into isostatic balance.

14.6

Concept Checks

1. Define isostasy. What happens to a floating
object when weight is added? Removed?
2. Briefly describe how the principle of isostatic
adjustment accounts for changes in the elevation
of mountains.
3. Give one example of evidence that supports the
concept of crustal uplift.
4. Explain the process whereby mountainous
regions experience gravitational collapse.

15
Mass
Wasting:
The Work
of Gravity

On March 22 2014, a major landslide occurred near Oso,
Washington. Triggered by heavy rains, a large mass of mud
and debris buried a 2.6-square-kilometer (1-square-mile)
area, damming a river, engulfing 49 buildings, and blocking
a highway. The event claimed 43 lives.
(Photo by Michael Collier)

M

any of

the preceding chapters focused on internal processes that are powered by
energy from Earth’s interior and produce volcanoes, earthquakes, ocean basins, and
mountains. Beginning with this chapter and extending through Chapter 20, we turn our
attention to external processes that sculpt and erode Earth’s surface. Driven by gravity
and energy from the Sun, external processes are responsible for shaping a wide variety
of landforms and creating many distinctive landscapes.

Importance of Mass Wasting
15.1 The
Describe how mass-wasting processes can cause natural disasters and discuss
the role that mass wasting plays in the development of landforms.

Earth’s surface is not perfectly flat but instead consists of slopes of many different varieties. Some
are steep and precipitous; others are moderate or gentle. Some are long and gradual; others are
short and abrupt. Slopes can be mantled with soil and covered by vegetation or can consist of barren rock and rubble. Taken together, slopes are the most common elements in our physical landscape. Although most slopes may appear to be stable and unchanging, the force of gravity causes
rock material to move downslope by way of processes we call mass wasting. At one extreme, the
movement may be gradual and practically imperceptible. At the other extreme, it may consist of a
roaring debris flow or a thundering rock avalanche.
Some mass-wasting processes are dangerous events that
represent significant geologic hazards. Perhaps less well
known is the fact that mass-wasting processes play an
important role in the development and evolution of many
of Earth’s varied landforms.

Landslides as Geologic Hazards
The chapter-opening photo is a striking example of a
phenomenon that many people would call a landslide. For
most of us, the word landslide implies a sudden event in
which large quantities of rock and soil plunge down steep
slopes. When people and communities are in the way, a
natural disaster may result. Landslides constitute major
geologic hazards that each year in the United States
cause billions of dollars in damages and the loss of dozens
of lives. As you will see, many landslides occur in connection with other major natural disasters, including earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, wildfires, and severe storms.
If you were to view several images of events called
landslides, you would likely notice that the term seems to
refer to several different things—from mudflows to rock
avalanches. This variety reflects the fact that although
many people, including geologists, frequently use the
word landslide, the term has no specific definition in
geology. Rather, it is a popular, nontechnical word used to
describe any or all relatively rapid forms of mass wasting.
Landslides are spectacular examples of a basic geologic process called mass wasting. Mass wasting refers

to the downslope movement of rock, regolith, and soil
under the direct influence of gravity. It is distinct from
the erosional processes that are examined in subsequent
chapters in that mass wasting does not require a transporting medium, such as water, wind, or glacial ice.
Landslides are not just events that occur in remote
mountains and canyons. People frequently live where
rapid mass-wasting events occur. Nevertheless, even in
populated areas with steep slopes, catastrophic landslides
are relatively rare. Consequently, people living in susceptible areas often do not appreciate the risks of living
where they do. However, such events occur with some
regularity around the world. GEOgraphics 15.1 provides
some examples.

The Role of Mass Wasting
in Landform Development
In the evolution of most landforms, mass wasting is the
step that follows weathering, discussed in Chapter 6. By
itself, weathering does not produce significant landforms.
Rather, landforms develop as products of weathering
are removed from the places where they originate. Once
weathering weakens and breaks rock apart, mass wasting transfers the debris downslope, where a stream or
glacier, acting as a conveyor belt, usually carries it away.
Although there may be many intermediate stops along
the way, the sediment is eventually transported to its ultimate destination: the sea.

445

15.1 The Importance of Mass Wasting

Figure 15.1

The combined effects of mass wasting and running
water produce stream valleys, which are among the
most common and conspicuous of Earth’s landforms. If
streams alone were responsible for creating the valleys
in which they flow, the valleys would be very narrow
features resembling the canyon in Figure 15.1. However,
the fact that most river valleys are much wider than
they are deep is a strong indication of the significance
of mass-wasting processes in supplying material to
streams. This is illustrated by the Grand Canyon (Figure 15.2). The walls of the canyon extend far from the
Colorado River due to the transfer of weathered debris
downslope to the river and its tributaries by masswasting processes. In this manner, streams and mass
wasting combine to modify and sculpt the surface. Of
course, glaciers, groundwater, waves, and wind are also
important agents in shaping landforms and developing
landscapes.

Zion Narrows The Virgin
River in southern Utah is
responsible for cutting this
narrow canyon through the
Navajo Sandstone. (Photo
by James Kay/SC Photos/Alamy
Images)

Slopes Change Through Time
It is clear that if mass wasting is to occur, there must be
slopes that rock, soil, and regolith can move down. Earth’s
mountain-building and volcanic processes, driven by plate
tectonics, produce these slopes through sporadic changes
in the elevations of landmasses and the ocean floor. If
dynamic internal processes did not continually produce
regions having higher elevations, the system that moves
debris to lower elevations
would gradually slow and eventually cease.
Most rapid and spectacular mass-wasting events occur
in areas of rugged, geologically young mountains. Newly
formed mountains are rapidly
eroded by rivers and glaciers
into regions characterized

SmartFigure 15.2
Excavating the Grand
Canyon The walls of
the canyon extend far
from the channel of the
Colorado River. This results
primarily from the transfer
of weathered debris
downslope to the river and
its tributaries by masswasting processes. (Photo by
Bryan Brazil/Shutterstock) (https://
goo.gl/9geHci)

Colorado River

CHAPTER 15

GEO GRAPHICS 15.1

Landslides as Natural Disasters

Mass Wasting: The Work of Gravity

Thevenot Laurent/PHOTOPQR/LE PROGRES/Newscom

446

Landslides don’t just occur in remote mountains and
canyons. People frequently live where rapid mass
wasting events occur. Here are a few examples.

Even in areas with steep
slopes, catastrophic landslides
are relatively rare, thus, people
living in susceptible areas often
do not appreciate the risks of living
where they do. This deadly event,
triggered by an earthquake in January
2001, buried 300 homes in Santa
Tecla, El Salvador. Many unsuspecting
residents perished.

On March 1, 2012, this boulder broke loose
from a steep mountain slope in the French Alps,
crushing a car and then crashing into this house.
There was no warning and no obvious
trigger for this event.

Question:
List two mass-wasting triggers
represented in these images.
Ed Harp/USGS

In January 2011, following a period of torrential rains, this thick slurry of
mud, appropriately called a mudflow, buried these cars in Nova Friburgo,
Brazil. Heavy rains are an important trigger of mass wasting processes.
_TT51


Marty Melville/AFP/Getty Images

Neil Sands/AFP/Getty Images

Ed Harp/USGS

Weathered rock, precipitous slopes, and the shock of an earthquake
combined to produce many rockfalls and rock avalanches in and around
Christchurch, New Zealand on February 22, 2011.

15.2 Controls and Triggers of Mass Wasting

by steep and unstable slopes. It is in such settings that
massive destructive landslides, such as those described
at the beginning of the chapter, occur. As mountain
building subsides, mass-wasting and erosional processes lower the land. Through time, steep and rugged
mountain slopes give way to gentler, more subdued
terrain. Thus, as a landscape ages, massive and rapid
mass-wasting processes give way to smaller, less dramatic downslope movements that are often imperceptibly slow.

15.2

15.1

447

Concept Checks

1. Define mass wasting. How does mass wasting
differ from erosional processes such as streams,
glaciers, and wind?
2. Sketch or describe how mass wasting contributes
to the development of a valley.
3. In what environment are rapid mass-wasting
processes most likely to occur?

Controls and Triggers of Mass Wasting
Summarize the factors that control and trigger mass-wasting processes.

Gravity is the controlling force of mass wasting, but several factors play important roles in overcoming
inertia and creating downslope movements. Long before a landslide occurs, various processes work
to weaken slope material, gradually making it more and more susceptible to the pull of gravity. During this span, the slope remains stable but gets closer and closer to being unstable. Eventually, the
strength of the slope is weakened to the point that something causes the slope to cross the threshold
from stability to instability. Such an event that initiates downslope movement is called a trigger.
Remember that a trigger is not the sole cause of a mass-wasting event but just the last of many causes.
Among the common factors that trigger mass-wasting processes are saturation of material with water,
oversteepening of slopes, removal of anchoring vegetation, and ground vibrations from earthquakes.

The Role of Water
Mass wasting is sometimes triggered when heavy rains
or periods of snowmelt saturate surface materials. The
water does not transport the material. Rather, it allows
gravity to more easily set the material in motion. This
was the case in March 2014, when a massive debris flow
(popularly called a mudslide in the media) occurred
on steep mountain slopes east of Oso, Washington (see
chapter-opening photo). In September 2013, heavy
rains on steep slopes over a 5-day span triggered more
than 1135 debris flows over an area of 3430 square

kilometers (1338 square miles) in and near Boulder,
Colorado (Figure 15.3).
When the pores in sediment become filled with
water, the cohesion among particles is destroyed, allowing them to move past one another with relative ease. For
example, when sand is slightly moist, it sticks together
quite well. However, if enough water is added to fill the
openings between the grains, the sand will ooze out in
all directions (Figure 15.4). Thus, saturation reduces the
internal resistance of materials, which are then easily set
in motion by the force of gravity. When clay is wetted, it

SmartFigure 15.3
Debris flow in the Colorado Front Range During the week
of September 9–13, 2013, residents in and near Boulder,
Colorado, received a harsh reminder of the dangers posed by
debris flows. During that 5-day span, nearly continuous rainfall
triggered numerous flash floods and more than 1100 debris
flows in an area covering more than 3400 square kilometers
(1300 square miles). Most occurred on steep slopes greater
than 25 degrees. (Photo by Rick Wilking/Reuters) (http://goo.gl/M7j5H6)

448

CHAPTER 15

Mass Wasting: The Work of Gravity

Figure 15.4
Saturation reduces friction
When water saturates
sediment, friction among
particles is reduced,
allowing material to move
downslope.

Damp sand
Dry sand

Dry sand grains are
bound mainly by friction
with one another

Small amounts of water
increase the cohesion
among sand grains

becomes very slick—another example of the “lubricating” effect of water. Water also adds considerable weight
to a mass of material. The added weight in itself may be
enough to cause the material to slide or flow downslope.

Oversteepened Slopes
Oversteepening of slopes is another trigger of many mass
movements. There are many situations in nature where
oversteepening takes place. For example, as a stream cuts
into a valley wall, it removes material from the base of
the wall. This causes the slope to become too steep and
material to fall or slide into the stream. Furthermore,
Figure 15.5

through their activities,
people often create oversteepened and unstable
Wet sand
slopes that become prime
sites for mass wasting (Figure 15.5).
Loose, granular particles (sand-size or coarser)
assume a stable slope
called the angle of repose
(reposen = to be at rest).
This is the steepest angle at
which material remains in
place (Figure 15.6). Depending on the size and shape of
Saturation reduces
the particles, the angle of
friction and causes the
repose varies from 25 to 40
sand to flow
degrees. The larger, more
angular particles maintain the steepest slopes. If the
angle is increased, the rock debris will adjust by moving
downslope.
Oversteepening is not just important because it triggers movements of unconsolidated granular materials.
Oversteepening also produces unstable slopes and mass
movements in cohesive soils, regolith, and bedrock. The
response will not be immediate, as with loose, granular
material, but sooner or later, one or more mass-wasting
processes will eliminate the oversteepening and restore
stability to the slope.

Removal of Vegetation
Plants protect against erosion and contribute to the stability of slopes because their root systems bind soil and
regolith together. In addition, plants shield the soil surface from the erosional effects of raindrop impact. Where
plants are lacking, mass wasting is enhanced, especially

Unstable slopes Natural
processes such as stream
and wave erosion can oversteepen slopes. Changing
the slope to accommodate
a new house or road can
also lead to instability and
a destructive mass-wasting
event.

Heavy rainfall

Angle of repose
Oversteepened
hillslope

Fill

Figure 15.6
Angle of repose The angle of repose is the steepest angle at
which an accumulation of granular particles remains stable.
Larger, more angular particles maintain the steepest slopes.
(Photo by G. Leavens/Science Source)

449

15.2 Controls and Triggers of Mass Wasting

if slopes are steep and water is plentiful.
When anchoring vegetation is removed by
forest fires or by people (for timber, farming, or development), surface materials
frequently move downslope.
An unusual example illustrating the
anchoring effect of plants occurred several decades ago, on steep slopes near
Menton, France. Farmers replaced olive
trees, which have deep roots, with a more
profitable but shallow-rooted crop: carnations. When the less stable slope failed,
the landslide took 11 lives.
In July 1994 a severe wildfire swept
Storm King Mountain, west of Glenwood
Springs, Colorado, denuding the slopes of
vegetation. Two months later, heavy rains
resulted in numerous debris flows—rapid
mass-wasting events involving watersaturated rock and soil. One debris flow
blocked Interstate 70 and threatened to
dam the Colorado River. A 5-kilometer (3-mile) length of the highway was
inundated with tons of rock, mud, and
burned trees. The closure of Interstate 70
imposed costly delays for travelers on this
major highway.
Wildfires are inevitable in the western United States, and fast-moving, highly
destructive debris flows triggered by
intense rainfall are some of the most dangerous postfire hazards (Figure 15.7). Such
events are particularly dangerous because
they tend to occur with little warning.
Their mass and speed make them particularly destructive. Postfire debris flows are most common
in the 2 years after a fire. Some of the largest debris-flow
events have been triggered by the very first intense rainfall following a wildfire. It takes much less rain to trigger
debris flows in burned areas than in unburned areas. In
southern California, as little as 7 millimeters (0.3 inch) of
rain in 30 minutes has triggered debris flows.
How large can these flows be? According to the U.S.
Geological Survey, documented debris flows from burned
areas in southern California and other western states
have ranged in volume from as small as 600 cubic meters
(about 20,000 cubic feet) to as much as 300,000 cubic
meters (more than 10 million cubic feet). This larger volume is enough material to cover a football field with mud
and rocks to a depth of about 65 meters (almost 215 feet)!
In addition to eliminating plants that anchor the
soil, fire can promote mass wasting in other ways. Following a wildfire, the upper part of the soil may become
dry and loose. As a result, even in dry weather, the soil
tends to move down steep slopes. Fire can also “bake”
the ground, creating a water-repellent layer at a shallow
depth. This nearly impermeable barrier prevents or slows

Figure 15.7
Wildfires contribute
to mass wasting
In September 2014, this
wildfire consumed 9000
acres of dense forest on
steep terrain near Fish
Pond, California. During
the summer, wildfires are
common occurrences in
many parts of the western
United States. Millions of
acres are burned each
year. The loss of anchoring
vegetation sets the stage for
accelerated mass wasting.
(Photo by Noah Berger/Reuters)

the infiltration of water, resulting in increased surface
runoff during rains. The consequence can be dangerous
torrents of viscous mud and rock debris.

Earthquakes as Triggers
Conditions that favor mass wasting may exist in an area
for a long time without movement occurring. An additional factor is sometimes necessary to trigger the movement. Among the most important and dramatic triggers
are earthquakes. An earthquake and its aftershocks can
dislodge enormous volumes of rock and unconsolidated
material (Figure 15.8).

Examples from California and China A memorable
U.S. example of an earthquake triggering mass wasting
occurred in January 1994, when a quake struck the Los
Angeles region of southern California. Named for its epicenter in the town of Northridge, the magnitude 6.7 event
produced estimated losses of $20 billion. Some of the
losses resulted from more than 11,000 landslides in an area
of about 10,000 square kilometers (3900 square miles)

450

CHAPTER 15

Mass Wasting: The Work of Gravity

Figure 15.8

disaster was avoided when Chinese engineers successfully breached the landslide
dam and safely drained the lake.

Earthquakes as triggers
A major earthquake in
China’s mountainous
Sichuan Province in May
2008 triggered hundreds
of landslides. The landslide
shown here took 51 lives.

Liquefaction Intense ground shaking
during earthquakes can cause watersaturated surface materials to lose their
strength and behave as fluidlike masses
that flow (see Figure 11.26 and 11.27,
pages 343-344). This process, called liquefaction, was a major cause of property
damage in Anchorage, Alaska, during the
massive 1964 Good Friday earthquake—
the largest quake to strike North America
in the twentieth century.

(Photo by Lynn Highland/U.S.
Geological Survey)

Landslides Without
Triggers?

that were set in motion by the quake. Most were shallow rock falls and slides, but some were much larger and
filled canyon bottoms with jumbles of soil, rock, and
plant debris. The debris in canyon bottoms created a secondary threat because it can mobilize during rainstorms,
producing debris flows. Such flows are common and
often disastrous in southern California.
On May 12, 2008, a magnitude 7.9 earthquake
struck near the city of Chengdu, in China’s Sichuan
Province. Compounding the tragic effects caused directly
by the severe ground shaking were hundreds of landslides triggered by the quake and its many aftershocks.
Rock avalanches and debris slides thundered down steep
mountain slopes, burying buildings and blocking roads
and rail lines. The landslides also dammed rivers, creating more than two dozen lakes. Earthquake-created lakes
present a dual danger. Apart from the upstream floods
that occur as the lake builds behind the natural dam,
the piles of rubble that form the dam may be unstable.
Another quake, or simply the pressure of water behind
it, could burst the dam, sending a wall of water downstream. Such floods may also occur when water begins to
cascade over the top of the dam. The largest of the lakes
created by the May 12 earthquake, Tangjiashan Lake,
threatened roughly 1.3 million people. In this instance, a
_TT52


Do rapid mass-wasting events always
require some sort of trigger, such as heavy
rains or an earthquake? The answer is
no. For example, on the afternoon of May
9, 1999, a landslide killed 10 hikers and
injured many others at Sacred Falls State
Park near Hauula, on the north shore of
Oahu, Hawaii. The tragic event occurred
when a mass of rock from a canyon wall
plunged 150 meters (500 feet) down a
nearly vertical slope to the valley floor.
Because of safety concerns, the park was
closed so that landslide specialists from
the U.S. Geological Survey could investigate the site.
Their study concluded that the landslide occurred without triggering by external conditions.
Many rapid mass-wasting events occur without a discernible trigger. Slope materials gradually weaken over
time, under the influence of long-term weathering, infiltration of water, and other physical processes. Eventually, if
the strength falls below what is necessary to maintain slope
stability, a landslide will occur. The timing of such events is
random, and thus accurate prediction is impossible.
GEOgraphics 15.2 includes two maps that show the
potential for landslides in the contiguous United States
and worldwide. All regions experience some damage
from rapid mass-wasting processes, but it is obvious that
not all regions have the same landslide potential.

15.2

Concept Checks

1. How does water affect mass-wasting processes?
2. Describe the significance of the angle of repose.
3. How might a wildfire influence mass wasting?
4. Describe the relationship between earthquakes
and landslides.

15.3 Classification of Mass-Wasting Processes

E Y E ON E A R T H

15.1

D

uring summer, wildfires are common occurrences in many
parts of the western United States. Millions of acres are burned
each year. This wildfire occurred near Santa Clarita, California,
in July 2004. We have learned that Earth is a system in which various
parts of its four major spheres interact in uncountable ways. Let’s
relate this idea to the situation pictured here.
QUESTION 1 What atmospheric conditions might have preceded and
thus set the stage for this wildfire?
QUESTION 2 What might have ignited the blaze? Suggest a natural
possibility and a human possibility.
QUESTION 3 Describe at least two ways that wildfires, like the one
shown here, might influence future mass-wasting events in the area.

Joshua Gates Weisberg/EPA Newscom

15.3

Classification of Mass-Wasting Processes
List and explain the criteria that are commonly used to classify
mass-wasting processes.

Geologists use the term mass wasting to describe a broad array of different processes. Generally,
the different types are classified based on the type of material involved, the kind of motion displayed, and the velocity of the movement.

Type of Material
Classifying mass-wasting processes on the basis of the
material involved in the movement depends on whether
the descending mass began as unconsolidated material
or as bedrock. If soil and regolith dominate, terms such
as debris, mud, or earth are used in the description.
In contrast, when a mass of bedrock breaks loose and
moves downslope, the term rock may be part of the
description.

Type of Motion
In addition to characterizing the type of material
involved in a mass-wasting event, the way in which the
material moves may also be important. Generally, the
kind of motion is described as either a fall, a slide, or a
flow.

Fall When the movement in a mass-wasting event
involves the free fall of detached individual pieces of
any size, it is termed a fall. Fall is a common form of

movement on slopes that are so steep that loose material cannot remain on the surface. The rock may fall
directly to the base of the slope or may move in a series
of leaps and bounds over other rocks along the way.
Rock falls are the primary way in which talus slopes
are built and maintained (Figure 15.9). Many falls result
when freeze and thaw cycles and/or the action of plant
roots loosen rock to the point that gravity takes over.
Although signs along bedrock cuts on highways warn of
falling rock, few of us have actually witnessed such an
event in progress. However, as Figure 15.10 illustrates,
they do indeed occur.
When large masses of rock plunge from great
heights, they hit the ground with enormous force and
often trigger additional mass-wasting events. One
especially deadly example occurred in Peru. In May
1970, an earthquake caused a huge mass of rock and
ice to break free from the precipitous north face of
Nevados Huascarán, the loftiest peak in the Peruvian
Andes. The material plunged nearly a kilometer and
pulverized on impact. The rock avalanche that followed rushed down the mountainside, made fluid by

451

15.3 Classification of Mass-Wasting Processes

453

In the mountains, mechanical weathering produces angular rock fragments
that fall to the base of a cliff. Over time, a talus slope forms.

Talus Slopes

A.

Figure 15.9
Talus slopes A. These large talus slopes (sometimes called talus cones) are in Canada’s Banff
National Park. (Photo by Marli Miller) B. This image of a hiker shows that talus slopes are steep
features. (Photo by Whit Richardson/Alamy Images)

trapped air and ice. Along the way, it ripped loose millions of tons of additional debris that ultimately and
tragically buried more than 20,000 people in the towns
of Yungay and Ranrahirca.
A different effect triggered by a rock fall occurred
in Yosemite National Park on July 10, 1996. When two
large rock masses broke loose from steep cliffs and fell
about 500 meters (1640 feet) to the floor of Yosemite
Valley, the impacts were great enough to be recorded
at seismic stations 200 kilometers (125 miles) from the
site. As the dislodged rock masses struck the ground,
they generated atmospheric pressure waves that were
comparable in velocity to a tornado or hurricane. The
force of the air blasts uprooted and snapped more than
1000 trees, including some that were 40 meters (130
feet) tall.

Slide Many mass-wasting processes are described as
slides. The term refers to mass movements in which
there is a distinct zone of weakness separating the
slide material from the more stable underlying material. Two basic types of slides are recognized. Rotational slides are those in which the surface of rupture
is a concave-upward curve resembling the shape of a
spoon, and the descending material exhibits a downward and outward rotation. By contrast, a translational
slide is one in which a mass of material moves along
relatively flat surfaces such as joints, faults, or bedding
planes. Such slides exhibit little rotation or backward
tilting.

Flow The third type of
The large angular rock fragments and high angle
movement common to
of repose make talus slopes a challenging climb.
mass-wasting processes is
B.
termed flow. Flow occurs
when material moves downslope as a viscous fluid. Most
flows are saturated with water and typically move as lobes
SmartFigure 15.10
or tongues. Frequently, when flows of saturated mud and
Watch out for falling
debris occur, they are incorrectly described in the media
rock! This rockfall blocked
as “mudslides.”
a Montana highway.
(Main photo by Harris Shiffman/
Shutterstock; inset photo by AP
Images) (http://goo.gl/QobZlc)

454

CHAPTER 15

Mass Wasting: The Work of Gravity

Figure 15.11
Blackhawk rock
avalanche This prehistoric
event is considered one
of the largest-known landslides in North America.

San Bernardino Mountains

8 kil

Between
9 and 30 meters
thick

ome
ters

(Photo by Michael Collier)

The mass of
rocky debris
raced downslope
on a cushion of
compressed air.

Rate of Movement
Some of the events that have been described so far in
this chapter involved very rapid rates of movement.
For example, it is estimated that the debris that rushed
down the slopes of Peru’s Nevados Huascarán moved
at speeds in excess of 200 kilometers (125 miles) per
hour. This most rapid type of mass movement is termed
a rock avalanche. Researchers now understand that
rock avalanches, such as the one that produced the
scene in Figure 15.11, must literally “float on air” as they
move downslope. That is, high velocities result when air
becomes trapped and compressed beneath the falling
mass of debris, allowing it to move as a buoyant, flexible
sheet across the surface.
Most mass movements, however, do not occur at
the speeds of rock avalanches. In fact, a great deal of
mass wasting is imperceptibly slow. One process we
will examine later, termed creep, results in particle

movements that are usually measured in millimeters
or centimeters per year. Thus, as you can see, rates of
movement can be spectacularly sudden or exceptionally gradual. Although various types of mass wasting
are often classified as either rapid or slow, such a
distinction is highly subjective because a wide range
of rates exists between the two extremes. Even the
velocity of a single process at a particular site can vary
considerably.

15.3

Concept Checks

1. What terms are used to describe the way material
moves during mass wasting?
2. Why can rock avalanches move at such great
speeds?

455

15.4 Rapid Forms of Mass Wasting

15.4

Rapid Forms of Mass Wasting
Distinguish among slump, rockslide, debris flow, and earthflow.

The common rapid mass-wasting processes discussed in this section are slump, rockslide, debris
flow, and earthflow. They are most common where slopes are steep. The speed of movement varies
from barely perceptible to very rapid.

Slump

re

Earthflow

ptu

Slump is an example of a rotational slide and refers to
the downward sliding of a mass of rock or unconsolidated material moving as a unit along a curved surface
(Figure 15.12). Usually the slumped material does not
travel spectacularly fast, and it does not travel very far.
Slump is a common form of mass wasting, especially in
thick accumulations of cohesive materials such as clay.
The ruptured surface is characteristically spoon shaped
and concave upward or outward. As the movement
occurs, a crescent-shaped scarp is created at the head,
and the block’s upper surface is sometimes tilted backward. Although slump may involve a single mass, it often
consists of multiple blocks. Sometimes water collects
between the base of the scarp and the top of the tilted
block. As this water percolates downward along the surface of rupture, it may promote further instability and
additional movement.
Slump commonly occurs because a slope has been
oversteepened. The material on the upper portion of
a slope is held in place by the material at the bottom
of the slope. As this anchoring material at the base
is removed, the material above is made unstable and
reacts to the pull of gravity. One relatively common
example is a valley wall that becomes oversteepened by
a meandering river. The photo in Figure 15.13 provides an
example in which a coastal cliff has been undercut by
wave action at its base. Slumping may also occur when
a slope is overloaded, causing internal stress on the
material below. This type of slump often
occurs where weak, clay-rich material
underlies layers of stronger, more resistant
rock such as sandstone. The seepage of

Figure 15.12

Scarp

f
Surface o

ru

Slump
block

Slump Slump occurs when
material slips downslope
en masse along a curved
surface of rupture. It is
an example of a rotational
slide. Earthflows frequently
form at the base of the
slump.

water through the upper layers reduces the strength of
the clay below, resulting in slope failure.

Rockslide
Rockslides are translational slides that occur when
blocks of bedrock break loose and slide down a slope
(Figure 15.14). If the material involved is largely unconsolidated, the term debris slide is used instead. Such
events are among the fastest and most destructive mass
movements. Usually rockslides take place in a geologic
setting where the rock strata are inclined, or where joints
and fractures exist parallel to the slope. When such a rock
unit is undercut at the base of the slope, it loses support,
and the rock eventually gives way. Sometimes the rockslide is triggered when rain or melting snow lubricates
Figure 15.13
Slump at Point Fermin,
California Waves undercut
the base of the steep slope,
making it unstable. (Photo
by John S. Shelton/University of
Washington Libraries)
_TT53


456

CHAPTER 15

Figure 15.14
Rockslide These rapid
movements are classified
as translational slides in
which the material moves
along a relatively flat
surface with little or no
rotation or backward tilting.

SmartFigure 15.15
Gros Ventre rockslide
This massive slide occurred
on June 23, 1925, just east
of the small town of Kelly,
Wyoming. (Photo by Michael
Collier) (https://goo.gl/el2Ecj)

Mass Wasting: The Work of Gravity

a severe earthquake west of Yellowstone National Park
triggered a massive slide in the canyon of the Madison
Surface of
River in southwestern Montana. In a matter of moments,
rupture
an estimated 27 million cubic meters of rock, soil, and
trees slid into the canyon. The debris dammed the river
and buried a campground and highway. More than 20
unsuspecting campers perished.
Rockslide
Heavy rains and melting snow, rather than an
earthquake, triggered another major rockslide in the
Yellowstone region. Not far from the site of the Madison Canyon slide, the legendary Gros Ventre rockslide
occurred 34 years earlier. The Gros Ventre River flows
west from the northernmost part of the Wind River
Range in northwestern Wyoming, through Grand Teton
National Park, and eventually empties into the Snake
River. On June 23, 1925, a massive rockslide took place
in its valley, just east of the small town of Kelly. In
the underlying surface to the point that friction is no lon- the span of only minutes, a great mass of sandstone,
shale, and soil crashed down the south side of the valger sufficient to hold the rock unit in place. As a result,
ley, carrying with it a dense pine forest. The volume of
rockslides tend to be most common during the spring,
debris, estimated at 38 million cubic meters (50 million
when heavy rains and melting snow are most prevalent.
cubic yards), created a dam on the Gros Ventre River
As mentioned earlier, earthquakes can trigger rock70 meters (230 feet) high. Because the river was comslides and other mass movements. There are many wellpletely blocked, a lake was formed. It filled so quickly
known examples. The 1811 earthquake at New Madrid,
that a house that had been 18 meters (60 feet) above
Missouri (see Chapter 11), caused slides in an area of
the river was floated off its foundation 18 hours after
more than 13,000 square kilometers (5000 square miles)
the slide. In 1927, the lake overflowed the dam, paralong the Mississippi River valley. On August 17, 1959,
tially draining the lake and resulting in a devastating
The side of the mountain gave
flood downstream.
Gros Ventre
way when the tilted sandstone
Why did the Gros Ventre rockslide take
landslide debris
bed, that had been cut through
place?
Figure 15.15 shows a diagrammatic
Former land
by the river, could no longer
cross-sectional
view of the geology of
surface
maintain its position atop the
the
valley.
Notice
that (1) the sedimensaturated bed of clay.
Scar
tary strata in this area dip (tilt) 15 to
21 degrees; (2) underlying the bed of
sandstone is a relatively thin layer of
Lake
clay; and (3) at the bottom of the valley, the river had cut through
Rupture
much of the sandstone layer.
bed
0
0.5
1
surface
Clay
During the spring of 1925,
Kilometer
e
n
water from heavy rains and
sto
Limestone
Sand
melting snow seeped through
the sandstone, saturating the
clay below. Because much of
the sandstone layer had been
cut through by the Gros
Ventre River, the layer had
virtually no support at the
bottom of the slope. Eventually the sandstone could no
longer hold its position on
the wetted clay, and gravity
Even though the Gros Ventre
pulled the mass down the
rockslide occurred in 1925,
side of the valley. The cirthe scar left on the side of
cumstances at this location
Sheep Mountain is still a
were such that the event was
prominent feature.
inevitable.

457

15.4 Rapid Forms of Mass Wasting

Debris Flow
Debris flow is a relatively rapid
type of mass wasting that
involves a flow of soil and regolith containing a large amount
of water (Figure 15.16). The
events depicted in the chapteropening photo and Figure 15.3 are
examples. Debris flows are sometimes called mudflows when the
material is primarily fine-grained.
Although they can occur in many
different climate settings, they tend
to occur more frequently in semiarid
mountainous regions. Because of
their fluid properties, debris flows
frequently follow canyons and stream
channels. In populated areas, debris
flows can pose a significant hazard to
life and property.

Debris Flows in Semiarid
Regions When a cloudburst or rapidly melting mountain snows create a sudden flood in a
semiarid region, large quantities of soil and regolith are
washed into nearby stream channels because there is usually little vegetation to anchor the surface material. The
end product is a flowing tongue of well-mixed mud, soil,
rock, and water. Its consistency may range from that of wet
concrete to a soupy mixture not much thicker than
muddy water. The rate of flow, therefore, depends
not only on the steepness of the slope but also on
the water content. Dense debris flows are capable of
carrying or pushing large boulders, trees, and even
houses with relative ease.
Debris flows pose a serious hazard to development in relatively dry mountainous areas such as
southern California. The construction of homes on
canyon hillsides and the removal of native vegetation by brush fires and other means have increased
the frequency of these destructive events. Moreover, when a debris flow reaches the end of a steep,
narrow canyon, it spreads out, covering the area
beyond the mouth of the canyon with a mixture of
wet debris. This material contributes to the buildup
of fanlike deposits, called alluvial fans, at canyon
mouths. The fans are relatively easy to build on,
often have nice views, and are close to the mountains; in fact, like the nearby canyons, many have
become preferred sites for development. Because
debris flows occur only sporadically, the public is
often unaware of the potential hazard of such sites.

Lahars Debris flows composed mostly of volcanic materials on the flanks of volcanoes are called
lahars. The word originated in Indonesia, a volcanic region that has experienced many of these

The consistency of a debris flow ranges from
that of wet concrete to a soupy mixture not
much thicker than muddy water.

Figure 15.16
Debris flow A debris flow
is a moving tongue of wellmixed mud, soil, rock, and
water. (Photo by Michael Collier)

When the material
is fine-grained, the
event may be called
a mudflow.

often-destructive events. Historically, lahars have been
some of the deadliest volcano-related hazards. They can
occur either during an eruption or when a volcano is
quiet. They take place when highly unstable layers of ash
and debris become saturated with water and flow down
steep volcanic slopes, generally following existing stream
channels (Figure 15.17). Heavy rainfalls often trigger these
Figure 15.17
Lahar at Redoubt
Volcano An eruption of
this volcano on Alaska’s
Kenai Peninsula in April
2009 sent lahars down
the valley of the Drift River.
The dark color of the lahar
contrasts sharply with the
surrounding snow-covered
landscape. (NASA)

N

458

CHAPTER 15

Mass Wasting: The Work of Gravity

Figure 15.18
Lahar at Mount St. Helens
The force of this viscous
debris flow that followed
the Toutle River tore the
end section from a house
and lodged it in the trees.
Lahars generated by the
Mount St. Helens eruption
surged up valley walls as
much as 110 meters
(360 feet) and over hills
as high as 76 meters
(250 feet). Based on
“bathtub-ring” mudlines,
some lahars at their peak
averaged 10 to 20 meters
(33 to 66 feet) deep. (Photo
by D. R. Crandell, U.S. Geological
Survey, Denver)

Figure 15.19
Earthflow This small
tongue-shaped earthflow occurred on a newly
formed slope along a
recently constructed highway in central Illinois. It
formed in clay-rich material following a period of
heavy rain. Notice the
small slump at the head of
the earthflow. (Photo by E. J.
Tarbuck)

flows. Others are initiated when large volumes of ice
and snow are melted by heat flowing to the surface from
within the volcano or by the hot gases and near-molten
debris emitted during a violent eruption.
The eruption of Mount St. Helens in May 1980 created several lahars. The flows and accompanying floods
raced down the valleys of the north and south forks of

the Toutle River at
speeds that were often
in excess of 30 kilometers (20 miles) per hour.
Fortunately, the affected
area was not densely settled. Nevertheless, more
than 200 homes were
destroyed or severely
damaged (Figure 15.18).
Most bridges met a similar fate.
In November 1985,
lahars were produced
during the eruption
of Nevado del Ruiz, a
5300-meter (17,400-foot)
volcano in the Andes
Mountains of Colombia.
The eruption melted
much of the snow and
ice that capped the
uppermost 600 meters
(2000 feet) of the peak,
producing torrents of
hot, viscous mud, ash,
and debris. The lahars
moved outward from the volcano, following the valleys
of three rain-swollen rivers that radiate from the peak.
The flow that moved down the valley of the Lagunilla
River was the most destructive. It devastated the town
of Armero, 48 kilometers (30 miles) from the mountain.
Most of the more than 25,000 deaths caused by the event
occurred in this once-thriving agricultural community.
Death and property damage due to the lahars
also occurred in 13 other villages within the

15.4 Rapid Forms of Mass Wasting

180-square-kilometer (70-square-mile) disaster area.
Although a great deal of pyroclastic material was explosively ejected from Nevado del Ruiz, it was the lahars
triggered by this eruption that made this such a devastating natural disaster. In fact, it was the worst volcanic
disaster to occur since 28,000 people died following the
1902 eruption of Mount Pelée on the Caribbean island
of Martinique.*

Earthflow
We have seen that debris flows are frequently confined
to channels in semiarid regions. In contrast, earthflows
most often form on hillsides in humid areas during
times of heavy precipitation or snowmelt. When water
saturates the soil and regolith on a hillside, the material
may break away, leaving a scar on the slope and forming
a tongue- or teardrop-shaped mass that flows downslope
(Figure 15.19).
The materials most commonly involved are rich in
clay and silt and contain only small proportions of sand
and coarser particles. Earthflows range in size from bodies a few meters long, a few meters wide, and less than a
meter deep to masses more than 1 kilometer long, several
hundred meters wide, and more than 10 meters deep.
Because earthflows are quite viscous, they generally
*A discussion of the Mount Pelée eruption, as well as additional material on
lahars, can be found in Chapter 5.

E Y E ON E A R T H

459

move at slower rates than the more fluid debris flows
described in the preceding section. They are characterized by a gradual movement that may go on for periods
ranging from days to years. Depending on the steepness
of the slope and the material’s consistency, measured
velocities range from less than a millimeter a day up to
several meters a day. Over the time span during which
an earthflow is active, movement is typically faster during wet periods than during drier times. In addition to
occurring as isolated hillside phenomena, earthflows
commonly take place in association with large slumps. In
this situation, they may be seen as tongue-like flows at
the base of the slump block.

15.4

Concept Checks

1. Without looking at Figures 15.12 and 15.13, sketch
and label a simple cross-section (side view) of a
slump.
2. Both slumps and rockslides move by sliding. How
do these processes differ?
3. What factors led to the massive rockslide at Gros
Ventre, Wyoming?
4. How is a lahar different from a debris flow that
might occur in southern California?
5. Contrast earthflows and debris flows.

15.2

H

eavy rains in late July 2010 triggered the mass wasting
that occurred in this mountain valley near Durango,
Colorado. Heavy equipment is clearing away material
that blocked railroad tracks and significantly narrowed the
adjacent stream channel.

QUESTION 1 What is the likely type of mass wasting that
occurred here? Explain your choice.
QUESTION 2 Most of us are familiar with the phrase “One
thing leads to another.” It certainly applies to the Earth system.
Suppose the material from the mass-wasting event had
completely filled the stream. What other natural hazard might
have developed?

Soaring Tree Adventures

460

CHAPTER 15

Mass Wasting: The Work of Gravity

Slow Movements

15.5

Review the general characteristics of slow mass-wasting processes and describe
the unique issues associated with a permafrost environment.

Movements such as rockslides, rock avalanches, and lahars are certainly the most spectacular and catastrophic forms of mass wasting. These dangerous events deserve intensive study to enable more effective prediction, timely warnings, and better controls to save lives. However, because of their large size
and spectacular nature, they give us a false impression of their importance as mass-wasting processes.
Indeed, sudden movements are responsible for moving less material than the slower and far more
subtle action of creep. Whereas rapid types of mass wasting are characteristic of mountains and steep
hillsides, creep takes place on both steep and gentle slopes and is thus much more widespread.
SmartFigure 15.20
Creep The repeated
expansion and contraction of the surface material
causes a net downslope
migration of soil and rock
particles. (https://goo.gl/nJO3Eh)

Creep

Expansion
caused by
freezing

Contraction
during thaws

Surface when
frozen
Surface when
thawed

Cre

ep

Soil and
regolith
Bedrock

Figure 15.21
Effects of creep Although
creep is an imperceptibly
slow movement, its effects
are often visible. (Photos by

Creep is a type of mass wasting that involves the gradual downhill movement of soil and regolith. One factor
that contributes to creep is the alternating expansion
and contraction of surface material caused by freezing
and thawing or wetting and drying. As shown in Figure
15.20, freezing or wetting lifts particles at right angles
to the slope, and thawing or drying allows the particles
to fall back to a slightly lower level. Each cycle therefore moves the material a tiny distance downslope.
Creep is aided by anything that disturbs the soil, such
as raindrop impact and disturbance by plant roots and
burrowing animals. Creep is also promoted when the
ground becomes saturated with water. Following a
heavy rain or snowmelt, a water-logged soil may lose
its internal cohesion, allowing gravity to pull the material downslope. Because creep is imperceptibly slow,
the process cannot be observed in action. However, the
effects of creep can be observed. Creep causes fences
and utility poles to tilt and retaining walls to be displaced (Figure 15.21).

Solifluction

D. Bradley/NOAA, Marli Miller, and
Tim McGuire Images, Inc./Alamy)

Curved
tree trunk
Bent rock
layers

Tilted
fence

Zon
e
of
cre
ep

When soil is saturated with
water, the soggy mass may
flow downslope at a rate
of a few millimeters or a
few centimeters per day or
per year. Such a process is
called solifluction (literally
“soil flow”). It is a type of
mass wasting that is common wherever water cannot
Broken
retaining
escape from the saturated
wall
surface layer by infiltrating
to deeper levels. A dense clay
Tension hardpan in soil or an impercracks meable bedrock layer can promote solifluction.
Solifluction is also common in
regions underlain by permafrost. Permafrost refers to the permanently frozen ground
that occurs in association with Earth’s harsh tundra

461

15.5 Slow Movements

Figure 15.22
Solifluction lobes near the
Arctic Circle in Alaska
Solifluction occurs in
permafrost regions when
the active layer thaws
in summer. Because
summers are cool and very
short, frozen soils generally
thaw to depths of less than
1 meter (3 feet). (Photo from
the James E. Patterson Collection
courtesy of F. K. Lutgens)

and subarctic climates. (There is more about permafrost in the next section.) Solifluction occurs in a zone
above the permafrost called the active layer, which
thaws to a depth of about a meter during the brief
high-latitude summer and then refreezes in winter.
During the summer season, water is unable to percolate into the impervious permafrost layer below. As a
result, the active layer becomes saturated and slowly
flows. The process can occur on slopes as gentle as 2
to 3 degrees. Where there is a well-developed mat of
vegetation, a solifluction sheet may move in a series of
well-defined lobes or as a series of partially overriding
folds (Figure 15.22).

the surface material. Knowing how much ice is present
and where it is located is very important when it comes
to constructing roads, buildings, and other projects in
areas underlain by permafrost.
Figure 15.23

Asia
Europe

The Sensitive Permafrost Landscape
Many of the mass-wasting disasters described in this
chapter had sudden and disastrous impacts on people.
When the activities of people cause ice contained in
permanently frozen ground to melt, the impact is more
gradual and less deadly. Nevertheless, because permafrost regions are sensitive and fragile landscapes, the
scars resulting from poorly planned actions can remain
for generations.
Permanently frozen ground, known as permafrost, occurs where summers are too short and cool to
melt more than a shallow surface layer. Deeper ground
remains frozen year-round. Permafrost is extensive in
the lands surrounding the Arctic Ocean (Figure 15.23).
Strictly speaking, permafrost is defined only on the
basis of temperature; that is, it is ground with temperatures that have remained below 0°C (32°F) continuously for 2 years or more. The degree to which ice is
present in the ground strongly affects the behavior of

60°

Arctic
Ocean

80°

In the continuous
zone, the only
unfrozen areas
are beneath deep
lakes or rivers.

Pacific
Ocean
Atlantic
Ocean
North America

In the higher-latitude portions of the discontinuous zone,
there are only scattered areas of thawed ground. Moving
southward, the percentage of unfrozen ground increases.
Continuous zone

Discontinuous zone

Distribution of permafrost in the Northern
Hemisphere More than
80 percent of Alaska
and about 50 percent of
Canada are underlain by
permafrost.

462

CHAPTER 15

Mass Wasting: The Work of Gravity

SmartFigure 15.24
When permafrost thaws This building,
located south of Fairbanks, Alaska, subsided
because of thawing permafrost. Notice that
the right side, which was heated, settled
much more than the unheated porch on the
left. (Photo by Steve McCutcheon, U.S. Geological

Heat

Survey) (https://goo.gl/PMHMpp)

Permafrost

When people disturb the surface, such as by removing the insulating vegetation mat or by constructing roads
and buildings, the delicate thermal balance is disturbed,
and ice within the permafrost can thaw. Thawing produces unstable ground that may slide, slump, subside,
and undergo severe frost heaving. When a heated structure is built directly on permafrost that contains a high
proportion of ice, thawing creates soggy material into
which a building can sink (Figure 15.24). One solution is to
place buildings and other structures on piles, like stilts.
Such piles allow subfreezing air to circulate between the
floor of the building and the soil and thereby keep the
ground frozen.

15.5

Zone of
thawing

Permafrost

Concept Checks

1. Describe the basic mechanisms that contribute
to creep. How might you recognize that creep is
occurring?
2. During what season does solifluction in the Arctic
occur? Explain why it occurs only during that
season.
3. What is permafrost? How might disturbing
permafrost lead to unstable ground that may
slide, flow, or subside?

16
Running
Water

Extraordinary rains in September 2013, caused extensive
flash flooding in the Colorado Rockies in and around the
city of Boulder. During the height of the flood, the Big
Thompson River washed out a portion of U.S. 34 and
nearly did the same to the houses in the bottom of the
image. (Photo by Andy Cross/The Denver Post/Getty Images)

C

onsider the

bittersweet relationship we have with rivers. They are vital economic
tools—used as highways to move goods and as sources of water for irrigation and
energy—as well as prime locations for recreation. When considered as part of the Earth
system, rivers and streams represent a fundamental link in the constant cycling of our
planet’s water. Yet running water is the dominant agent of landscape alteration, eroding
more terrain and transporting more sediment than any other process. Soils and other
materials can be washed away, only to be deposited elsewhere. Because human populations concentrate along rivers, flooding represents enormous potential for destruction
and loss of life.
This chapter provides an overview of the hydrologic cycle, the nature of river systems,
the types of river channels and the factors that produce them, the influences of running
water on our planet’s landscapes, and the nature of floods and their impact on people.

16.1

Earth as a System: The Hydrologic Cycle
List the hydrosphere’s major reservoirs and describe the different paths that water
takes through the hydrologic cycle.
_TT54


We live on a planet that is unique in the solar system—in just the right location and just the right
size (see Chapter 22). If Earth were appreciably closer to the Sun, water would exist only as a vapor.
Conversely, water would be forever frozen if our planet were much farther away. Moreover, Earth is
large enough to have a hot mantle that supports convective flow, which carries water to the surface
through volcanism. Water that rose from Earth’s interior through mantle convection generated our
planet’s oceans and atmosphere. Thus, by coincidence of favorable size and location, Earth is the
only planet in the solar system that has a global ocean and a hydrologic cycle.
Water is found almost everywhere on Earth—in the
oceans, glaciers, rivers, lakes, air, soil, and living tissue.
All these “reservoirs” constitute Earth’s hydrosphere,
which contains about 1.39 billion cubic kilometers (333
Figure 16.1

Total
global water
Freshwater
2.5%

Distribution of Earth’s
water

Saline lakes
and
groundwater
1%

Freshwater
Surface water
and other
freshwater
1.3%

Groundwater
30.1%

Oceans
96.5%

Glaciers
and ice
sheets
68.6%

million cubic miles) of water. The vast majority of it, an
estimated 96.5 percent, is stored in the global ocean. Ice
sheets and glaciers account for another 1.74 percent, leaving less than 2 percent divided among
lakes, streams, subsurface water,
Surface water
and the atmosphere (Figure 16.1).
and other freshwater
Water is constantly movAtmosphere 0.22%
Biological water 0.22%
ing among Earth’s different
Rivers 0.46%
spheres—the hydrosphere,
Swamps
the atmosphere, the geo2.53%
sphere, and the biosphere.
This
unending circulation of
Soil moisture
Lakes
water
is called the hydro3.52%
20.1%
logic cycle (Figure 16.2).
Recall from Chapter 1 that
the hydrologic cycle is one of
Snow
many important subsystems that conand ice
stitute the Earth system.
73.1%
When precipitation falls on land,
it either soaks into the ground, a process called infiltration, flows over
the surface as runoff, or immediately

469

16.2 Running Water

ip

evaporates. Much of the water that infiltrates or runs off
H ydr ologic C ycle
eventually finds its way back to the
atmosphere via evaporation from
Pr
ec
soil, lakes, and streams. In addition,
n
o
i
t
Precipitation
a
some of the water that soaks into the
or
96,000 km3
p
ground is absorbed by plants, which later
a
Precipitation
release it into the atmosphere. This
284,000 km3
process is called transpiration
(trans = across, spiro = to breathe).
Evaporation/Transpiration
Each year a field of crops may
60,000 km3
transpire the equivalent of a
water layer 0.6 meter (2 feet)
Evaporation
deep over the entire field. The
36,000 km3
320,000 km3
same area of trees may pump
ff
Runo
twice this amount into the atmosphere. Because both evaporaInfiltration
tion and transpiration involve the
Oceans
transfer of water from the surface
directly to the atmosphere, they are
often considered together as the combined process of evapotranspiration.
Figure 16.2 also shows that Earth’s hydrologic cycle
More water falls on land as precipitation than is lost
is balanced. This basically means that although water
by evapotranspiration. The excess is carried back to the
is constantly moving from one reservoir to another, the
ocean mainly by streams; less than 1 percent returns
overall amount of water in the oceans and on land remains
as groundwater. However, much of the water that flows
about the same. Each year, solar energy evaporates about
in rivers is not transmitted directly into river channels
320,000 cubic kilometers of water from the oceans, but
after falling as precipitation. Instead, a large percentage first soaks into surface materials and then gradually only 284,000 cubic kilometers return to the oceans as precipitation. A balance is achieved by the 36,000 cubic kiloflows as groundwater to river channels. In this manner,
groundwater provides a form of storage that sustains the meters that are carried to the ocean as runoff. Although
runoff makes up a small percentage of the total, running
flow of streams between storms and during periods of
water is, nevertheless, the single most important erosional
drought. Groundwater is the focus of Chapter 17.
agent sculpting Earth’s land surface.
When precipitation falls in very cold areas—at
high elevations or high latitudes—the water may not
immediately soak in, run off, or evaporate. Instead, it
becomes part of a snowfield or a glacier. In this way,
glaciers store large quantities of water. If present-day
1. Describe or sketch the movement of water through
glaciers were to melt and release their stored water,
the hydrologic cycle. Once precipitation has fallen
sea level would rise by several tens of meters worldon land, what paths might the water take?
wide and submerge many heavily populated coastal
2. What is meant by the term evapotranspiration?
areas. As you will see in Chapter 18, over the past
2 million years, huge ice sheets have formed and
3. Over the oceans, evaporation exceeds precipitation,
melted on several occasions, each time changing the
yet sea level does not drop. Explain why.
balance of the hydrologic cycle.

ita

Ev

tion

16.1

Concept Checks

Water
16.2 Running
Describe the nature of drainage basins and river systems. Sketch and briefly
explain four basic drainage patterns.

Recall that most of the precipitation that falls on land either enters the soil (infiltration) or remains
at the surface, moving downslope as runoff. The amount of water that runs off rather than soaks
into the ground depends on several factors: (1) the intensity and duration of rainfall, (2) the amount
of water already in the soil, (3) the nature of the surface material, (4) the slope of the land, and
(5) the extent and type of vegetation. When the surface material is highly impermeable or when it
becomes saturated, runoff is the dominant process. Runoff is also high in urban areas because large
areas are covered by impermeable buildings, roads, and parking lots.

SmartFigure 16.2
The hydrologic cycle
The primary movement of
water through the cycle is
shown by the large arrows.
A number refers to the
annual amount of water
taking a particular path.
(https://goo.gl/8IRwFJ)

470

CHAPTER 16

Running Water

Figure 16.3

Overland flow

Drainage basin and divide
A drainage basin is the area
drained by a stream and
its tributaries. Boundaries
between basins are called
divides.

Div

ide

Rills

Gullies

Drainage divide

Hill
Dr

ai

na

Dr
ge

slop

es

ainage

Hil

ls

es
lop

i
bas

di

n
Tributaries

vid

e

Trunk
stream
Outlet

Runoff initially flows in broad, thin sheets across slopes
in a process called sheet flow. This thin, unconfined flow
eventually develops threads of current that form tiny
channels called rills. Rills meet to form gullies, which
join to form brooks, creeks, or streams. Then, when they
reach an undefined size, they are called rivers. Although
the terms river and stream are often used interchangeably, geologists define stream as water that flows in a
channel, regardless of size. River, on the other hand, is a
general term for streams that carry substantial amounts
of water and have numerous tributaries.
In humid regions, the water to support streamflow
comes from two sources: overland flow that sporadically

enters the stream and groundwater that enters the channel. In areas where the bedrock is composed of soluble
rocks such as limestone, large openings may exist that
facilitate the transport of groundwater to streams. In arid
regions, however, the water table may be below the level
of the stream channel, in which case the stream loses
water to the groundwater system by outflow percolating
through the streambed.

Drainage Basins
Every stream drains an area of land called a drainage
basin, or watershed (Figure 16.3). Each drainage basin is
bounded by an imaginary line called a divide, which is
clearly visible as a sharp ridge in some mountainous areas
but can be more difficult to determine when the topography is subdued. The outlet, where the stream exits the
drainage basin, is at a lower elevation than the rest of the
basin.
Drainage divides range in scale from a small ridge
separating two gullies on a hillside to a continental
divide that splits an entire continent into enormous
drainage basins. The Mississippi River has the largest
drainage basin in North America, collecting and carrying
40 percent of the flow in the United States (Figure 16.4).
By looking at the drainage basin in Figure 16.3, it
should be obvious that slopes cover most of the area.
Water erosion on the hillsides is aided by the impact of
falling rain and surface flow, moving downslope as sheets
or in rills toward a stream channel. Hillslope erosion is
the main source of fine particles (clays and fine sand)
carried in stream channels.
If you could observe the streams in an area similar to that depicted in Figure 16.3 over several years,
you would see many of them lengthen their courses by
headward erosion—that is, by extending the heads
of their valleys upslope. In their headwater sections,

SmartFigure 16.4

Mississippi
River
Drainage
Basin

Big

ive
r

Mississippi River drainage basin The drainage basin of
the Mississippi River forms a funnel that stretches from
Yellowstone River
Montana and southern Canada in the west to New York
Drainage
Basin
State in the east that runs down to a spout in Louisiana. It
Yellowstone River
Miles City
consists of many smaller drainage basins. The drainage basin
Billings
r
r
of the Yellowstone River is one
ive
ive
n R
rR
R
r
e
o
of many that contribute water
h
ue
wd
ng
Po
To
to the Missouri River, which,
Big
ho
in turn, is one of many that
r
Cody
make up the drainage basin
Yellowstone
of the Mississippi River.
Lake
n

Mts

.

Upper
Missouri Mississippi
River Basin

(https://goo.gl/z6epSn)

Ohio
River Basin
ArkansasRed-White

Tennessee
Lower
Mississippi

San

471

16.2 Running Water

Rafa

el

River

SmartFigure 16.5
Headward erosion
A stream lengthens its
course by extending the
head of its valley upslope
into previously undissected
terrain. (Photo by Michael
Collier) (https://goo.gl/hDFQip)

Headward erosion
is occurring here.

Tributaries to the San Rafael River are
dissecting this flat upland area.

streams tend to erode their channels downward. This
lowering of the stream leads to increased rates of erosion on the steeper slopes, which lie in the opposite
direction of streamflow. Thus, through headward erosion, a valley is extended into previously undissected
terrain. In Figure 16.5, the tributaries to Utah’s San
Rafael River illustrate this process.

River Systems
Rivers drain much of the land area, with the exception of extremely arid regions or polar areas that are
permanently frozen. To a large extent, the variety of
rivers that exist is a reflection of the different environments in which they are found. For example, although
the Paraná–La Plata river system in South America
drains an area roughly the same size as the Nile in
Egypt, it carries nearly 10 times more water to the
ocean. Because its drainage basin is entirely in a rainy
tropical climate, the Paraná–La Plata system has a huge
discharge. By contrast, the Nile, which also originates in
a humid region, flows through an expansive arid landscape, where significant amounts of water evaporate
or are withdrawn to sustain agriculture. Thus, climatic
differences and human intervention can significantly
influence the character of a river. Later, we will examine
other factors that contribute to stream variability.
River systems not only involve a network of stream
channels but the entire drainage basin. Based on the
dominant processes operating within them, river systems can be divided into three zones: sediment production—where erosion dominates, sediment transport, and
sediment deposition (Figure 16.6). It is important to recognize that sediment is being eroded, transported, and

deposited along the entire length of a stream, regardless
of which process is dominant within each zone.

Sediment Production

The zone of sediment production, where most of the sediment is derived, is located
in the headwaters region of the river system. Much of
the sediment carried by streams begins as bedrock
that is subsequently broken down by weathering and
then moved downslope by mass wasting and by way of
sheet flow and rills. Bank erosion can also contribute
significant amounts of sediment. In addition, scouring
of the channel bed deepens the channel and adds to the
stream’s sediment load.

Sediment Transport

Sediment acquired by a stream is
transported through the channel network along sections
called trunk streams. When trunk streams are in balance, the amount of sediment eroded from their banks
equals the amount deposited elsewhere in the channel.
ters

Figure 16.6

Headwa

Zones of a river
Each of the three zones
is based on the dominant
process that is operating
in that part of the river
system.

Zone of sediment
production
(erosion)

Zone of
transportation
Trunk
stream

Zone of
deposition

uth

Mo

472

CHAPTER 16

Running Water

Although trunk streams rework their channels over time,
they are not a source of sediment, nor do they accumulate or store it.

Sediment Deposition

When a river reaches the ocean
or another large body of water, it slows, and the energy
to transport sediment is greatly reduced. Most of the
sediments accumulate at the mouth of the river to form
a delta, are reconfigured by wave action to form a variety
of coastal features, or are moved far offshore by ocean
currents. Because coarse sediments tend to be deposited
upstream, it is primarily the fine sediments (clay, silt,
and fine sand) that eventually reach the ocean. Taken
together, erosion, transportation, and deposition are the
processes by which rivers move Earth’s surface materials
and sculpt landscapes.

Drainage Patterns
Drainage systems are interconnected networks of
streams that form a variety of patterns. The nature of a
drainage pattern can vary greatly from one type of terrain to another, primarily in response to the kinds of rock
on which the streams developed and/or the structural
pattern of joints, faults, and folds (see Chapter 10).
Figure 16.7 illustrates four drainage patterns.

Dendritic Pattern

The most commonly encountered
drainage pattern is the dendritic pattern (Figure
16.7A). This pattern of irregularly branching tributary

streams resembles the branching pattern of a deciduous
tree. In fact, the word dendritic means “treelike.” The
dendritic pattern forms where the underlying material
is relatively uniform. Because the surface material is
essentially uniform in its resistance to erosion, it does
not control the pattern of streamflow. Rather, the pattern is determined chiefly by the direction of slope of
the land.

Radial Pattern When streams diverge from a central
area like spokes from the hub of a wheel, the pattern is
said to be radial (Figure 16.7B). This pattern typically
develops on isolated volcanic cones and domal uplifts.

Rectangular Pattern A rectangular pattern exhibits many right-angle bends (Figure 16.7C). This pattern
develops when the bedrock is crisscrossed by a series
of joints and/or faults. Because fractured rock tends to
weather and erode more easily than unbroken rock, the
geometric pattern of joints guides the paths of streams as
they carve their valleys.
Trellis Pattern A trellis pattern is a rectangular
drainage pattern in which tributary streams are nearly
parallel to one another and have the appearance of a
garden trellis (Figure 16.7D). This pattern forms in areas
underlain by alternating bands of resistant and lessresistant rock and is particularly well displayed in the
folded Appalachian Mountains, where both weak and
strong strata outcrop in nearly parallel belts.

Figure 16.7
Drainage patterns
Networks of streams form a
variety of patterns.

A. Dendritic pattern
develops on relatively
uniform surface materials

C. Rectangular pattern
develops on highly jointed bedrock

Ridges of
resistant
rock
Volcano

B. Radial pattern
develops on isolated
volcanic cones or domes

D. Trellis pattern
develops in areas of alternating
weak and resistant bedrock

Valleys cut in
less-resistant
rock

473

16.3 Streamflow Characteristics
The river establishes its course
on relatively uniform strata
that cover a structural
feature below.

As the stream erodes downward, it encounters and
cuts through the resistant rock to create a water
gap. By this process the river is superimposed on
the ridge.

Water gap

Figure 16.8
Development of a superposed stream This is one
way in which a water gap
can form. The Bighorn
River is a good example.
See SmartFigure Mobile
Field Trip 10.9 for some
excellent views and additional explanation of the
Bighorn River and how
it created the water gap
shown here. (Photo by
Michael Collier)

Formation of a Water Gap

To fully understand the
drainage pattern displayed by a stream, it is often useful to consider a stream’s entire history. For example,
river valleys occasionally cut through a ridge or mountainous topography that lies across their path. This
situation is illustrated by the trellis pattern in Figure
16.7D. The steep-walled notch followed by the river
through a tectonic structure is called a water gap
(Figure 16.8).
Why do streams cut across such structures and
not flow around them? One possibility is that a stream
existed before the ridge or mountain was uplifted.
In this situation, the stream, called an antecedent
stream, eroded its bed downward at a pace equal to
the rate of uplift. That is, the stream would maintain its
course as folding or faulting gradually raised the structure across its path.
A second possibility is that a superposed stream
eroded its channel into an existing structure (see Figure
16.8). This can occur when folded beds or resistant rocks
are buried beneath layers of relatively flat-lying sediments
or sedimentary strata. Streams originating on the overlying
strata establish their courses without regard to the structures below. Then, as the valley deepens, the river continues
to cut its valley into the underlying structure. The folded
Appalachians feature several superposed rivers, including
the Potomac and the Susquehanna, which cut their channels
through folded strata on their way to the Atlantic.

Water gap

Bighorn River

The Bighorn River is a superposed stream that created a
water gap through Wyoming’s Sheep Mountain.

16.2

Concept Checks

1. List several factors that cause infiltration and
runoff to vary from place to place and time to time.
2. Draw a simple sketch of a drainage basin and a
divide and label each.
3. What are the three main parts (zones) of a river
system?
4. Prepare a simple sketch of the four drainage
patterns discussed in this section. Briefly
describe why streams exhibit each pattern.
5. Contrast antecedent and superposed streams.
_TT55


Characteristics
16.3 Streamflow
Discuss streamflow and the factors that cause it to change.
The water in river channels moves under the influence of gravity. In very slowly flowing streams,
water moves in nearly straight-line paths parallel to the stream channel; this is called laminar
flow. However, streams typically exhibit turbulent flow, in which the water moves in an erratic
fashion characterized by a series of horizontal and vertical swirling motions (Figure 16.9). Strong
turbulent behavior occurs in whirlpools and eddies, as well as in roiling whitewater rapids. Even
streams that appear smooth on the surface often exhibit turbulent flow near the bottom and sides
of the channel, where flow resistance is greatest. Turbulence contributes to a stream’s ability to
erode its channel because it acts to lift sediment from the streambed.

474

CHAPTER 16

Running Water
B.

Figure 16.9

locations across the stream’s
channel. Some sluggish
streams have flow velocities of less than 1 kilometer
(0.62 mile) per hour, whereas
stretches of some fast-flowing
rivers may exceed 30 kilometers (19 miles) per hour.

A.

Laminar and turbulent
flow Most often streamflow
is turbulent. (Photos by
Michael Collier)

Running the rapids in the Grand Canyon– an extreme
example of turbulent flow.

This water is not standing still. It is moving slowly
toward the bottom of the image. The flow in the
foreground is primarily laminar.

An important factor influencing stream turbulence is
the water’s flow velocity. As the velocity of a stream
increases, the flow becomes more turbulent. Flow velocities can vary significantly from place to place along a
stream channel, as well as over time, in response to variations in the amount and intensity of precipitation. If you
have ever waded into a stream, you may have noticed that
the strength of the current increased as you moved into
deeper parts of the channel. This is related to the fact
that frictional resistance is greatest near the banks and
bed of a stream channel.
Flow velocities are determined at stream gaging
stations by averaging measurements taken at various
Figure 16.10
Influence of channel
shape on velocity
The stream with the smaller
wetted perimeter has less
frictional drag and will flow
more rapidly, all else being
equal.

Factors Affecting
Flow Velocity

The ability of a stream to
erode and transport material is directly related to its
flow velocity. Even slight variations in flow rate can
lead to significant changes in the sediment load transported by a stream. Several factors influence flow
velocities and, therefore, control a stream’s potential
to do its “work” of transporting sediment. These factors include (1) channel slope, or gradient, (2) channel
cross-sectional shape, (3) channel size and roughness,
and (4) discharge, or the amount of water flowing in the
channel.

Gradient The slope of a stream channel, expressed as
the vertical drop of a stream over a specified distance,
is called gradient. Portions of the lower Mississippi
River have very low, or gentle, gradients, about 10 centimeters or less per kilometer. By contrast, some mountain streams have channels that drop at a rate of more
than 40 meters per kilometer—a gradient 400 times
steeper than that of the lower Mississippi. Gradient also
varies along the length of a particular channel. When
the gradient is steeper, more gravitational energy is
available to drive channel flow.

Channel Shape
Maximum
velocity
Depth
1 unit

Width 10 units
Cross-sectional area = 10 square units
Wetted perimeter = 12 units
10
Ratio = 12
= 0.83

Wide, shallow
channel

Maximum
velocity

Depth
2 units
Width 5 units

Narrow, deep
channel

Cross-sectional area = 10 square units
Wetted perimeter = 9 units
Ratio = 109 = 1.11

As water in a stream channel moves
downslope, it encounters a significant amount of frictional resistance. The cross-sectional shape (a slice taken
across the channel) determines, to a large extent, the
amount of flow that comes in contact with the banks and
bed of the channel. This measure is referred to as the
wetted perimeter. The most efficient channel is one
with the least wetted perimeter for its cross-sectional
area. Figure 16.10 compares two channels that differ only
in shape: One is wide and shallow, the other is narrow
and deep. Although the cross-sectional area of both is
identical, the narrow and deep one has less water in contact with the channel (a smaller wetted perimeter) and
therefore less frictional drag. As a result, if all other factors are equal, the water will flow more efficiently and at
a higher velocity in a deep and narrow channel than in a
wide and shallow channel.

Channel Size and Roughness Water depth also
affects the frictional resistance that the channel exerts
on flow. Maximum flow velocity occurs when a stream
is bankfull, before water starts to overflow its banks

475

16.3 Streamflow Characteristics

and inundate the surrounding floodplain. At this stage,
the channel’s ratio of the
cross-sectional area to wetted perimeter is highest and
streamflow is most efficient.
Therefore, greater water depth
increases this ratio, which in
turn increases channel efficiency. All other factors being
equal, flow velocities are
higher in large channels than
in small channels.
Most streams have channels that can be described
as rough. Elements such as
boulders, irregularities in
the channel bed, and woody
debris create turbulence that
significantly reduces flow
velocity.

SmartFigure 16.11
The Mighty Mississippi near
Memphis, Tennessee The
Mississippi is North America’s
largest river. From head to mouth,
it is nearly 3900 kilometers
(2400 miles) long. Its watershed
encompasses about 40 percent of
the lower 48 states and includes
all or parts of 31 states and 2
Canadian provinces. Average
discharge at its mouth is about
16,800 cubic meters (593,000
cubic feet) per second. (Photo by
Michael Collier) (http://goo.gl/LkgZXX)

Discharge Streams vary in size from small headwater
creeks less than a meter wide to large rivers with widths of
several kilometers. The size of a stream channel is largely
determined by the amount of water supplied from the
drainage basin. The measure most often used to compare
the size of streams is discharge—the volume of water flowing past a certain point in a given unit of time. Discharge,
usually measured in cubic meters per second or cubic feet
per second, is determined by multiplying a stream’s crosssectional area by its flow velocity. The largest river in North
America, the Mississippi, has an average discharge at its
mouth of about 16,800 cubic meters (593,000 cubic feet)
per second (Figure 16.11). That figure is dwarfed by South
America’s mighty Amazon River, which discharges nearly 13
times more water than the Mississippi. GEOgraphics 16.1
presents more information on Earth’s major rivers.

The discharge of a river system changes over time
because of variations in the amount of precipitation
received by the drainage basin. Studies show that when
discharge increases, the width, depth, and flow velocity
of the channel all increase predictably. As we saw earlier,
when the size of the channel increases, proportionally
less water is in contact with the bed and banks of the
channel. This reduces friction, which acts to retard the
flow, resulting in an increase in the rate of streamflow.

Monitoring Streamflow The U.S. Geological Survey
maintains a network of about 7500 stream gaging stations
that collect basic data about the country’s surface-water
resources (Figure 16.12). Data collected include flow
velocity, discharge, and river stage. Stage is the height of
the water surface relative to a fixed reference point. This
Figure 16.12

The U.S. Geological Survey operates and maintains
nearly 7500 stream gaging stations.

Car
Cable

Stilling
well

Satellite antenna

Recorder

Sunday,
October 14, 2012
13:30 ET

Water level

Streamflow
Low

Much Below Normal Above Much
below normal
normal above
normal
normal

High

Colors indicate whether the current river stage is above or below normal.

Float

Stream
Intake pipe

Cable tower

Flow velocity is
measured by a current
meter at several places
across the stream
channel. The newest
meters use Doppler
radar. Older meters use
a propeller that spins in
response to the moving
water.

A stilling well, used to determine the stage
of a river, is connected to the stream with
pipes. When the water level in the stream
changes, the water level in the well
changes. A float is connected to a recorder.
Data can be sent via satellite to various
agencies.

Stream gaging
stations The
United States has
a dense network
of stream gaging
stations. To determine a channel’s
discharge, it is
necessary to survey
the channel to
determine its shape
and calculate its
area. A stilling
well measures the
stage, and a current
meter determines
flow velocity.

GEO GRAPHICS 16.1

What Are the Largest Rivers?

When rivers are ranked, the criterion most often used is the amount of water the river
delivers to the ocean expressed in cubic feet (ft3) or cubic meters (m3) per second.

#6
YENISEI RIVER

#9
LENA RIVER

Drainage basin:
1,000,000 square miles
Average discharge:
614,000 cubic feet per second

#7
ORINOCO RIVER

#8
MISSISSIPPI RIVER

Drainage basin:
340,000 square miles
Average discharge:
600,000 cubic feet per second

Drainage basin:
1,150,000 square miles
Average discharge:
593,000 cubic feet per second

#5
GANGES RIVER

Drainage basin:
2,231,000 square miles
Average discharge:
7,500,000 cubic feet per second

#10
PARANA RIVER

The drainage basin of the
“Mighty Mississippi” covers
about 40 percent of the lower
48 states and includes all or
parts of 31 states and 2 Canadian
provinces. The discharge of North
America's largest river is just
one-twelfth that of the Amazon.

Drainage basin:
890,000 square miles
Average discharge:
526,000 cubic feet per second

Drainage basin:
936,000 square miles
Average discharge:
547,000 cubic feet per second

Drainage basin:
409,000 square miles
Average discharge:
660,000 cubic feet per second

#1
AMAZON RIVER
#2
CONGO RIVER
Drainage basin:
1,550,000 square miles
Average discharge:
1,400,000 cubic feet per second

#3
YANGTZE RIVER
Drainage basin:
750,000 square miles
Average discharge:
770,000 cubic feet per second

#4
BRAHMAPUTRA RIVER
Drainage basin:
361,000 square miles
Average discharge:
700,000 cubic feet per second

The size of the drainage basin and the amount of
rainfall it receives are the primary factors
influencing discharge.

LARGEST U.S. RIVERS
COLUMBIA
RIVER

ST. LAWRENCE
RIVER

MISSOURI
RIVER

OHIO
RIVER

MISSISSIPPI
RIVER

TENNESSEE
RIVER

YUKON
RIVER

RANK
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

RIVER
Mississippi
St. Lawrence
Ohio
Columbia
Yukon
Missouri
Tennessee

DRAINAGE BASIN
1,150
396
203
258
328
529
41

AVERAGE DISCHARGE AT MOUTH
593
348
281
265
225
76
68

Guido Alberto Rossi/AGE Fotostock

Aris Michich/AGE Fotostock

The flow of the Amazon accounts for
about 15 percent of all the fresh water
that flows into the oceans. Much of its
huge drainage basin is tropical
rainforest that receives 80 inches or
more of rainfall each year.

Questions:
1. Why is the Amazon’s discharge so large?
2. About how many times larger is the discharge of the
Amazon than the second ranked river, the Congo?

477

16.3 Streamflow Characteristics

Figure 16.13

4
Elevation (km)

measurement is frequently reported
by the media, especially when a
river approaches or surpasses flood
stage. Streamflow measurements
are essential components of river
models used to make flood forecasts
and issue warnings. There are other
applications as well. The data are
used to make decisions related to
water supply allocations, operation of
wastewater treatment plants, design
of highway bridges, and recreation
activities.

3

A longitudinal profile is
a cross-section along
the length of a stream

2
1
0
0

Longitudinal profile California’s Kings River originates high in the Sierra Nevada and flows into the
San Joaquin Valley.

Head
Steeper gradient

Mouth

Gentler
gradient
50

100
Distance (km)

Mt. Whitney

S i e r r a

Changes Downstream

Kings

Ri

ve

Fresno,
CA

N e v a d a

r

16.3

Concept Checks

1. Contrast laminar flow and turbulent flow.
2. Summarize the factors that influence flow
velocity.
3. What is a longitudinal profile?
4. What typically happens to channel width, channel
depth, flow velocity, and discharge between the
headwaters and the mouth of a stream? Briefly
explain why these changes occur.
_TT56


SmartFigure 16.14

Headwaters

Mouth

n ne

rge
cha
Dis

l ro
ug
es

slo p

s

e(

g

ra

die

ze
Channel si
nt)

Headwaters

Channel changes from
head to mouth
Although the gradient decreases toward
the mouth of a stream,
increases in discharge and
channel size and decreases
in roughness more than
offset the decrease in
slope. Consequently, flow
velocity usually increases
toward the mouth. (https://
goo.gl/6srX2s)

hn

Cha n n e l

Increase

Ch a

One useful way of studying a stream
is to examine its longitudinal profile. Such a profile is simply a crosssectional view of a stream from its source area
(called the head, or headwaters) to its mouth, the
point downstream where it empties into another water
body—a river, a lake, or the ocean. Figure 16.13 shows
that the most obvious feature of a typical longitudinal
profile is its concave shape—a result of the decrease in
slope that occurs from the headwaters to the mouth. In
addition, local irregularities exist in the profiles of most
streams; the flatter sections may be associated with lakes
or reservoirs, and the steeper sections are sites of rapids
or waterfalls.
The change in slope observed on most stream profiles
is usually accompanied by an increase in discharge and
channel size, as well as a reduction in sediment particle
size (Figure 16.14). For example, data from successive gaging stations along most rivers show that, in humid regions,
discharge increases toward the mouth. This should come
as no surprise because, as we move downstream, more
and more tributaries contribute water to the main channel. In the case of the Amazon, for example, about 1000
tributaries join the main river along its 6500-kilometer
(4000-mile) course across South America.
In order to accommodate the growing volume of
water, channel size typically increases downstream as
well. Recall that flow velocities are higher in large channels than in small channels. Furthermore, observations
show a general decline in sediment size downstream,
making the channel smoother and more efficient.
Although the channel slope decreases—the gradient
becomes less steep—toward a stream’s mouth, the flow
velocity generally increases. This fact contradicts our
intuitive assumptions of swift, narrow headwater streams
and wide, placid rivers flowing across more subtle
topography. Increases in channel size and discharge and
decreases in channel roughness that occur downstream
compensate for the decrease in slope—thereby making the stream more efficient (see Figure 16.14). Thus,
the average flow velocity is typically lower in headwater
streams than in wide, placid-appearing rivers.

150

Flow velocity

Mouth

478

CHAPTER 16

Running Water

Work of Running Water
16.4 The
Outline the ways in which streams erode, transport, and deposit sediment.
Streams are Earth’s most important erosional agents. Not only do they have the ability to deepen
and widen their channels, but streams also have the capacity to transport enormous quantities of
sediment delivered to them by overland flow, mass wasting, and groundwater. Eventually, much of
this material is deposited to create a variety of landforms.

Stream Erosion
A stream’s ability to accumulate and transport soil and
weathered rock is aided by the work of raindrops, which
knock sediment particles loose (see Figure 6.24 on page
202). When the ground is saturated, rainwater cannot
infiltrate, so it flows downslope, transporting some of the
material it dislodges. On barren slopes the flow of muddy
water (sheet flow) often produces small channels (rills),
which in time can evolve into larger gullies (see Figure
6.25 on page 203).
Once flow is confined within a channel, the erosional
power of a stream is related to its slope and discharge.
The rate of erosion, however, also depends on the relative resistance of the bank and bed material. In general,
channels composed of unconsolidated materials are more
easily eroded than channels cut into bedrock.
When a channel is sandy, the particles are easily dislodged from the bed and banks, and they are lifted into the
moving water. Moreover, banks consisting of sandy material are often undercut, or eroded at their base, dumping
even more loose debris into the water to be carried downstream. Banks that consist of coarse gravels or cohesive
clay and silt particles tend to be relatively resistant to erosion. Thus, channels with cohesive silty banks are generally
narrower than comparable ones with sandy banks.
Figure 16.15
Potholes The rotational
motion of swirling pebbles
acts like a drill to create
potholes. (Photo by Storm

Streams cut channels into bedrock through three
main processes: quarrying, abrasion, and corrosion.

Quarrying Quarrying involves the removal of blocks
from the bed of a stream channel. This process is aided
by fracturing and weathering that loosen the blocks sufficiently so they are movable during times of high flow
rates. Quarrying is mainly a result of the impact forces
exerted by flowing water.
Abrasion The process by which the bed and banks of
a bedrock channel are ceaselessly bombarded by particles
carried into the flow is termed abrasion. The individual
sediment grains are also abraded by their many impacts
with the channel and with one another. Thus, by scraping,
rubbing, and bumping, abrasion erodes a bedrock channel
and simultaneously smooths and rounds the abrading particles. That is why smooth, rounded cobbles and pebbles
are found in streams. Abrasion also results in a reduction in
the size of the sediments transported by streams.
Features common to some bedrock channels are circular depressions known as potholes, which are created
by the abrasive action of particles swirling in fast-moving
eddies (Figure 16.15). The rotational motion of sand and
pebbles acts like a drill that bores the holes. As the particles wear down to nothing, they are replaced by new ones
that continue to drill the streambed. Eventually, smooth
depressions several meters across and deep may result.
Corrosion Bedrock channels formed in soluble rock
such as limestone are susceptible to corrosion—a process in which rock is gradually dissolved by the flowing water. Corrosion is a type of chemical weathering
between the solutions in the water and the mineral matter that makes up the bedrock.

Studio/Alamy Images)

Transport of Sediment by Streams

Abrasion by long-lived
whirlpools armed with
sand and pebbles
creates bowl-shaped
bedrock depressions
called potholes.

All streams, regardless of size, transport some weathered
rock material (Figure 16.16). Streams also sort the solid
sediment they transport because finer, lighter material
is carried more readily than larger, heavier particles.
Streams transport their load of sediment in three ways:
(1) in solution (dissolved load), (2) in suspension (suspended load), and (3) by sliding, skipping, or rolling
along the bottom (bed load).

Dissolved Load

Most of the dissolved load is brought
to a stream by groundwater and is dispersed throughout

479

16.4 The Work of Running Water

Figure 16.17
Suspended load
An aerial view of the
Colorado River in the
Grand Canyon. Heavy rains
washed sediment into the
river. (Photo by Michael Collier)

Suspended load

Dissolved load

(silt, clay)

(invisible)

Saltation
(bouncing)

Bedload
(sand, gravel, boulders)
Sliding

Rolling

SmartFigure 16.16
Transport of sediment Streams transport their load of
sediment in three ways. The dissolved and suspended loads
are carried in the general flow. The bed load includes coarse
sand, gravel, and boulders that move by rolling, sliding, and
saltation. (https://goo.gl/F9TOv1)

gravels, and even boulders, typically move along the bed
of a channel as bed load. The particles that make up the
bed load move by rolling, sliding, and saltation. Sediment moving by saltation (saltare = to leap) appears to
jump or skip along the streambed (see Figure 16.16). This
Figure 16.18

1000
500
100
50

Settling velocity
The speed at which a
particle falls through still
water is its settling velocity.
Deposition of suspended
particles occurs when
their settling velocities are
greater than the stream’s
flow velocity.

Transportation
(above settling velocity)

ve

lo

ci

ty

10
5

in
g

of their load in suspension. Indeed, the muddy appearance created by suspended sediment is the most obvious
portion of a stream’s load (Figure 16.17). Usually only
very fine sand, silt, and clay particles are carried this
way, but during flood stage, larger particles can also be
transported in suspension. During flood stage, the total
quantity of material carried in suspension also increases
dramatically, verifiable by people whose homes have
become sites for the deposition of this material. For
example, during its flood stage, the Yellow River (Hwang
Ho) of China is reported to carry an amount of sediment
equal in weight to the water that carries it. Rivers such as
this are appropriately described as “too thick to drink but
too thin to cultivate.”
The type and amount of material carried in suspension are controlled by two factors: the flow velocity and
the settling velocity of each sediment grain. Settling
velocity is defined as the speed at which a particle falls
through a still fluid. The larger the particle, the more
rapidly it settles toward the streambed (Figure 16.18).
In addition to size, the shape and specific gravity of

Bed Load Coarse material, including coarse sands,

Se
ttl

Suspended Load Most streams carry the largest part

particles also influence settling velocity. Flat grains sink
through water more slowly than spherical grains, and
dense particles fall toward the bottom more rapidly than
less-dense particles. The slower the settling velocity and
higher the flow velocity, the longer a sediment particle
will stay in suspension, and the farther it will be carried
downstream.

Stream flow velocity (cm/sec)

the flow. When water percolates through the ground, it
acquires soluble soil compounds. Then it seeps through
cracks and pores in bedrock, dissolving additional mineral matter. Eventually much of this mineral-rich water
finds its way into streams.
The velocity of streamflow has essentially no effect
on a stream’s ability to carry its dissolved load; material in
the solution goes wherever the stream goes. Precipitation
of the dissolved mineral matter occurs when the chemistry of the water changes, when organisms create hard
parts, or when the water enters an inland “sea,” located in
an arid climate where the rate of evaporation is high.

This river’s muddy
appearance is a
result of suspended
sediment.

1
0.5

Deposition
(below settling velocity)

0.1
0.001
Clay

0.01
Silt

0.1

1.0
Sand

10

100

Coarse material

PARTICLE GRAIN SIZE (mm)

480

CHAPTER 16

Running Water

occurs as particles are propelled upward by collisions
or lifted by the current and then carried downstream a
short distance until gravity pulls them back to the bed of
the stream. Particles that are too large or heavy to move
by saltation either roll or slide along the bottom, depending on their shapes.
The movement of bed load through a stream network tends to be less rapid and more localized than the
movement of suspended load. A study conducted on a
glacially fed river in Norway determined that suspended
sediments took only a day to exit the drainage basin,
while the bed load required several decades to travel the
same distance. Depending on the discharge and slope
of the channel, coarse gravels may only be moved during times of high flow, while boulders move only during
exceptional floods. Once set in motion, large particles are
usually carried short distances. Along some stretches of a
stream, bed load cannot be carried at all until it is broken
into smaller particles.

Capacity and Competence A stream’s ability to carry
solid particles is described using two criteria: capacity and competence. Capacity is the maximum load of
solid particles a stream can transport per unit time. The
greater the discharge, the greater the stream’s capacity
for hauling sediment. Consequently, large rivers with
high flow velocities have large capacities.
Competence is a measure of a stream’s ability to
transport particles based on size rather than quantity.
Flow velocity is key: Swift streams have greater competencies than slow streams, regardless of channel size. A
stream’s competence increases proportionately to the
square of its velocity. Thus, if the velocity of a stream
doubles, the impact force of the water increases four
times; if the velocity triples, the force increases nine
times, and so forth. Hence, large boulders that are often
visible in low water and seem immovable can, in fact,
be transported during exceptional floods because of the
stream’s increased competence.
By now it should be clear why the greatest erosion and
transportation of sediment occur during periods of high
water associated with floods. The increase in discharge
_TT57


E Y E ON E A R T H

results in greater capacity; the increased velocity produces
greater competency. Rising velocity makes the water more
turbulent, and larger particles are set in motion. In the
course of a few days, or perhaps just a few hours, a stream
at flood stage can erode and transport more sediment
than it does during several months of normal flow.

Deposition of Sediment by Streams
Deposition occurs whenever a stream slows, causing a
reduction in competence. Put another way, particles are
deposited when the flow velocity is less than the settling
velocity. As a stream’s flow velocity decreases, sediment
begins to settle, largest particles first. In this manner,
stream transport provides a mechanism by which solid
particles of various sizes are separated. This process,
called sorting, explains why particles of similar size
are deposited together. For example, you may have seen
stretches of a riverbed consisting mainly of gravel or
boulders, while sandbars may have dominated another
part of the stream.
The general term for sediment deposited by
streams is alluvium. Many different depositional features are composed of alluvium. Some occur within
stream channels, some occur on the valley floor adjacent to a channel, and some are found at the mouth of
a stream. We will consider the nature of these features
later in the chapter.

16.4

1. Describe two processes by which streams cut
channels in bedrock.
2. In what three ways does a stream transport its
load? Which part of the load moves most slowly?
3. Explain the difference between capacity and
competency.
4. What is settling velocity? What factors influence
settling velocity? Does settling velocity affect the
dissolved load?

16.1

T

he meandering White River in Arkansas is a tributary of the
Mississippi River.

QUESTION 1 In this aerial view, the color of the White River is
brown. What part of the stream’s load gives it this color?
QUESTION 2 If a channel were created across the narrow neck of
land shown by the arrow, how would the river’s gradient change?
QUESTION 3 How would the flow velocity be affected by the
formation of such a channel?

Concept Checks

Michael Collier

481

16.5 Stream Channels

Channels
16.5 Stream
Contrast bedrock and alluvial stream channels. Distinguish between two types
of alluvial channels.

A basic characteristic that distinguishes streamflow from overland flow is that it is confined in a
channel. A stream channel can be thought of as an open conduit consisting of the streambed and
banks that act to confine flow except, of course, during floods.
Although this is somewhat oversimplified, we can
divide stream channels into two basic types. Bedrock channels are channels in which the streams are
actively cutting into solid rock. In contrast, when the
bed and banks are composed mainly of unconsolidated
sediment or alluvium, the channel is called an alluvial
channel.

Bedrock Channels
As the name suggests, bedrock channels are cut
into the underlying strata and typically form in the
headwaters of river systems where streams have steep
slopes. The energetic flow tends to transport coarse
particles that actively abrade the bedrock channel.
Potholes are often visible evidence of the erosional
forces at work.
Steep bedrock channels often develop a sequence
of steps and pools, relatively flat segments (pools)

where alluvium tends to accumulate and steep segments
(steps) where bedrock is exposed. The steep areas contain
rapids or, occasionally, waterfalls.
The channel pattern exhibited by streams cutting
into bedrock is controlled by the underlying geologic
structure. Even when flowing over rather uniform bedrock, streams tend to exhibit winding or irregular patterns rather than flowing in straight channels. Anyone
who has gone whitewater rafting has observed the steep,
winding nature of a stream flowing in a bedrock channel.

Alluvial Channels
Alluvial channels form in sediment that was previously
deposited in the valley. When the valley floor reaches
SmartFigure 16.19
Formation of cut banks
and point bars By eroding
its outer bank and depositing material on the inside of
the bend, a stream is able
to shift its channel. (https://

Maximum
velocity

Maximum
velocity

goo.gl/4bXxsu)

USGS

Deposition
of point bar

White River near
Vernal, Utah

Point bar

Erosion of a
cut bank along
the Newaukum River
in southwestern
Washington State.

The cut bank
forms on the outside
of a meander where flow
velocity and turbulence
are greatest.

Erosion of
cut bank

Maximum
velocity

Michael Collier

As water slows on the
inside of a meander,
coarser material is
deposited as a
point bar.

482

CHAPTER 16

Running Water

Meandering Channels

SmartFigure 16.20
Formation of an oxbow
lake Oxbow lakes occupy
abandoned meanders.
Aerial view of an oxbow
lake created by the meandering Green River near
Bronx, Wyoming. (Photo by
Michael Collier) (https://goo.gl/
J1KomF)

Green River, WY

sufficient width, material deposited by
the stream can form a floodplain that
borders the channel. Because the banks
and beds of alluvial channels are composed of unconsolidated sediment (alluvium), they can undergo major changes
in shape as material is continually being
eroded, transported, and redeposited.
The major factors affecting the shapes of
these channels are the average size of the
sediment being transported, the channel’s gradient, and
discharge.
Alluvial channel patterns reflect a stream’s ability
to transport its load at a uniform rate while expending
the least amount of energy. Thus, the size and type of
sediment being carried help determine the nature of the
stream channel. Two common types of alluvial channels
are meandering channels and braided channels.
Figure 16.21
Braided stream The Knik
River is a classic braided
stream with multiple channels separated by migrating
gravel bars. The Knik is
choked with sediment from
four melting glaciers in the
Chugach Mountains north
of Anchorage, Alaska.
(Photo by Michael Collier)

Streams that transport much
of their load in suspension generally move in sweeping
bends called meanders. These streams flow in relatively
deep, smooth channels and primarily transport mud (silt
and clay), sand, and occasionally fine gravel. The lower
Mississippi River exhibits this type of channel.
Meandering channels evolve over time as individual
bends migrate across the floodplain. Most of the erosion is
focused at the outside of the meander, where velocity and
turbulence are greatest. In time, the outside bank is undermined, especially during periods of high water. Because
the outside of a meander is a zone of active erosion, it is
often referred to as a cut
bank (Figure 16.19). Debris
acquired by the stream at the
cut bank moves downstream,
where the coarser material is
generally deposited as point
bars on the insides of bends.
In this manner, meanders
migrate laterally by eroding the outside of the bends
and depositing sediment on
the inside, moving sideways
without appreciably changing
their shape.
In addition to migrating
laterally, the bends in a channel also migrate down the
valley. This occurs because
erosion is more effective on
the downstream (downslope) side of the meander. Sometimes the downstream migration of a meander is slowed
when it reaches a more resistant bank material. This allows
the next meander upstream to gradually erode the material between the two meanders, as shown in Figure 16.20.
Eventually, the river may erode through the narrow neck
of land, forming a new, shorter channel segment called a
cutoff. Because of its shape, the abandoned bend is called
an oxbow lake.

Braided Channels
Some streams consist
of a complex network
of converging and
diverging channels
that thread their
way among numerous islands or gravel
bars (Figure 16.21).
Because these channels have an interwoven appearance, they
are called braided
channels. Braided
channels form where
a large portion of a

483

16.6 Shaping Stream Valleys

stream’s sediment load consists of coarse material (sand
and gravel) and the stream has a highly variable discharge. Because the bank material is readily erodible,
braided channels are wide and shallow.
One setting in which braided streams form is at the
end of glaciers, where there is a large seasonal variation
in discharge. During the summer, large amounts of iceeroded sediment are dumped into the meltwater streams
flowing away from the glacier. However, when flow is
sluggish, the stream deposits the coarsest material as
elongated structures called bars. This process causes the
flow to split into several paths around the bars. During
the next period of high flow, the laterally shifting channels erode and redeposit much of this coarse sediment,

thereby transforming the entire streambed. In some
braided streams, the bars have built semipermanent
islands anchored by vegetation.

16.5

Concept Checks

1. Are bedrock channels more likely to be found
near the head or the mouth of a stream?
2. Describe or sketch the evolution of a meander,
including how an oxbow lake forms.
3. Describe a situation that might cause a stream
channel to become braided.

Stream Valleys
16.6 Shaping
Contrast narrow V-shaped valleys, broad valleys with floodplains, and valleys
that display incised meanders or stream terraces.

A stream valley consists of a channel and the surrounding terrain that directs water to the stream.
It includes the valley floor, which is the lower, flatter area that is partially or totally occupied by the
stream channel, and the sloping valley walls that rise above the valley floor on both sides. Alluvial
channels often flow in valleys that have wide valley floors consisting of sand and gravel deposited
in the channel and clay and silt deposited by floods. Bedrock channels, on the other hand, tend to
be located in narrow V-shaped valleys. In some arid regions, where weathering is slow and rock is
particularly resistant, narrow valleys having nearly vertical walls are also found. Such features are
called slot canyons (Figure 16.22). Stream valleys exist on a continuum from narrow, steep-sided valleys to valleys that are so flat and wide that the valley walls are not discernible.
Streams, with the aid of weathering
and mass wasting, shape the landscape
through which they flow. As a result,
streams continuously modify the valleys
they occupy.

Base Level and Graded
Streams
In 1875 John Wesley Powell, the pioneering geologist who first explored the
Grand Canyon and later headed the
U.S. Geological Survey, introduced the
concept of a downward limit to stream
erosion, which he called base level. A
fundamental concept in the study of
stream activity, base level is defined as
the lowest elevation to which a stream
can erode its channel. Essentially, it
is the level at which the mouth of a
stream enters the ocean, a lake, or a
trunk stream. Powell determined that
two types of base level exist: “We may
consider the level of the sea to be a
grand base level, below which the dry

Figure 16.22
Halls Creek Narrows This
is a classic slot canyon in
Utah’s Capitol Reef National
Park. (Photo by Michael Collier)

484

CHAPTER 16

Figure 16.23
Building a dam The base
level upstream from the
reservoir is raised, which
reduces the stream’s
flow velocity and leads to
deposition and a reduced
gradient.

Figure 16.24
Changes in base level
A resistant layer of rock can
act as a temporary base
level. The stream concentrates its erosive energy on
the resistant rock at the
knickpoint. Eventually the
river eliminates the knickpoint and reestablishes a
smooth profile.
_TT58


Running Water
Profile of stream
adjusted to
base level

of rock, and rivers that act as base levels for
their tributaries. All limit a stream’s ability
Ultimate
to downcut its channel.
base level
Changes in base level cause corresponding adjustments in the “work”
that streams perform. When a dam is
Sea
built along a stream course, the reservoir that forms behind it raises the
base level of the stream (Figure 16.23).
Upstream from the reservoir, the
New stream profile
formed by deposition
stream gradient is reduced, lowerof sediment
ing its velocity and, hence, its
sediment-transporting ability. As
a result, the stream deposits
New
material, thereby building up
base level
its channel. This process conReservoir
Dam
tinues until the stream again
Sea
has a gradient sufficient to
Original profile
carry its load. The profile of
the new channel will be similands cannot be eroded; but we may also have, for local
lar to the old profile but somewhat higher.
and temporary purposes, other base levels of erosion.”*
If, on the other hand, base level is lowered by a
Sea level, which Powell called “grand base level,”
drop in sea level, the stream will have excess energy and
is now referred to as ultimate base level. Local (or
downcut its channel to establish a balance with its new
temporary) base levels include lakes, resistant layers
base level. Erosion first occurs near the mouth and then
progresses upstream, creating a new stream profile.
Observing streams that adjust their profiles to
*Exploration of the Colorado River of the West (Washington, DC: Smithsonian
changes in base level led to the concept of a graded
Institution, 1875), p. 203.
stream. A graded stream has the necessary slope and
Graded stream
other channel characteristics to maintain the minimum
Ultimate base level
prior to faulting
velocity required to transport the material supplied
to it. On average, a graded system is neither eroding
nor depositing material but simply transporting it.
When a stream reaches equilibrium, it becomes a selfregulating system in which a change in one
characteristic causes a change in the others
Resistant bed
Knickpoint
Profile of stream
to counteract the effect.
if resistant rock
did not exist
Consider what would happen if disWaterfalls
placement
along a fault were to raise a
Resistant bed
layer of resistant rock along the course of a
graded stream. As shown in Figure 16.24 , the resisFault
tant rock forms a waterfall and
Knickpoint
serves as a temporary base level
Profile of stream
for the stream. Because of the
if resistant rock
Rapids
did not exist
increased gradient, the stream
concentrates its erosive energy
on the resistant rock along an area
called a knickpoint. Eventually, the river
Fault
erases the knickpoint from its path and reesResistant bed
tablishes a smooth profile.
Ultimate base level

Graded
stream
Profile of stream
adjusted to
ultimate base level

Fault

Valley Deepening
Resistant bed

When a stream’s gradient
is steep, the channel is well
above base level and the
dominant erosional process

485

16.6 Shaping Stream Valleys

gradient increases significantly, a situation usually
caused by variations in the erodibility of the bedrock
into which a stream channel is cutting. Resistant
beds create rapids by acting as a temporary base level
upstream while allowing downcutting to continue
downstream. Recall that, over time,
erosion usually eliminates the resistant
rock.
Waterfalls occur where streams
make vertical drops. One type of waterfall is exemplified by Niagara Falls
(Figure 16.26). These famous falls are supported by a resistant bed of dolostone
that is underlain by less-resistant shale.
As the water plunges over the lip of the
falls, it erodes the less-resistant shale,
undermining a section of overlying rock,
which eventually breaks off. In this manner, the waterfall retains its vertical cliff
while slowly, but continually, retreating
upstream. Over the past 12,000 years,
Niagara Falls has retreated more than
11 kilometers (7 miles) upstream.

Figure 16.25
Yellowstone River The
V-shaped valley, rapids, and
waterfalls indicate that the river
is vigorously downcutting. (Photo by

Valley Widening

Charles A. Blakeslee/AGE Fotostock)

is downcutting, the lowering of the streambed
toward base level. Abrasion caused by bed load sliding
and rolling along the bottom, and the hydraulic power
of fast-moving water, slowly deepen the streambed.
The result is usually a V-shaped valley with steep
sides. A classic example of a V-shaped valley is the
section of the Yellowstone River shown in Figure 16.25.
The most prominent features of V-shaped valleys
are rapids and waterfalls. Both
occur where the stream’s
La

As a stream approaches a graded condition—in which
it primarily works to transport sediment—downcutting
becomes less dominant. At this point the stream’s channel takes on a meandering pattern, and more of its energy
is directed from side to side. As a result, the valley widens as the river cuts away at one bank and then the other.

ie

Nia
gar
aR
iver

ag

ara

Niagara Falls

Niagara gorge
Esc

arp

men

t

Former position
of Niagara Falls

The Niagara River flows from Lake Erie
to Lake Ontario. The falls have retreated
upstream (toward Lake Erie) more than
11 kilometers (7 miles) during the last
12,000 years.

The retreat of Niagara
Falls The force of the
plunging Niagara River
is causing the falls to
retreat.(Photo by Michael Collier)

As the river plunges over the falls, it erodes the weaker rocks
beneath the more resistant Lockport Dolostone. As a section of
dolostone is undercut, it loses support and breaks off.

ke Er

Ni

Figure 16.26

Lak

eO

ntar

io

486

CHAPTER 16

Running Water

SmartFigure 16.27
Development of an erosional floodplain
Continuous side-to-side erosion by shifting meanders
gradually produces a broad, flat valley floor. Alluvium
deposited during floods covers the valley floor.

Narrow
V-shaped valley

(https://goo.gl/WNfY8s)

Site of erosion

Site of
deposition

Well develo
pe
floodplain d

The continuous lateral erosion caused by shifting meanders gradually produces a broad, flat valley floor covered with alluvium (Figure 16.27). This feature, called a
floodplain, is appropriately named because when a river
overflows its banks during flood stage, it inundates the
floodplain. Over time the floodplain will widen to a point
where the stream is actively eroding the valley walls in
only a few places. In the case of the lower Mississippi
River, for example, the distance from one valley wall to

another sometimes exceeds
160 kilometers (100 miles).
When a river erodes laterally and creates a floodplain as
described, it is called an erosional floodplain. Floodplains
can be depositional as well.
Depositional floodplains are
produced by major fluctuations
in conditions, such as changes in
base level or climate. The floodT
I
plain in California’s Yosemite Valley
M
is one such feature; it was produced
E
when a glacier gouged the valley floor
about 300 meters (1000 feet) deeper
than its former level. After the glacial
ice melted, running water refilled the
valley with alluvium. The Merced River
currently winds across a relatively flat
floodplain that forms much of the floor of
Yosemite Valley.

Incised Meanders and Stream
Terraces
We usually find streams with highly meandering courses
on floodplains in wide valleys. However, some rivers have
meandering channels that flow in steep, narrow bedrock
valleys. Such meanders, pictured in Figure 16.28, are
called incised meanders (incisum = to cut into).
How do these features form? Originally the meanders probably developed on the floodplain of a stream

SmartFigure 16.28
Incised meanders Aerial
view of incised meanders
of the Colorado River on
the Colorado Plateau. (Photo
by Michael Collier)
(https://goo.gl/JWM1ib)

Before uplift of the Colorado
Plateau, the river was meandering
on a floodplain.

During uplift of the plateau, the
meanders downcut because of the
steepening gradient.

487

16.6 Shaping Stream Valleys

Stream meandering
on its floodplain

Floodplain

Because of a relative drop in base level, the river
erodes downward through previously deposited
alluvium. Eventually a new floodplain forms. Terraces
represent elevated remnants of the former floodplain.
Terrace

Terrace

SmartFigure 16.29
Stream terraces Terraces
result when a stream
adjusts to a relative drop
in base level. (Photo by Greg
Hancock) (https://goo.gl/6cDynS)

These stream terraces developed
along the Wind River in Wyoming
Terraces

Terraces

When there is another relative drop in base
level, a second set of terraces forms.

that was in balance with its base level. Then, a change
in base level caused the stream to begin downcutting.
One of two events likely occurred: Either the base level
dropped, or the land on which the river was flowing was
uplifted. For example, regional uplifting of the Colorado
Plateau in the southwestern United States generated
incised meanders on several rivers. As the plateau gradually rose, meandering rivers began downcutting because
of their steepening gradient.
After a river has adjusted in this manner, it may once
again produce a floodplain at a level below the old one.
The remnants of a former floodplain are sometimes present as relatively flat surfaces called terraces (Figure 16.29).

E Y E ON E A R T H

16.2

T

he Middle Fork of the Salmon River flows for about
175 kilometers (110 miles) through a wilderness area
in central Idaho. (Photo by Michael Collier)

QUESTION 1 Is the river flowing in an alluvial channel or a
bedrock channel? Explain.
QUESTION 2 What process is dominant here: valley
deepening or valley widening?
QUESTION 3 Is the area shown in this image more likely
near the mouth or the head of the river?

16.6

Concept Checks

1. Define base level and distinguish between ultimate
base level and local, or temporary, base level.
2. What is a graded stream?
3. Explain why V-shaped valleys often contain
rapids and/or waterfalls.
4. Describe or sketch how an erosional floodplain
develops.
5. List two situations that would trigger the
formation of incised meanders.

488

CHAPTER 16

Running Water

16.7

Depositional Landforms
List the major depositional landforms associated with streams and describe
the formation of these features.

Recall that streams continually pick up sediment in one part of their channel and deposit it downstream. These small-scale channel deposits are called bars. Such features, however, are only temporary, as the material will be picked up again and eventually carried to the ocean. In addition to
sand and gravel bars, streams also create other depositional features that have somewhat longer life
spans. These include deltas, natural levees, and alluvial fans.

Deltas
Deltas form where sediment-charged streams reach a
temporary or ultimate base level and enter the relatively
still waters of a lake, an inland sea, or the ocean (Figure
16.30). As the stream’s forward motion is slowed, sediments are deposited by the dying current, producing
three types of beds. Foreset beds are composed of coarse
particles that drop almost immediately upon entering
the water to form layers that slope downcurrent from the
delta front. The foreset beds are usually covered by thin,
horizontal topset beds deposited during flood stage. The
finer silts and clays settle away from the mouth in nearly
horizontal layers called bottomset beds.
As a delta grows outward from the shoreline, the
stream’s gradient continually decreases. This circumstance eventually causes the channel to become choked
with sediment. As a consequence, the river seeks shorter,
higher-gradient routes to base level. Figure 16.30 shows
the main channel dividing into several smaller ones,
called distributaries, that carry water away from the
main channel in varying paths to base level. After numerous shifts in the main flow from one distributary to the
Figure 16.30
Formation of a simple
delta Structure and growth
of a simple delta that forms
in relatively quiet waters.

Distributaries
Topset beds are
deposited atop the
foreset beds during
floods.

next, a delta may grow into the triangular shape of the
Greek letter delta (∆), although several other shapes
exist. Differences in the configurations of shorelines and
variations in the nature and strength of wave activity are
responsible for the shape and structure of each delta.
Many of the world’s great rivers have created massive
deltas, each with its own peculiarities and typically more
complex than the one illustrated in Figure 16.30.
Not all rivers have deltas. A river that transports a
large sediment load may lack a delta because ocean waves
and powerful currents quickly redistribute the material soon after it is deposited. The Columbia River in the
Pacific Northwest is an example. In other cases, rivers do
not carry sufficient quantities of sediment to build a delta.
The St. Lawrence River, for example, has little opportunity to pick up much sediment between its head in Lake
Ontario and its mouth in the Gulf of St. Lawrence.

The Mississippi River Delta
The Mississippi River delta resulted from the accumulation of huge quantities of sediment derived from the vast
region drained by the river and
Foreset beds consist of its tributaries. New Orleans curcoarse particles that
rently rests where there was once
drop soon after entering
ocean.
the water body. As the
delta grows, these beds
cover the bottomset
beds.
_TT59


History and Structure The
portion of the Mississippi
delta that has formed during
the past 6000 years is shown in
Figure 16.31. As the figure illustrates, the delta is actually a series
of seven coalescing subdeltas. Each
subdelta formed when the main flow was
diverted from one channel to a shorter,
more
direct path to the Gulf of Mexico. The
Bottomset beds consist of fine silt and clay
individual
subdeltas intertwine and partially
particles that settled beyond the mouth of the river.
cover each other to produce a complex structure. It is also
apparent from Figure 16.31
that after each channel was
abandoned, coastal erosion modified
the newly formed subdelta.
As the stream extends its channel, the gradient is reduced. During flood stage some of
the flow is diverted to a shorter, higher-gradient route forming a new distributary.
The present subdelta (number 7 in

489

16.7 Depositional Landforms
Atcha

Figure 16.31), called a bird-foot
delta because of the configuration
of its distributaries, has been built
by the Mississippi River over the
a
R
past 500 years.
At present, this active birdfoot delta has extended seaward
almost as far as natural forces will
allow. In fact, for many years the
river has been “struggling” to cut
through a narrow neck of land
and shift its course to the Atchafalaya River (see inset in Figure
16.31). If this were to happen, the
1
Mississippi would abandon the
lowermost 500 kilometers (300
miles) of its channel in favor of
the Atchafalaya’s much shorter
225-kilometer (140-mile) route to
R.
the Gulf.
In a concerted effort to keep
the Mississippi on its present course,
Gulf of Mexico
a dam-like structure was erected
at the site where the channel was
trying to break through. A flood in 1973 weakened the
control structure, and the river again threatened to shift.
This event caused the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers to
construct a massive auxiliary dam that was completed in
the mid-1980s. For the time being, at least, the inevitable
has been avoided, and the Mississippi River continues to
flow past Baton Rouge and New Orleans on its way to the
Gulf of Mexico.

Figure 16.31
Growth of the Mississippi
River delta During the
past 6000 years, the river
has built a series of seven
coalescing subdeltas. The
numbers indicate the order
in which the subdeltas
were deposited. The present bird-foot delta (number
7) represents the activity
of the past 500 years. The
left inset shows the point
where the Mississippi may
sometime break through
(arrow) and the shorter
path it would take to the
Gulf of Mexico. (Image cour-

Baton Rouge

fal

M

ay

is

iver

si

ss

ippi Ri ve
r

New Orleans
2

4
6
3

5

7

Mis

tesy of JPL/Cal tech/NASA)

sis

sip

pi

.
Atchafalaya R

Gulf of Mexico

Vanishing Wetlands The delta of the Mississippi
River in Louisiana is a biologically significant region that
includes about 12,000 square kilometers (3 million acres)
of coastal wetlands—40 percent of all coastal wetlands
in the contiguous United States (Figure 16.32). These flat

SmartFigure 16.32
Coastal wetlands These
low-lying, sediment-starved
swamps, marshes, and bayous
are disappearing at an alarming
rate. (Photo by Michael Collier) (https://
goo.gl/YuGzP5)

490

CHAPTER 16

Running Water

SmartFigure 16.33

Valley
wall

Formation of a natural
levee These gently sloping structures that parallel a river channel are
created by repeated floods.
Because the ground next to
the channel is higher than
the adjacent floodplain,
back swamps and yazoo
tributaries may develop.
(https://goo.gl/7ZcsYJ)

Floodplain

Coarse sediments

Fine sediments

Back swamp
Floodstage
Yazoo tributary
Natural levees

Coarse sediments

Fine sediments

Post flood
Floodplain

Coarse sediments

Fine sediments

Floodstage

Natural
levees

Natural levees

Natural levee after numerous floods

areas that are only slightly above sea level are sheltered
from the wave action of hurricanes and winter storms by
low-lying offshore barrier islands. Both the wetlands and
offshore islands were formed and maintained by sediments carried to the Gulf of Mexico by the Mississippi
River.
The coastal wetlands of Louisiana are disappearing
at an alarming rate—accounting for 80 percent of the
wetland loss in the lower 48 states. According to the U.S.

E Y E ON E A R T H

Geological Survey, Louisiana has lost more than 5000
square kilometers (1900 square miles) of coastal land
since the early 1930s. If wetland loss continues at this
rate, another 3000 square kilometers (1170 square miles)
will vanish by the year 2050. Why is this occurring?
Before Europeans settled the delta, the Mississippi
River regularly overflowed its banks in seasonal floods.
Huge quantities of sediment were deposited atop the
delta, which kept the land elevated above sea level. However, with settlement came flood-control efforts and the

16.3

T

his satellite image shows the delta of the Yukon
River. The river originates in northern British
Columbia. It flows through the Yukon Territory and
across the tundra of Alaska before entering the Bering
Sea, a distance of nearly 3200 kilometers (about 2000
miles).
QUESTION 1 Explain why the river breaks into numerous
channels as it crosses the delta.
QUESTION 2 What term is applied to the channels that
radiate across the delta?
QUESTION 3 Notice the cloud of sediment in the water
surrounding the delta. Are these sediments more likely
sand and gravel or silt and clay? Explain.
QUESTION 4 After the cloud of material settles to the seafloor
and the delta expands farther into the Bering Sea, which
beds of the delta will these sediments become?

NASA

491

16.7 Depositional Landforms

SmartFigure 16.34

desire to maintain and improve navigation on the river.
Artificial levees (earthen mounds built parallel to the
river) were constructed to contain the rising river during
flood stage. Over time the levees were extended all the
way to the mouth of the Mississippi to keep the channel
open to navigation.
The effects have been straightforward: The levees
prevent sediment from being dispersed onto the wetlands. As a result, sediment is not added in sufficient
quantities to offset compaction, subsidence, and wave
erosion. Thus, the size of the delta and the extent of the
wetlands are shrinking. The problem has been exacerbated by a decline in the sediment load of the Mississippi, which has decreased approximately 50 percent over
the past 100 years. A substantial portion of the reduction
is due to sediment being trapped upstream by dams on
the river’s many tributaries.

Alluvial fan in Death
Valley Fans are deposited
at the mouth of a valley that
emerges from a mountainous or upland area onto
a relatively flat lowland.
Usually coarse material is
dropped near the apex of
the fan, while finer materials
are carried toward the base
of the deposit. California’s
Death Valley has many large
fans. As adjacent fans grow
larger, they may coalesce to
form a steep apron of sediment called a bajada. (Photo
by Michael Collier) (https://goo.gl/
bqOZ5R)

Natural Levees
Meandering rivers that occupy valleys with broad floodplains tend to build natural levees (lever = to raise)
that parallel their channels on both banks (Figure 16.33).
Natural levees are built by years of successive floods.
When a stream overflows onto the floodplain, the water
flows over the surface as a broad sheet. Because the flow
velocity drops significantly, the coarser portion of the
suspended load is immediately deposited adjacent to the
channel. As the water spreads across the floodplain, a
thin layer of fine sediment is laid down over the valley
floor. This uneven distribution of material produces the
gentle, almost imperceptible, slope of the natural levee
(see Figure 16.33).
The natural levees of the lower Mississippi River rise
6 meters (20 feet) above the adjacent valley floor. The
area behind a levee is characteristically poorly drained
for the obvious reason that water cannot flow over the
levee and into the river. Marshes called back swamps
often result. When a tributary stream enters a river valley that has a substantial natural levee, it often flows for
many kilometers through the back swamp before finding
an opening where it enters the main river. Such streams
are called yazoo tributaries, after the Yazoo River,
which parallels the lower Mississippi River for more than
300 kilometers (185 miles).

Alluvial Fans
Alluvial fans are fan-shaped deposits that accumulate
along steep mountain fronts (Figure 16.34). When a stream
with a steep gradient emerges onto a relatively flat lowland,
its gradient drops, and it deposits a large portion of its
sediment load. Although alluvial fans are more prevalent
in arid climates (see Chapter 19 for a further discussion of
alluvial fans), they are occasionally found in humid regions.
Mountain streams, because of their steep gradients,
carry much of their sediment load as coarse sand and

gravel. Because alluvial fans are composed of these same
coarse materials, water that flows across them readily soaks
in. When a stream emerges from its valley onto an alluvial
fan, its flow divides itself into several distributary channels.
The fan shape is produced because the main flow swings
back and forth between the distributaries from a fixed
point where the stream exits the mountain.
Between rainy periods in deserts, little or no water
flows across an alluvial fan, which is evident in the many
dry channels that cross its surface. Thus, fans in dry
regions grow intermittently, receiving considerable water
and sediment only during wet periods. As you learned in
Chapter 15, steep canyons in dry regions are prime locations for debris flows. Therefore, as would be expected,
many alluvial fans have debris-flow deposits interbedded
with the coarse alluvium.

16.7

Concept Checks

1. Sketch a cross section of a simple delta and
distinguish among the three types of beds that
compose it.
2. Explain why the Mississippi delta consists of
seven coalescing subdeltas.
3. Briefly describe the formation of a natural levee.
How is this feature related to back swamps and
yazoo tributaries?
4. Describe the formation of an alluvial fan.

492

CHAPTER 16

Running Water

and Flood Control
16.8 Floods
Summarize the various categories of floods and the common measures of flood
control.

Floods are serious and costly events that are among the most universally experienced natural
hazards. Floods are part of the natural behavior of a stream and occur when the flow of a stream
becomes so great that it exceeds the capacity of its channel and overflows its banks. Although
floods are natural phenomena, the magnitude and frequency of flooding is often significantly influenced by human activities such as clearing forests, building cities, and constructing flood control
structures such as dams and levees. The occurrence of floods is often linked to other natural hazards, including severe storms and mass-wasting processes such as debris flows.

Types of Floods
Most floods are caused by atmospheric processes that
can vary greatly in both time and space. An hour or less
of intense thunderstorm rainfall can trigger flash floods
in small valleys. By contrast, major floods in large river
valleys often result from an extraordinary series of precipitation events over a broad region for many days or
weeks. Common flood types include regional floods,
flash floods, ice-jam floods, and dam-failure floods.

Regional Floods Most regional floods are seasonal.
Rapid melting of snow in spring and/or heavy spring rains
often overwhelm rivers. For example, the extensive 1997
flood along the Red River of the North was preceded by
an especially snowy winter and an early spring blizzard.
Early April brought rapidly rising temperatures, melting the snow in a matter of days and causing a recordbreaking 500-year flood. Roughly 4.5 million acres were
underwater, and the losses in the Grand Forks, North
Dakota, region exceeded $3.5 billion.*
*Ice jams also contribute to floods on the Red River of the North; see the
section “Ice-Jam Floods.”

Figure 16.35
The flooding Mississippi
River, 2011 Extraordinary
rains caused record floods
from Illinois to Louisiana.
This scene is from
Vicksburg, Mississippi.
(Photo by Scott Olson/Getty
Images)

In April 2011, unrelenting storms brought record
rains to the Mississippi watershed. The Ohio Valley,
which makes up the eastern portion of the Mississippi’s
drainage basin, received nearly 300 percent of its normal
springtime precipitation. When that rainfall combined
with water from the past winter’s large and extensive,
rapidly melting snowpack, the Mississippi River and
many of its tributaries began to swell to record levels by
early May. The resulting floods were among the largest
and most damaging in nearly a century (Figure 16.35).
Like most other regional floods, these were associated
with weather phenomena that could be forecast with a
good deal of accuracy. This allowed adequate time to
warn and evacuate thousands of people who were in
harm’s way. Although economic losses approached $4 billion, loss of life was small.

Flash Floods Flash floods often occur with little
warning and are potentially deadly because they produce
rapid rises in water levels and can have devastating flow
velocities (see GEOgraphics 16.2). Rainfall intensity and
duration, surface conditions, and topography are among
the factors that influence flash flooding. Mountainous

494

CHAPTER 16

Running Water

Ice-Jam Floods

Frozen rivers are especially susceptible to ice-jam floods. As the level of a stream rises, it
breaks up ice and creates ice floes that can accumulate
on channel obstructions. Jams of this nature create
temporary ice dams across the channel. Water trapped
upstream can rise rapidly and overflow the channel
banks. When an ice dam fails, water behind the dam is
often released with sufficient force to inflict considerable
damage downstream.
These floods are often associated with northwardflowing rivers in the Northern Hemisphere. The Red

Figure 16.36

ARCTIC OCEAN

Ob Rive
r

iver
iR
ise
Yen

areas are especially susceptible because steep slopes
can funnel runoff into narrow valleys with disastrous
consequences.
A recent episode of flash flooding occurred in late
August 2011, when heavy rains from the remnants of
Hurricane Irene swamped parts of the Northeast. The
hilly and mountainous terrain of upstate New York and
Vermont were hit especially hard (Figure 16.36). Flash
floods washed out dozens of roads and bridges, isolating
numerous small towns and rural areas.
Urban areas are also susceptible to flash floods
because a high percentage of the surface area is composed of impervious roofs, streets, and parking lots,
where infiltration is minimal and runoff is rapid.

MONGOLIA

CHINA

Figure 16.37
Northward-flowing Siberian rivers Ice-jam floods are relatively
common in late spring and early summer in Siberia because
its large rivers flow north into the Arctic Ocean.

River of the North mentioned earlier is an example.
The Siberian region of Russia has several northwardflowing rivers, such as the Ob, Lena, and Yenisei, that
frequently experience these floods (Figure 16.37). When
spring arrives, ice melts in the warmer southern portions of a river and its drainage basin, while farther
north the river remains frozen. Water flowing from the
south “backs up” behind the frozen northern portion of
the river.

(Photo by AP Photo/Toby Talbot)

Graph showing river stages
for Otter Creek near Rutland,
Vermont. The stream rose
about 14 feet in less than a
day and then subsided
quickly.

Stage (ft)

Lena River

KAZAKHSTAN

The scale of destruction
was unprecedented
including nearly 2000
damaged road segments and
300 damaged or destroyed
bridges. In addition, more
than 800 homes and
businesses and several rail
and telecommunications
lines were damaged or
destroyed.

Flash floods in Vermont
In late August 2011, the
remnants of Hurricane
Irene brought torrential
rains that caused recordbreaking flash floods in
Vermont and parts of
upstate New York.

RUSSIA

24
Former record flood
22
stage—13.4 ft
River level
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
Flood Stage
2
12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12
PM AM PM AM PM AM PM AM PM AM PM
Fri
Sat
Sun
Mon
Tue
Wed
Aug 26 Aug 27 Aug 28 Aug 29 Aug 30 Aug 31

Site Time (EDT)

Dam-Failure
Floods Human interference with stream systems
can cause floods. A prime
example is the failure of a
dam or an artificial levee
designed to contain small
or moderate floods. When
larger floods occur, the dam
or levee may fail, resulting
in the water behind it being
released as a flash flood. The
bursting of a dam in 1889 on
the Little Conemaugh River
caused the devastating Johnstown, Pennsylvania, flood
that took more than
2200 lives.

Flood Recurrence
Intervals
Land-use planning in river
basins requires an understanding of the frequency
and magnitude of floods. For
every river, a relationship
exists between the size of a

495

16.8 Floods and Flood Control

flood and the frequency with which it occurs. The larger
the flood, the less often it is expected to occur. You may
have heard the term 100-year flood. This describes the
recurrence interval, which is an estimate of how often a
flood of a given size can be expected to occur. A 25-year
event would be much smaller but would be four times
more likely to occur than a 100-year flood.
The phrase “100-year flood” does not mean that 100
years must pass between each flood of equal or greater
magnitude. Floods happen irregularly! Rather, it means
that there is a 1 percent (1 in 100) probability in a given
year for a flood of that size. It is possible that a 100-year
flood could occur 2 or 3 years in a row. It is also possible
that such a flood might not occur over a span exceeding
100 years.
In order to make a reasonable calculation, stream
gage data must be collected for at least 10 to 30 years.
The longer the record, the better the prediction will
likely be. Other factors also influence the accuracy of
flood recurrence estimates. Climate cycles that involve
extensive drought or rainy periods are an example. Landuse changes, such as when adjacent rural areas become
urbanized, typically require reevaluation of flood recurrence intervals.

Flood Control
Several strategies have been devised to eliminate or
reduce the catastrophic impact of floods on our lives
and environment. Engineering efforts include the

construction of artificial levees, river channelization, and
the building of flood-control dams.

Artificial Levees Artificial levees are earthen
mounds built on riverbanks to contain a stream in its
channel when the water volume increases. Levees,
used since ancient times, are the most commonly used
stream-containment structures. In some locations, concrete floodwalls are constructed that function as artificial levees.
Many artificial levees were not built to withstand
periods of extreme flooding. For example, numerous
levees failed during the summer of 1993, when the
upper Mississippi and many of its tributaries experienced
record flooding. During that event, floodwalls at St.
Louis, Missouri, created a bottleneck for the river that
led to increased flooding upstream of the city.
When exceptional floods threaten to overwhelm
levees, water is sometimes intentionally diverted from
a river by creating openings in artificial levees. The
purpose is to spare vulnerable urban areas by allowing
water to flood sparsely populated rural areas. The areas
that are intentionally flooded are called floodways. For
example, to prevent the town of Cairo, Illinois, from
being inundated during the 2011 floods along the Mississippi River, a 3-kilometer- (2-mile-) wide opening was
blasted in a levee. This allowed water to spill into the
130,000-acre Birds Point-New Madrid Floodway (Figure
16.38). Similar steps were taken downstream in Louisiana
to protect the cities of Baton Rouge and New Orleans.
Figure 16.38
Birds Point-New Madrid
Floodway In early May
2011, the intentional
demolition of portions of an
artificial levee on the west
side of the Mississippi River
immersed this floodway.
A total of 520 square kilometers (200 square miles)
of Missouri farmland were
flooded. This rare action
prevented the inundation of the small town of
Cairo, Illinois. (Photo by David
Carson/St. Louis Post Dispatch/
ZUMAPRESS.com)

496

CHAPTER 16

Running Water

Channelization

Channelization involves altering a
stream channel in order to make the flow more efficient.
This may simply involve clearing a channel of obstructions or dredging a channel (removing sediment from
the channel bed) to make it wider and deeper. Another
alteration involves straightening, and thus shortening, a
channel by creating artificial cutoffs. Shortening a stream
increases the channel’s flow velocity.
Between 1929 and 1942, the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers removed 16 meander bends on the lower Mississippi for the purpose of increasing the slope of the
channel and thereby reducing the threat of flooding.
This river, a vital transportation corridor, was shortened
about 240 kilometers (150 miles). These efforts have been
somewhat successful in reducing the maximum height of
the river during flood stage. However, channel shortening led to increased gradients and accelerated erosion of
bank material, both of which necessitated further intervention. Following the creation of artificial cutoffs, massive bank protection was installed along several stretches
of the lower Mississippi.
A similar case in which artificial cutoffs accelerated
bank erosion occurred on the Blackwater River in Missouri, whose meandering course was shortened in 1910.
Among the many effects of this project was a significant
increase in the channel’s width due to increased velocity.
One particular bridge over the river collapsed in 1930
because of bank erosion. During the following 17 years,
the bridge was replaced three times, each time requiring
a longer span.

Flood-Control Dams

Flood-control dams are built to
store floodwater and then release it slowly, in a controlled
manner. Since the 1920s, thousands of dams have been
built on nearly every major river in the United States.
Many dams have significant non-flood-related functions,
such as providing water for irrigated agriculture and for

hydroelectric power generation. Many reservoirs are also
major regional recreational facilities.
Although dams are effective in reducing flooding
and provide other benefits, their construction and maintenance also have significant costs and consequences. For
example, reservoirs created by dams may cover valuable
farmland, forests, historic sites, and scenic valleys. Large
dams can also cause significant damage to river ecosystems that have developed over thousands of years.
Furthermore, building dams is not a permanent solution to flooding. Sedimentation behind a dam gradually
diminishes the volume of its reservoir, reducing the longterm effectiveness of this flood-control measure.

A Nonstructural Approach All of the flood-control
measures described so far employ structural solutions to
“control” rivers. These solutions are typically expensive
and often give those who reside on the floodplain a false
sense of security.
Many scientists and engineers advocate a nonstructural approach to flood control. They suggest that sound
floodplain management, such as limiting certain activities or land uses, is an alternative to artificial levees,
dams, and channelization. In high-risk flood areas,
appropriate zoning regulations can be implemented to
minimize development and promote safer, more appropriate land use.

16.8

Concept Checks

1. List and distinguish among four types of floods.
2. Describe three basic flood-control strategies.
What are some drawbacks of each?
3. What is meant by a nonstructural approach to
flood control?

17
Groundwater

Irrigation is the number-one use of groundwater in the United
States. In some places, groundwater is being withdrawn
much more rapidly than it is being replenished. (Photo by Debra
Ferguson/Alamy)

H

idden from view, vast quantities of water exist in the cracks, crevices, and
pore spaces of rock and soil. Groundwater can be found almost everywhere beneath
Earth’s surface and is a major source of water worldwide. Groundwater is a valuable
natural resource that provides about half of our drinking water and is essential to the
vitality of agriculture and industry. In addition to its utility, groundwater plays a crucial
role in sustaining streamflow between precipitation events—especially during protracted
dry periods. Many ecosystems depend on groundwater discharge into streams, lakes,
and wetlands. In some regions, large-scale development has caused groundwater levels
to decline, resulting in water shortages, streamflow depletion, land subsidence, and
increased pumping costs. Groundwater pollution is also a serious issue in some places.

17.1

The Importance of Groundwater
Describe the importance of groundwater as a source of freshwater and
groundwater’s roles as a geologic agent.

Groundwater is one of our most important and widely available resources, yet people’s perceptions
of the subsurface environment from which it comes are often unclear and incorrect. This is because
the groundwater environment is largely hidden from view except in caves and mines, and the
impressions people gain from these subsurface openings are misleading. Observations on the land
surface give an impression that Earth is “solid.” This view remains when we enter a cave and see
water flowing in a channel that appears to have been cut into solid rock.
Because of such observations, many people believe that
groundwater occurs only in underground “rivers.” In
reality, most of the subsurface environment is not “solid”
at all. It includes countless tiny pore spaces between
grains of soil and sediment, plus narrow joints and fractures in bedrock. Together, these spaces add up to an
immense volume. Where these subsurface pore spaces
are saturated with water, that stored water is called
groundwater. It is in these small openings that groundwater collects and moves.
Figure 17.1
Earth’s freshwater
Groundwater is the
major reservoir of liquid
freshwater.

Share of
Total Volume
of Freshwater

Ice sheets
and glaciers
68.7%

Groundwater 30.1%

Share of all
Liquid Freshwater
Surface/other
freshwater
1.2%

Lakes;
Soil moisture;
Water vapor in
atmosphere;
Rivers;
4%

Groundwater
96%

Groundwater and the Hydrosphere
When we consider the entire hydrosphere, or all of
Earth’s water, only about six-tenths of 1 percent is located
underground. Nevertheless, this small percentage, stored
in the rocks and sediments beneath Earth’s surface, is
a vast quantity. When the oceans are excluded and only
sources of freshwater are considered, the significance of
groundwater becomes more apparent.
Figure 17.1 gives estimates of the distribution of
freshwater in the hydrosphere. Clearly the largest volume
occurs as glacial ice. Groundwater is ranked second,
with slightly more than 30 percent of the total. However,
when ice is excluded and just liquid water is considered,
96 percent of all freshwater is groundwater. Without
question, groundwater represents the largest reservoir of
freshwater that is readily available to humans. Its value in
terms of economics and human well-being is incalculable.

Geologic Importance of Groundwater
Geologically, groundwater is important as an erosional
agent. The dissolving action of groundwater slowly
removes soluble rock such as limestone, allowing surface
depressions known as sinkholes to form as well as creating
subterranean caverns (Figure 17.2). The final section of
this chapter describes the landforms associated with
subsurface water. Groundwater is also an equalizer of

503
Figure 17.2
Carlsbad Caverns,
New Mexico The
dissolving action of acidic
groundwater created
these caverns. Later,
groundwater deposited
the limestone decorations.
(Photo by Clint Farlinger)

streamflow. Much of the water that flows in rivers is
not direct runoff from rain and snowmelt. Rather, a
large percentage of precipitation soaks into the ground
and then moves slowly under the surface to stream
channels. Groundwater is thus a form of storage that
sustains streams during periods when rain does not fall.
Therefore, when we see water flowing in a river during a
dry period, it is rain that fell at some earlier time and was
stored underground.

Groundwater: A Basic Resource

states, where annual precipitation is typically less than 20
inches. About 42 percent of the water used for irrigation
is groundwater.
Public and domestic uses include water for indoor
and outdoor household purposes as well as water used
for commercial purposes. Common indoor uses include
drinking, cooking, bathing, washing clothes and dishes,
and flushing toilets. If you are curious about how much
water an average American uses each day for indoor
domestic purposes, look at Figure 17.4. Major outdoor uses
are watering lawns and gardens. Water for domestic use
may come from a public supply or may be self-supplied.*
Practically all (98 percent) those whose water is selfsupplied rely on groundwater.

Water is basic to life. It has been called the “bloodstream”
of both the biosphere and society. Each day in the United
States we use about 349 billion gallons of freshwater.
*According to the U.S. Geological Survey, public supply refers to water withdrawn
According to the U.S. Geological Survey, about 77 percent by suppliers that furnish water to at least 25 people or have at least 15 connections.
comes from surface sources. Groundwater provides the
remaining 23 percent (Figure 17.3). One of the advantages
SOURCES OF FRESHWATER IN
THE UNITED STATES
of groundwater is that it exists almost everywhere across
23%
the country and thus is often available in places
Groundwater
that lack reliable surface sources such as lakes and
79 billion gallons
rivers. Water in a groundwater system is stored in
per day
subsurface pore spaces and fractures. As water is
77%
withdrawn from a well, the connected pore spaces
Surface water
270 billion gallons
and fractures act as a “pipeline” that allows water
per day
to gradually move from one part of the hydrologic
system to where it is being withdrawn.
68.4%
What are the primary ways that we use
Irrigation
groundwater? The U.S. Geological Survey identifies
several categories, shown in Figure 17.3. More
groundwater is used for irrigation than for all other GROUNDWATER –
USE BY CATEGORY
uses combined. There are nearly 60 million acres
(nearly 243,000 square kilometers [about 93,700
19.3%
Thermoelectric 0.05%
square miles]) of irrigated land in the United
Public supply
Mining 0.92%
States. That is an area nearly the size of the state
Aquaculture 1.3%
Livestock 1.3%
of Wyoming. The vast majority (75 percent) of the
Industrial 4.3%
irrigated land is in the 17 conterminous western
Domestic 4.2%

Figure 17.3
Sources and uses of
freshwater Each day in the
United States, we use 345
billion gallons of freshwater.
Groundwater is the source
of nearly one-quarter of the
total. More groundwater is
used for irrigation than for
all other uses combined.
(Data from U.S. Geological Survey)

504

CHAPTER 17

Groundwater

Figure 17.4
How we use water
According to the American
Water Works Association,
daily indoor per capita use
in an average single-family
home is 69.3 gallons. By
installing more efficient
water fixtures and regularly
checking for leaks, households could reduce this
figure by about one-third.

5

10

Another category, aquaculture, involves water used
PER CAPITA USE (GALLONS)
15
20 for fish hatcheries, fish farms, and shellfish farms. Many
mining operations require significant quantities of water,
as do industrial processes such as petroleum refining and
the manufacture of chemicals, plastics, paper, steel, and
concrete.

SHOWERS & BATHS
CLOTHES WASHERS
DISHWASHERS

17.1

TOILETS

Concept Checks

LEAKS

1. What percentage of Earth’s total freshwater
supply is groundwater?

FAUCETS

2. What share of Earth’s liquid freshwater is
groundwater?
3. List two geologic roles that groundwater plays.

OTHER USES
5

17.2

10

15

20

25
30
PERCENT OF DAILY USE

4. What share of U.S. freshwater is provided by
groundwater? What is most groundwater used for?

Groundwater and the Water Table
Prepare a sketch with labels that summarizes the distribution of water beneath
Earth’s surface. Discuss the factors that cause variations in the water table and
describe the interactions between groundwater and streams.

When rain falls on Earth’s land surface, some of the water runs off, some returns to the atmosphere
by evaporation and transpiration, and the remainder soaks into the ground. This last path is the
primary source of practically all subsurface water. The amount of water that takes each of these
paths varies greatly both in time and space. Influential factors include steepness of slope, nature
of the surface material, intensity of rainfall, and type and amount of vegetation. For example,
heavy rains falling on steep slopes underlain by impervious materials will obviously result in a high
percentage of the water running off. Conversely, rain falling steadily and gently on more gradual
slopes composed of materials that are easily penetrated by the water means that a much larger
percentage of water soaks into the ground.

Distribution of Groundwater
Some of the water that soaks in does not travel far
because it is held by molecular attraction as a surface
film on soil particles. This near-surface zone is called the
zone of soil moisture. It is crisscrossed by roots, voids
left by decayed roots, and animal and worm burrows that
enhance the infiltration of rainwater into the soil. Soil
water is used by plants in life functions and transpiration.
Some water also evaporates directly back into the
atmosphere.
Water that is not held as soil moisture percolates
downward until it reaches a zone where all the open
spaces in sediment and rock are completely filled with
water (Figure 17.5). This is the zone of saturation (also
called the phreatic zone). Water in the zone of saturation is called groundwater. The upper limit of this zone
is known as the water table. Extending upward from
the water table is the capillary fringe (capillus = hair).

Here groundwater is held by surface tension in tiny passages between grains of soil or sediment. The area above
the water table that includes the capillary fringe and the
zone of soil moisture is called the unsaturated zone
(also known as the vadose zone). The pore spaces in this
zone contain both air and water. Although a considerable
amount of water can be present in the unsaturated zone,
this water cannot be pumped by wells because it clings
too tightly to rock and soil particles. By contrast, below
the water table, the water pressure is great enough to
allow water to enter wells, thus permitting groundwater
to be withdrawn for use. We will examine wells more
closely later in the chapter.

Variations in the Water Table
The water table, the upper limit of the zone of saturation,
is a very significant feature of the groundwater system.
Knowing the water table level is important in predicting

505
the productivity of wells, explaining the changes in the
flow of springs and streams, and accounting for fluctuations in the levels of lakes. This level is highly variable
and can range from zero, when the zone of saturation
is at the surface, to hundreds of meters below the surface in some places. An important characteristic of the
water table is that its configuration varies seasonally and
from year to year because the addition of water to the
groundwater system is closely related to the quantity,
distribution, and timing of precipitation. Except where
the water table is at the surface, we cannot observe it
directly. However, the elevation of the water table is
mapped and studied in detail by examining water levels
in wells (Figure 17.6). The U.S. Geological Survey and
state agencies maintain and monitor an extensive network
of observation wells to provide statistics about groundwater levels. Such data are the basis for maps that reveal
that the water table is rarely level, as we might expect
a table to be (Figure 17.7). Instead, its shape is usually a
subdued replica of the surface topography, reaching its
highest elevations beneath
hills and descending toward
valleys (see Figure 17.5).
Where a wetland (swamp)
is encountered, the water
table is right at the surface.
Radio
antenna
Lakes and streams generally
occupy areas low enough
that the water table is above
the land surface.
Several factors contribute to the irregular surface
Photovoltaic
of the water table. One
panel

SmartFigure 17.5
Water beneath Earth’s
surface The shape of
the water table is usually
a subdued replica of the
surface topography. During
periods of drought, the water
table falls, reducing streamflow and drying up some
wells. (https://goo.gl/Z2GhM5)

Soil
moisture

Unsaturated
zone

Water
table

inge

Capillary fr

Zone of
saturation
Groundwater
Stream

Well

Normal
water table

Water table
during drought

important influence is the fact that groundwater moves
very slowly and at varying rates under different conditions. Because of this, water tends to “pile up” beneath
high areas between stream valleys. If rainfall were to
cease completely, these water table “hills” would slowly

Figure 17.6
Monitoring the water table Water level measurements from observation wells are a basic and important source of data. The
well location highlighted in red on the map is the well whose data are shown below. (Photo by Missouri Department of Natural Resources)

61.0
62.0
63.0
64.0

w
November 29–30
4.39 in. of rain

th
er

Water level data can
be accessed remotely.

ea

65.0

St. Louis

66.0
67.0

Water
table

January 12–15
2.54 in. of rain

ry

Counterweight
Float

Kansas
City

60.0

D

Recorder
box

The steady drop in water level
from late May to November is
the result of water discharging
from the aquifer to feed
April 13–14
springs and streams but not
1.6 in. of rain
being replaced by recharge.

59.0

Depth to water level,
feet below land surface

A groundwater network is an array of wells where water
levels are routinely measured. The U.S. Geological Survey in
conjunction with state agencies maintains an extensive
network of about 20,000 observation wells. This map shows
the network of wells in Missouri.

Jul 01
2006

Sep 01
2006

Nov 01
2006

Jan 01
2007

Mar 01
2007

Groundwater recharge and discharge at the Akers observation
well in Shannon County, Missouri. The height of the water table
in this well and many others in this region shows a steady
decline between spring and fall. This occurs because recharge
is low during these months. However, water continues to move
through the aquifer to supply springs and streams in the area
maintaining their flow even in dry years.

506

CHAPTER 17

Groundwater

Figure 17.7
Mapping the water
table The water table coincides with the water level in
observation wells. (Based on
U.S Geological Survey)

145.2

121.2

151.3

145.2

121.2

150

151.3

14

0

141.6

119.4

141.6

119.4

13

0

133.3

124.8

133.3

124.8

12

0

115.7

121.9

115.7
106.5

106.5

subside and gradually approach the level of the valleys.
However, new supplies of rainwater are usually added
frequently enough to prevent this. Nevertheless, in times
of extended drought, the water table may drop enough to
dry up shallow wells (see Figure 17.5). Other causes for
the uneven water table are variations in precipitation and
surface permeability from place to place.

Interactions Between Groundwater and
Streams The interaction between the groundwater
system and streams is a basic link in the hydrologic
cycle. This interaction can take place in one of three
ways. Streams may gain water from the inflow of
groundwater through the streambed. Such streams
are called gaining streams (Figure 17.8A). For this to
occur, the elevation of the water table must be higher
than the level of the surface of the stream. Streams
may lose water to the groundwater system by outflow
Figure 17.8
Interactions between
the groundwater system
and streams (Based on U.S
Geological Survey)

Water table

0
114.4

114.4

Step 1 The locations of observation wells and the
elevations of the water table above sea level are plotted
on the map.

121.9

11

Step 2 Data points are used to guide the drawing of
water-table contour lines. Groundwater flow lines can be
added to show water movement in the upper portion of the
zone of saturation. Groundwater moves perpendicular to
the contours and down the slope of the water table.
_TT60


through the streambed. The term losing stream is
applied to this situation (Figure 17.8B,C). When this
happens, the elevation of the water table must be lower
than the surface of the stream. The third possibility is
a combination of the first two: A stream gains in some
sections and loses in others.
Losing streams can be connected to the groundwater
system by a continuous saturated zone, or they can
be disconnected from the groundwater system by an
unsaturated zone. Compare parts B and C in Figure 17.8.
When the stream is disconnected, the water table may
have a discernible bulge beneath the stream if the rate of
water movement through the streambed and unsaturated
zone is greater than the rate of groundwater movement
away from the bulge.
In some settings, a stream might always be a gaining
stream or might always be a losing stream. However,
in many situations, flow direction can vary a great deal
along a stream; some sections receive groundwater, and
other sections lose water to the groundwater system.
Moreover, the direction of flow can change over a short
time span due to storms adding water near the stream
bank or when temporary flood peaks move down the
channel.

A. Gaining stream Gaining streams receive water from the
groundwater system.

Water table

Unsaturated
zone

B. Losing stream (connected) Losing streams provide
water to the groundwater system.

Water table

Unsaturated
zone

C. Losing stream (disconnected) When losing streams are
separated from the groundwater system by the unsaturated
zone, a bulge may form in the water table.

17.3 Factors Influencing the Storage and Movement of Groundwater

E Y E ON E A R T H

17.1

M

arshes are characterized by saturated, poorly
drained soils. This wetland is located southwest
of Fort McMurray, Alberta, Canada. (Photo by

Michael Collier)

QUESTION 1 Describe the position of the water table in
this image.
QUESTION 2 Suggest two situations that might cause the
marsh to disappear. Include one natural cause and one
cause related to human activities.

Groundwater contributes to streams in most geologic
and climatic settings. Even where streams are primarily
losing water to the groundwater system, certain sections
may receive groundwater inflow during some seasons.
One study of 54 streams in all parts of the United States
indicated that 52 percent of the streamflow was contributed by groundwater. The groundwater contribution
ranged from a low of 14 percent to a maximum of 90
percent. Groundwater is also a major source of water for
lakes and wetlands.

17.3

17.2

Concept Checks

1. When rain falls on land, what factors influence the
amount of water that soaks in?
2. Define groundwater and relate it to the water table.
3. A kitchen table is flat. Is this usually the case for a
water table? Why?
4. Contrast a gaining stream and a losing stream.

Factors Influencing the Storage and Movement
of Groundwater
Summarize the factors that influence the storage and movement of groundwater.

The nature of subsurface materials strongly influences the rate of groundwater movement and
the amount of groundwater that can be stored. Two factors are especially important: porosity and
permeability.

Porosity
Water soaks into the ground because bedrock, sediment, and soil contain countless voids or openings.
These openings are similar to those of a sponge and are
often called pore spaces. The quantity of groundwater that can be stored depends on the porosity of the
material, which is the percentage of the total volume
of rock or sediment that consists of pore spaces (Figure
17.9). Voids most often are spaces between sedimentary

particles, but also common are joints, faults, cavities
formed by the dissolving of soluble rock such as limestone, and vesicles (voids left by gases escaping from
lava).
Variations in porosity can be great. Sediment is
commonly quite porous, and open spaces may occupy
10 to 50 percent of the sediment’s total volume. Pore
space depends on the size and shape of the grains, how
they are packed together, the degree of sorting, and,

507

508

CHAPTER 17

Figure 17.9
Porosity demonstration
Porosity is the percentage
of the total volume of rock
or sediment that consists of
pore spaces.

Groundwater
The beaker on the left is filled with
1000 ml of sediment. The beaker on
the right is filled with 1000 ml of
water.

The sediment-filled beaker now contains (1) the portion that will perco500 ml of water. Pore spaces (porosity) late downward under the influmust represent 50 percent of the volume
ence of gravity (called specific
of the sediment.

1000 ml

1000 ml

1000 ml

500 ml

500 ml

500 ml

in sedimentary rocks, the amount of cementing material. For example, clay may have a porosity as high as
50 percent, whereas some gravels may have only 20
percent voids.
Where sediments are poorly sorted, the porosity
is reduced because the finer particles tend to fill the
openings among the larger grains. Most igneous and
metamorphic rocks, as well as some sedimentary rocks,
are composed of tightly interlocking crystals such that
the voids between the grains may be negligible. In these
rocks, fractures must provide the porosity.

Permeability, Aquitards, and Aquifers
Porosity alone cannot measure a material’s capacity to
yield groundwater. Rock or sediment may be very porous
yet still not allow water to move through it. The pores
must be connected to allow water flow, and they must
be large enough to allow flow. Thus, the permeability
(permeare = to penetrate) of a material—its ability to
transmit a fluid—is also very important.
Groundwater moves by twisting and turning
through small interconnected openings. The smaller
the pore spaces, the more slowly the water moves.
This idea is clearly illustrated by examining the wateryielding potential of different materials in Table 17.1.
Here groundwater is divided into two categories:
TABLE 17.1

yield) and (2) the part that
is retained as a film on par1000 ml
ticle and rock surfaces and in
tiny openings (called specific
retention). Specific yield indi500 ml
cates how much water is actually available for use, whereas
specific retention indicates
how much water remains bound in the material. For
example, the ability of a clay deposit to store water may
be great, due to high porosity, but its pore spaces are so
small that water is unable to move through it. Thus, the
clay’s porosity is high but because its permeability is
poor, it has a very low specific yield.
Impermeable layers that hinder or prevent water
movement are termed aquitards (aqua = water, tard
= slow). Clay is a good example. On the other hand,
larger particles, such as sand or gravel, have larger
pore spaces. Therefore, the water moves through with
relative ease. Permeable rock strata or sediment that
transmit groundwater freely are called aquifers (aqua
= water, fer = carry). Sands and gravels are common
examples.
In summary, porosity is not always a reliable guide
to the amount of surface water that can be stored as
groundwater, and permeability is significant in determining the rate of groundwater movement and the quantity
of water that might be pumped from a well.

17.3

Concept Checks

1. Distinguish between porosity and permeability.
2. What is the difference between an aquifer and an
aquitard?

Selected Values of Porosity, Specific Yield, and Specific Retention*

Material

Porosity

Clay

50

Specific Yield
2

Specific Retention
48

Sand

25

22

3

Gravel

20

19

1

Limestone

20

18

2

Sandstone (semiconsolidated)

11

Granite
Basalt (fresh)
*Values

0.1
11

in percent by volume.
Source: U.S. Geological Survey, Water Supply Paper 2220, 1987.

6

5

0.09

0.01

8

3

509

17.4 How Groundwater Moves

17.4

How Groundwater Moves
Sketch and describe a simple groundwater flow system. Discuss how groundwater
movement is measured and the different scales of movement.

The movement of water in the atmosphere and on the land surface is relatively easy to visualize, but
the movement of groundwater is not. Near the beginning of the chapter, we mentioned the common misconception that groundwater occurs in underground rivers that resemble surface streams.
Although subsurface streams do exist, they are not common (Figure 17.10). Rather, as you learned in
the preceding sections, groundwater exists in the pore spaces and fractures in rock and sediment.
Thus, contrary to any impressions of rapid flow that an underground river might evoke, the movement of most groundwater is exceedingly slow, from pore to pore.

A Simple Groundwater Flow System
Figure 17.11 depicts a simple example of a groundwater

flow system—a three-dimensional body of Earth
material saturated with moving groundwater. It shows
groundwater moving along flow paths from recharge
areas, where groundwater is being replenished, to a
discharge area along a stream where groundwater
is flowing back to the surface. Discharge also occurs
at springs, lakes, or wetlands, and in coastal areas, as
groundwater seeps into bays or the ocean. Transpiration
by plants whose roots extend to near the water table is
another form of groundwater discharge. Wells, where
groundwater is being pumped to the surface, are
artificial discharge areas.

The force that moves groundwater is gravity. In
response to gravity, water moves from areas where the
water table is high to zones where the water table is
lower. Although some water takes the most direct path
down the slope of the water table, much of the water follows long, curving paths.
Figure 17.11 shows water percolating into a stream
from all possible directions. Some paths clearly turn
upward, apparently against the force of gravity, and enter
through the bottom of the channel. This is easily explained:
The deeper you go into the zone of saturation, the greater
the water pressure. Thus, the looping curves followed by
water in the saturated zone may be thought of as a compromise between the downward pull of gravity and the
Figure 17.10
Underground rivers—a
common misconception
Although subsurface
channels of flowing water
occasionally occur, such as
this one in France, they are
rare. (Photo by Michael Collier)

510

CHAPTER 17

Groundwater

Figure 17.11
Groundwater movement
Arrows show paths of
groundwater movement
through uniformly permeable material.

Recharge
area
Recharge
area
Discharge
area

Discharge
area
Water
table

The looping flow lines result from the downward pull of
gravity and the tendency of groundwater to move toward
areas of reduced pressure.

Figure 17.12
Hydraulic gradient The
hydraulic gradient is determined by measuring the
difference in elevation
between two points on
the water table (h1 2 h2)
divided by the distance
between them, d. Wells
are used to determine the
height of the water table.

Wells

h1
h1 – h2
h2
d
Hydraulic gradient =

h1 – h2
d

Water table

tendency of water to move toward areas of reduced pressure. As a result, water at any given height is under greater
pressure beneath a hill than beneath a stream channel, and
the water tends to migrate toward points of lower pressure.

Measuring Groundwater Movement
The foundations of our modern understanding of
groundwater movement began in the mid-nineteenth
century with the work of the French scientist-engineer
SmartFigure 17.13
Hypothetical groundwater
flow system The diagram
includes subsystems at
three different scales.
Variations in surface topography and subsurface
geology can produce a
complex situation. The horizontal scale of the figure
could range from tens to
hundreds of kilometers.

Henri Darcy. One of the experiments Darcy carried out showed that the velocity of groundwater
flow is proportional to the slope of the water table:
The steeper the slope, the faster the water moves
(because the steeper the slope, the greater the pressure difference between two points). The water table
slope is known as the hydraulic gradient and can be
expressed as follows:
hydraulic gradient 5 h12h2
d
where h1 is the elevation of one point on the water table,
h2 is the elevation of a second point, and d is the horizontal distance between the two points (Figure 17.12).
Darcy also experimented with different materials,
such as coarse sand and fine sand, by measuring the rate
of flow through sediment-filled tubes that were tilted at
varying angles. He found that flow velocity varied with
the permeability of the sediment: Groundwater flows
more rapidly through sediments having greater permeability than through materials having lower permeability.
This factor is known as hydraulic conductivity and is a
coefficient that takes into account the permeability of the
aquifer and the viscosity of the fluid.
To determine discharge (Q)—that is, the actual volume of water that flows through an aquifer in a specified
time—the following equation is used:
Q 5 KA(h12h2)
d
_TT61


h12h2
where d
is the hydraulic gradient, K is the coefficient that represents hydraulic conductivity, and A is the
cross-sectional area of the aquifer. This expression has
come to be called Darcy’s law, in honor of the pioneering French scientist-engineer. Using this equation, if
you know an aquifer’s hydraulic gradient, conductivity,
and cross-sectional area, you can calculate its discharge.

Stream
Major
river

Lake

Lake

(https://goo.gl/3GYAlI)

Explanation
High hydraulic-conductivity aquifer
Low hydraulic-conductivity aquitard
Water table

Groundwater movement in
near-surface local systems
Groundwater movement in
a subregional system
Groundwater movement in
a deep regional system

Different Scales of
Movement
The geographic extent of
groundwater flow systems
varies from a few square
kilometers or less to tens of
thousands of square kilometers. The length of flow paths
ranges from a few meters to
tens and sometimes hundreds
of kilometers. Figure 17.13 is a
cross section of a hypothetical region in which a deep
groundwater flow system is
overlain by and connected
to several, more shallow
local flow systems. The subsurface geology exhibits a
complicated arrangement

17.5 Wells and Artesian Systems

E Y E ON E A R T H

17.2

NEBRASKA

REPUBLICAN RIVER BASIN

T

he drainage basin of the Republican River
occupies portions of Colorado, Nebraska,
and Kansas. A significant part of the basin is
considered semiarid. In 1943, the three states made
a legal agreement regarding sharing the river’s water.
In 1998, Kansas went to court to force farmers in
southern Nebraska to substantially reduce the amount
of groundwater used for irrigation. Nebraska officials
claimed that the farmers were not taking water from the
Republican River and thus were not violating the 1943
agreement. The court ruled in favor of Kansas.

COLORADO

KANSAS

0

100 miles

QUESTION 1 Explain why the court ruled that
groundwater in southern Nebraska should be
considered part of the Republican River system.
QUESTION 2 How might heavy irrigation in a drainage
basin influence the flow of a river?

Michael Collier

of high-hydraulic-conductivity aquifer units and lowhydraulic-conductivity aquitard units.
Starting near the top of Figure 17.13, the blue arrows
represent water movement in several local groundwater systems that occur in the upper water table aquifer.
The groundwater systems are separated by groundwater
divides at the center of the hills, and they discharge
into the nearest surface water body. Beneath these most
shallow systems, red arrows show water movement in a
somewhat deeper system in which groundwater does not
discharge into the nearest surface water body but into a
more distant one. Finally, the black arrows show groundwater movement in a deep regional system that lies
beneath the more shallow ones and is connected to them.

17.5

The horizontal scale of the figure could range from tens
to hundreds of kilometers.

17.4

Concept Checks

1. What factors cause water to follow the paths
shown in Figure 17.11?
2. Relate groundwater movement to hydraulic
gradient and hydraulic conductivity.
3. Contrast groundwater movement in a nearsurface local system with that in a deep regional
system.

Wells and Artesian Systems
Discuss water wells and their relationship to the water table. Sketch and label a
simple artesian system.

According to the National Groundwater Association, there are more than 16 million water wells for
all purposes in the United States. Private household wells constitute the largest share—more than
13 million. About 500,000 new residential wells are drilled each year.

Wells
The most common method for removing groundwater
is to use a well, a hole bored into the zone of saturation
(Figure 17.14). Wells serve as small reservoirs into which

groundwater migrates and from which it can be pumped
to the surface. The use of wells dates back many centuries and continues to be an important method of obtaining water today. Groundwater is the principal source of

511

512

CHAPTER 17

Groundwater

Figure 17.14
Wells Wells are the most
common means by which
people obtain groundwater.
(Top photo by Shutterstock; bottom
photo by ASP/YPP/AGE Fotostock)

drinking water for about 50 percent of the U.S. population and provides about 96 percent of the water used for
rural domestic supplies.
The water table level may fluctuate considerably
during the course of a year, dropping during dry periods
and rising following wet periods. Therefore, to ensure a
continuous supply of water, a well must penetrate below
the water table. Whenever substantial water is withdrawn
SmartFigure 17.15

Site of new
high-capacity
well

Cone of depression For
most small domestic wells,
the cone of depression is
negligible. When wells are
heavily pumped, the cone
of depression can be large
and may lower the water
table such that nearby shallower wells may be left dry.

Well

(https://goo.gl/nupO6m)

Before
heavy
pumping

Dry well

After
heavy
pumping

from a well, the water table around the well may be
lowered. This effect, termed drawdown, decreases
with increasing distance from the well. The result
is a depression in the water table, roughly conical in
shape, known as a cone of depression (Figure 17.15).
Because the cone of depression increases the hydraulic gradient near the well, groundwater will flow more
rapidly toward the opening. For most small domestic
wells, the cone of depression is negligible. However,
when wells are heavily pumped for irrigation or for
industrial purposes, the withdrawal of water can be
great enough to create a very wide and steep cone of
depression. This may substantially lower the water
table in an area and cause nearby shallow wells to
become dry. Figure 17.15 illustrates this situation.
Digging a successful well is a familiar challenge
for people in areas where groundwater is the primary
source of supply. One well may be successful at a
depth of 10 meters (33 feet), whereas a neighbor may
have to go twice as deep to find an adequate supply.
Still others may be forced to go deeper or try a different site altogether. When subsurface materials are
heterogeneous, the amount of water that a well can
provide may vary a great deal over short distances.
For example, when two nearby wells are drilled to
the same level and only one is successful, it may be
because there is a perched water table beneath one
of them. As Figure 17.16 illustrates, a perched water table
forms where an aquitard is situated above the main water
table. Massive igneous and metamorphic rocks provide a
second example. These crystalline rocks are usually not
very permeable, except where they are cut by many intersecting joints and fractures. Therefore, when a well drilled
into such rock does not intersect an adequate network of
fractures, it is likely to be unproductive.

Artesian Systems

In most wells, water cannot rise without the use
of pumps. If water is first encountered at a
Well
depth of 30 meters (100 feet), it remains
at that level, fluctuating perhaps 1 or 2
meters (3 to 6 feet) with seasonal wet
and dry periods. However, in some
Water table
wells, water rises, sometimes overflowing at the surface. Such wells are abundant in the Artois region of northern
France, and so we call these self-rising
wells artesian.
The term artesian is applied
Dry well
to any situation in which
groundwater under pressure
rises above the level of the
ion
Con
s
aquifer. For an artesian syss
eo
pre
f
tem to exist, two conditions
de
Lowered water table
usually are met (Figure 17.17):
(1) Water is confined to an

aquifer that is inclined so that
one end can receive water,
The perched water
A natural outflow of water
and (2) aquitards, both above
table allowed this well
called a spring forms
to be successful.
where the perched water
and below the aquifer, must
table intersects the slope.
be present to prevent the
water from escaping. Such an
aquifer is called a confined
aquifer. When such a layer is
tapped, the pressure created
by the weight of the water
above will force the water to
Aquitard
rise. If there were no friction,
the water in the well would
When an aquitard occurs above the
Main water table
rise to the level of the water
main water table, it intercepts
downward percolating water creating
at the top of the aquifer.
a localized zone of saturation and a
However, friction reduces the
perched water table.
height of the pressure sursurface by rising along a natural fracture such as a fault
face. The greater the distance
rather than through an artificially produced hole. In
from the recharge area (where water enters the inclined
deserts, artesian springs are sometimes responsible for
aquifer), the greater the friction and the less the rise of
creating oases.
water.
Artesian systems act as conduits, often transmitting
In Figure 17.17, well 1 is a nonflowing artesian
water great distances from remote areas of recharge to
well because at this location, the pressure surface
points of discharge. A well-known artesian system in
is below ground level. When the pressure surface is
above the ground and a well is drilled into the aquifer,
a flowing artesian well is created (well 2 in Figure
17.17). Not all artesian systems are wells. Artesian
springs also exist. Here groundwater may reach the

a
are
rge
ha
Re
c

Flowing
artesian well
Pr es su re su rfa ce

#2

Aquitard
Confined
aquifer

Recharge
area

Nonflowing artesian well
(water must be pumped from
pressure surface to land surface)

Pressure
surface
Flowing
artesian well

Pressure
surface

Figure 17.16
Perched water table

SmartFigure 17.17
Artesian systems These
groundwater systems occur
where an inclined aquifer
is surrounded by impermeable beds (aquitards). Such
aquifers are called confined
aquifers. The photo shows
a flowing artesian well.
(Photo by James E. Patterson)
(https://goo.gl/yVJhLE)

Nonflowing
artesian well

#1

513

17.5 Wells and Artesian Systems

This well was unsuccessful
because it missed the
perched water table and
was not deep enough to
reach the main water table.

Aquitard

514

CHAPTER 17

Figure 17.18

and gradually dips into the ground toward the east.
When the aquifer was first tapped, water poured from
the ground surface, creating fountains many meters
high. In some places the force
Missouri
of the water was sufficient
Area of flowing artesian wells
River
to power waterwheels.
Cretaceous Shale Confining Layer
ca
Such scenes no longer
u l stl
lC eS
occur because thousands
a
ree nds
Dakota
to
Co
kS
h ale n e
Sandstone
nfi
of additional wells now tap
nin
ad
g La
is o
the same aquifer. This has
yer
le
nG
oz
Precambrian
roup
depleted the reservoir and
oic
Crystalline
Roc
k
s
lowered the water table in
Rocks
0
100 Miles
the recharge area. As a con0
100 Kilometers
SOUTH
sequence, the pressure has
DAKOTA
dropped to the point where
Missouri River
South Dakota is a good many wells have stopped flowing altogether and now
have to be pumped.
example of this (Figure
W
E
On a different scale, city water systems can be
17.18). In the western
considered examples of artificial artesian systems
part of the state, the
(Figure 17.19). The water tower, into which water is
edges of a series of
pumped, would represent the area of recharge, the
sedimentary layers
have been bent up to the surface along the flanks of the pipes the confined aquifer, and the faucets in homes
the flowing artesian wells.
Black Hills. One of these beds, the permeable Dakota
Sandstone, is sandwiched between impermeable strata
Recharge
area

dis

w
Ne Sk

Ma

A classic artesian
system This geologic
cross section across South
Dakota shows the major
elements of the Dakota
Sandstone artesian system.

Black
Hills

on

M

Pa

17.5

Figure 17.19

Concept Checks

Water tank

City water systems City
water systems can be
considered artificial artesian systems.

1. Define drawdown and relate this to cone of
depression.
Pressure surface
(level to which water
will rise)
_TT62


Water is
pumped
into
tank

2. In Figure 17.16, two wells are drilled to the same
depth. Why was one successful and the
other not?
3. Sketch a simple cross section of an artesian
system with a flowing well. Label aquitards,
aquifers, and the pressure surface.

Well

4. Why do some artesian wells not flow at Earth’s
surface?

Pressure moves
water through pipe

E Y E ON E A R T H

17.3

In 1900, when this well was drilled near Woonsocket in
eastern South Dakota, a “gusher” of water resulted. The
stream of water from a 3-inch pipe reached a height of
nearly 30 meters (100 feet). Thousands of additional
wells now tap the same aquifer. (Photo by N.H. Darton/USGS)
QUESTION 1 Describe or sketch the subsurface geologic
situation that was responsible for this fountain of water.
QUESTION 2 What term is applied to a well such as this?
QUESTION 3 Today wells that tap this aquifer do not flow
freely at the surface but must be pumped. Suggest a
likely reason.

515

17.6 Springs, Hot Springs, and Geysers

17.6

Springs, Hot Springs, and Geysers
Distinguish among springs, hot springs, and geysers.

The phenomena described in this section often arouse people’s curiosity and wonder. The fact that
springs, hot springs, and geysers seem rather mysterious is not difficult to understand, for here is
water (sometimes very hot water) flowing or spewing from the ground in all kinds of weather, in
seemingly inexhaustible supply, but with no obvious source.

Springs

Figure 17.20

Not until the middle of
the seventeenth century
did the French physicist
Pierre Perrault invalidate
the age-old assumption
that precipitation could
not adequately account
for the amount of water
emanating from springs
and flowing in rivers.
Over several years, Perrault computed the
quantity of water that fell
on France’s Seine River
basin. He then calculated
the mean annual runoff
by measuring the river’s
discharge. After allowing
for the loss of water by
evaporation, he showed
that there was sufficient
water remaining to feed
the springs. Thanks to Perrault’s pioneering efforts and
the measurements by many afterward, we now know that
the source of springs is water from the zone of saturation
and that the ultimate source of this water is precipitation.
Whenever the water table intersects Earth’s surface,
a natural outflow of groundwater results, and we call this
a spring. Springs often form when an aquitard blocks the
downward movement of groundwater and causes the water
to move laterally. Where the permeable bed crops out, a
spring results. Another example is illustrated in Figure
17.16, which shows a perched water table intersecting a
slope.
Springs, however, are not confined
to places where a perched water table
creates a flow at the surface. Many geologic situations lead to the formation of
springs because subsurface conditions
vary greatly from place to place. Even in
areas underlain by impermeable crystalline rocks, permeable zones may exist in
the form of fractures or solution channels. If these openings fill with water
and intersect the ground surface along a
slope, a spring results (Figure 17.20).

Thunder Spring A spring is
a natural outflow of groundwater that occurs when the
water table intersects the
surface. Thunder Spring
emerges from a deep joint
and cave system in the
Muav limestone along the
North Rim of the Grand
Canyon. (Photo by Michael Collier)

Hot Springs
There is no universally accepted definition of hot spring.
One frequently used definition is that the water in a hot
spring is 6°–9°C (10°–15°F) warmer than the mean
annual air temperature for the locality where it occurs
(Figure 17.21). In the United States alone, there are more
than 1000 such springs.
Temperatures in deep mines and oil wells usually
rise with increasing depth, an average of about 25°C
(45°F) per kilometer. You learned in Chapter 4 that
this is called the geothermal gradient. Therefore, when
Figure 17.21
Hot spring Many hot
springs, including this one
in Iceland, are associated
with areas that have experienced recent igneous
activity. (Photo by Andre Hasson/
Alamy Images)

516

CHAPTER 17

Groundwater

Figure 17.22

Geysers

Yellowstone National Park

Distribution of hot springs
and geysers Note the
concentration in the West,
where igneous activity has
been most recent.

0

400 mi
0

400 km

Hot Springs,
Arkansas

Warm Springs,
Georgia

groundwater circulates at great depths, it becomes
heated. If the hot water rises rapidly to the surface,
it may emerge as a hot spring. The water of some hot
springs in the eastern United States is heated in this
manner. The springs at Warm Springs, Georgia, the presidential retreat of Franklin Roosevelt, are one example.
The temperature of these hot springs is always near 32°C
(90°F). At Hot Springs National Park, Arkansas, water
temperatures average about 60°C (140°F).
The great majority (more than 95 percent) of the hot
springs (and geysers) in the United States are found in the
West. A glance at Figure 17.22 reinforces this fact. This is
because the heat sources for most hot springs are magma
bodies and hot igneous rocks, and igneous activity has
occurred more recently in the West than in the rest of the
country. The hot springs and geysers of the Yellowstone
region are well-known examples.
Figure 17.23
Old Faithful This geyser
in Wyoming’s Yellowstone
National Park is one of the
most famous in the world.
Contrary to popular legend,
it does not erupt every hour
on the hour. Time spans
between eruptions vary
from about 65 minutes to
more than 90 minutes and
have generally increased
over the years due to
changes in the geyser’s
plumbing. (Photo by Jeff
Vanuga/Corbis)

Geysers are intermittent hot springs or fountains in
which columns of water are ejected with great force at
various intervals, often rising 30 to 60 meters (100 to 200
feet) into the air. After the jet of water ceases, a column
of steam rushes out, usually with a thunderous roar. Perhaps the most famous geyser in the world is Old Faithful
in Yellowstone National Park (Figure 17.23). The great
abundance, diversity, and spectacular nature of geysers
and other thermal features in Yellowstone undoubtedly
was the primary reason for its becoming the first national
park in the United States. Geysers are also found in other
parts of the world, notably New Zealand and Iceland. In
fact, the Icelandic word geysa, meaning “to gush,” gives
us the name geyser.

How Geysers Work Geysers occur where extensive
underground chambers exist within hot igneous rocks.
How they operate is shown in Figure 17.24. As relatively
cool groundwater enters these chambers, it is heated
by the surrounding rock. At the bottom of the chambers, the water is under great pressure because of
the weight of the overlying water. This great pressure
prevents the water from boiling at the normal surface
temperature of 100°C (212°F). For example, water
at the bottom of a 300-meter (1000-foot) water-filled
chamber must attain nearly 230°C (450°F) before it
will boil. The heating causes the water to expand, and
as a result, some is forced out at the surface. This loss
of water reduces the pressure on the remaining water
in the chamber, which lowers the boiling point. A portion of the water deep within the chamber quickly
turns to steam, and the geyser erupts. Following eruption, cool groundwater again seeps into the chamber,
and the cycle begins anew.

Geyser Deposits When groundwater from hot springs
and geysers flows out at the surface, material in solution is often precipitated, producing an accumulation of
chemical sedimentary rock. The material deposited at
any given place commonly reflects the chemical makeup
of the rock through which the water circulated. When
the water contains dissolved silica, a material called
siliceous sinter, or geyserite, is deposited around
the spring. When the water contains dissolved calcium carbonate, a form of
limestone called travertine, or calcareous tufa, is deposited. The latter
term is used if the material is spongy
and porous.
The deposits at Mammoth Hot
Springs in Yellowstone National Park
are more spectacular than most others (Figure 17.25). As the hot water
flows upward through a series of
channels and then out at the surface,

517

17.6 Springs, Hot Springs, and Geysers
A. Water near the bottom is heated to near its boiling point.
The boiling point is higher at the bottom because pressure
is high due to the weight of all the water above.

Water table

C. When pressure is reduced at the bottom, boiling occurs.
Some of the bottom water flashes into steam. The expanding
steam triggers an eruption. Then the water flows back in and
the whole process begins anew.

Geyser
eruption

Cavern

SmartFigure 17.24
How a geyser works A
geyser can form if the
underground plumbing
does not allow heat to
be readily distributed by
convection. (https://goo.gl/qzYxyy)

Warm
rocks
Heat flow
Empty
chambers

B. Higher up in the geyser the water is also heated, therefore it
expands causing some to flow out at the top. This outflow
reduces the pressure on the water at the bottom.

Heat flow

springs contain sulfur, which gives water a poor taste and
unpleasant odor. This is undoubtedly the case at Rotten
Egg Spring, Nevada.

Outflow
Steam
Steam

17.6

Concept Checks

1. Describe some circumstances that lead to the
formation of a spring.

Steam
Heat flow

the reduced pressure allows carbon dioxide to separate
and escape from the water. The loss of carbon dioxide
causes the water to become supersaturated with calcium
carbonate, which then precipitates. In addition to containing dissolved silica and calcium carbonate, some hot

2. What warms the waters that flow at Hot Springs
National Park, Arkansas, and at Warm Springs,
Georgia?
3. What is the source of heat for most hot springs
and geysers? How is this reflected in the
distribution of these features?
4. Describe what occurs to cause a geyser to erupt.

Figure 17.25
Yellowstone’s Mammoth
Hot Springs Although
most of the deposits associated with geysers and
hot springs in Yellowstone
National Park are silicarich geyserite, the deposits
here consist of a form of
limestone called travertine.
(Photo by Jamie and Judy Wild/
Danita Delimont/Alamy)

518

CHAPTER 17

Groundwater

Environmental Problems

17.7

List and discuss important environmental problems associated with groundwater.

Like many of our other valuable natural resources, groundwater is being exploited at an increasing rate. In some areas, overuse threatens the groundwater supply. In other places, groundwater
withdrawal has caused the ground and everything resting on it to sink. Still other localities are concerned with possible contamination of the groundwater supply.

Mining Groundwater
Many natural systems tend to establish a condition of
equilibrium. The groundwater system is no exception.
The water table’s height reflects a balance between the
rate of recharge and the rate of discharge and withdrawal.
Any imbalance will either raise or lower the water table.
Long-term imbalances can lead to a significant drop in
the water table if there is either a decrease in recharge
due to prolonged drought or an increase in groundwater
discharge or withdrawal (see GEOgraphics 17.1).
Because of its high porosity, excellent permeability, and
great size, the High Plains aquifer, the largest in the United
States, accumulated enough freshwater to fill Lake Huron.
SOUTH DAKOTA

WYOMING

No
rth

NEBRASKA

Pla
tte
Riv
er

Plat
te

Rive

r

Platt

e River

u th

Republi
ca
n

Ri
v

er

High Plains aquifer The
map shows changes in
groundwater levels from
predevelopment (about
1950) to 2013. Extensive
pumping for irrigation has
led to water level declines
in excess of 30 meters
(100 feet) in parts of four
states. Water level rises have
occurred where surface
water is used for irrigation,
such as along the Platte
River in Nebraska. (Based on

So

Figure 17.26

U.S. Geological Survey)

KANSAS

COLORADO

Arka
nsas

R i ver

Canadian

OKLAHOMA
_TT63


Many believe that groundwater is an endlessly
renewable resource because it is continually replenished by rainfall and melting snow. But in some regions,
groundwater has been and continues to be treated as a
nonrenewable resource. Where this occurs, the water
available to recharge the aquifer falls significantly short
of the amount being withdrawn.
The High Plains aquifer provides one example
(Figure 17.26). Underlying about 111 million acres
(450,000 square kilometers [174,000 square miles]) in
parts of eight western states, it is one of the largest and
most agriculturally significant aquifers in the United
States. It accounts for about 30 percent of all groundwater withdrawn for irrigation in the country. Mean annual
precipitation on the High Plains is modest—ranging
from about 40 centimeters (16 inches) in western portions to about 71 centimeters (28 inches) in eastern
parts. Evaporation rates, on the other hand, are high—
ranging from about 150 centimeters (60 inches) in the
cooler northern parts of the region to 265 centimeters
(105 inches) in the warmer southern parts. Because
evaporation rates are high relative to precipitation, there
is little rainwater to recharge the aquifer. Thus, in some
parts of the region where intense irrigation has been
practiced for an extended period, groundwater depletion
has been severe. Figure 17.26 bears this out. The U.S.
Geological Survey estimates that since 1950, water storage in the High Plains aquifer has declined about 267
million acre feet (about 87 trillion gallons), with 60 percent of the total decline having occurred in Texas.

EXPLANATION
Water-level change, in feet
Declines
More than 150
100 to 150
50 to 100
25 to 50
10 to 25
5 to 10
No substantial change
–5 to +5
Rises
5 to 10
10 to 25
25 to 50
More than 50

Subsidence

As you will see later in this chapter, surface subsidence can result from natural processes related to
groundwater. However, the ground may also sink
when water is pumped from wells faster than natuNEW MEXICO
ral recharge processes can replace it. This effect
is particularly pronounced in areas underlain by
thick layers of unconsolidated sediments. As the
TEXAS
water is withdrawn, the water pressure drops, and
the weight of the overburden is transferred to the
0
50
100 miles
sediment. The greater pressure packs the sediment
0 50 100 kilometers
grains tightly together, and the ground subsides.
The U. S. Geological Survey estimates that during the past 60
Many areas illustrate land subsidence caused by
years, water in storage in the High Plains aquifer declined by about excessive pumping of groundwater from relatively
267 million acre feet (about 87 trillion gallons) with 60 percent of
loose sediment. A classic U.S. example occurred in
the total decline occurring in Texas.
R i v er

CHAPTER 17

Groundwater

Level of land
before heavy
groundwater
pumping began

Figure 17.27

y

e
Vall
uin
Joaq

courtesy of U.S. Geological Survey)

San

That sinking feeling! The
San Joaquin Valley, an
important agricultural area,
relies heavily on irrigation. Between 1925 and
1975, this part of the valley
subsided almost 9 meters
(30 feet) because of the
withdrawal of groundwater
and the resulting compaction of sediments. (Photo

9 meters (30 feet)

520

of southern Arizona (Figure 17.28); Las Vegas,
Nevada; New Orleans and Baton Rouge, Louisiana; and the Houston–Galveston area of Texas.
In the low-lying coastal area between Houston
and Galveston, land subsidence ranges from 1.5
to 3 meters (5 to 10 feet). The result is that an area
of about 78 square kilometers (30 square miles) is
permanently flooded.
Outside the United States, one of the most
spectacular examples of subsidence occurred
in Mexico City, a portion of which is built on a
former lake bed. In the first half of the twentieth century, thousands of wells were sunk into
the water-saturated sediments beneath the city.
As water was withdrawn, portions of the city
subsided by as much as 6 to 7 meters (20 to 23
feet). In some places buildings have sunk to such
a point that access to them from the street is
located at what used to be the second-floor level!

Saltwater Intrusion

Figure 17.28
Land subsidence in
south-central Arizona In
southern Arizona, heavy
pumping has led to
water table declines of
up to 180 meters (600
feet). This has triggered
extensive and uneven
permanent compaction of sediments and
the formation of large
fissures (cracks) in
the ground around the
margins of subsiding
basins. Some rural roads
have signs that warn of
the potential hazard.
(Photo by Todd Shipman/
Arizona Geological Survey)

In many coastal areas, the groundwater
resource is being threatened by the encroachLevel of land
ment of saltwater. To understand this problem,
after 52 years
let us examine the relationship between fresh
of heavy
groundwater and salty groundwater. Figure
pumping
17.29 shows a cross section that illustrates
this relationship in a coastal area underlain
the San Joaquin Valley of California, where subsidence
by permeable homogeneous materials. Freshwater is
approached 9 meters (30 feet) in some areas (Figure 17.27).
less dense than saltwater, so it floats on the saltwater
Many other cases of land subsidence due to groundwater
and forms a large lens-shaped body that may extend to
pumping exist in the United States, including in portions
considerable depths below sea level. In such a
situation, if the water table is 1 meter (3 feet)
above sea level, the base of the freshwater
body will extend to a depth of about 40 meters
(130 feet) below sea level. Stated another way,
the depth of the freshwater below sea level is
about 40 times greater than the elevation of
the water table above sea level. Thus, when
excessive pumping lowers the water table by a
certain amount, the bottom of the freshwater
zone will rise by 40 times that amount. Therefore, if groundwater withdrawal continues to
exceed recharge, at some point, the elevation of
the saltwater will be sufficiently high that the
saltwater will be drawn into wells, thus contaminating the freshwater supply. This is called
saltwater intrusion or saltwater contamination.
Deep wells and wells near the shore are usually
the first to be affected.
In urbanized coastal areas, the problems
created by excessive pumping are compounded
by a decrease in the rate of natural recharge.
As more and more of the surface is covered
by streets, parking lots, and buildings, surface
runoff increases and infiltration into the soil is
diminished.

521

17.7 Environmental Problems
If excessive pumping lowers the water table, the base of
the freshwater zone will rise 40 times that amount. The
result may be saltwater contamination of wells.

Because freshwater is less dense than saltwater, it floats on
the saltwater and forms a lens-shaped body that may extend
to considerable depths below sea level.

Pumped
well

Pumped
well Water table

Ocean

Cone of
depression

Figure 17.29
Saltwater intrusion Heavy
pumping in coastal areas
can cause encroachment of saltwater and
threaten the supply of fresh
groundwater.

Ocean

Fresh
groundwater

Fresh
groundwater

Salt groundwater

Salt groundwater

One way to correct the problem of saltwater intrusion
of groundwater resources is to use a network of recharge
wells. These wells allow wastewater to be pumped back
into the groundwater system. A second method of correction is accomplished by building large recharge basins.
These basins collect surface drainage and allow it to seep
into the ground. On New York’s Long Island, where the
problem of saltwater intrusion was recognized more than
50 years ago, both of these methods have been employed
with considerable success (Figure 17.30).
Contamination of freshwater aquifers by saltwater
is primarily a problem in coastal areas, but it can also
threaten noncoastal locations. Many ancient sedimentary rocks of marine origin were deposited when the
ocean covered places that are now far inland. In some
instances, significant amounts of seawater were trapped
and still remain in the rock. These strata sometimes
contain quantities of freshwater that people may pump.
However, if freshwater is
removed more rapidly than
it is replenished, saline water
may encroach and render
the wells unusable. Such a
situation threatened users of
a deep (Cambrian age) sandstone aquifer in the Chicago
area. To counteract this,
water from Lake Michigan
was allocated to the affected
communities to offset the
rate of withdrawal from the
aquifer.
The storm water

Groundwater
Contamination
The pollution of groundwater
is a serious matter, particularly in areas where aquifers
provide a large part of the

water supply. One common source of groundwater pollution is sewage. Its sources include an ever-increasing
number of septic tanks, as well as inadequate or broken
sewer systems and farm wastes.
If sewage water that is contaminated with bacteria
enters the groundwater system, it may become purified
through natural processes. The harmful bacteria may be
mechanically filtered by the sediment through which the
water percolates, destroyed by chemical oxidation, and/or
assimilated by other organisms. For purification to occur,
however, the aquifer must be of the correct composition. For example, extremely permeable aquifers (such
as highly fractured crystalline rock, coarse gravel, or
cavernous limestone) have such large openings that contaminated groundwater may travel long distances without
being filtered and cleansed. In this case, the water flows
too rapidly and is not in contact with the surrounding

system is
connected to the
recharge basin.
Following rains,
Unsaturated
water collects in
soils
the basin and
slowly infiltrates
to the water table.

Figure 17.30
Recharge basins Much
of Long Island, New York,
is completely dependent
on groundwater. To help
maintain the water table
and prevent saltwater
intrusion, more than 2000
recharge basins have been
constructed. Recharge
basins are used in many
places, not just coastal
areas. (Photo by Alan Cressler)

Discharge pipe
Recharge
basin

Water table
mound

Infiltration through
unsaturated zone

522

CHAPTER 17

Figure 17.31
Comparing two aquifers In
this example, the limestone aquifer allowed the
contamination to reach a
well, but the sandstone
aquifer did not.

SmartFigure 17.32
Changing direction
Drawdown at the heavily
pumped well changed the
slope of the water table,
which led to the contamination of the small well.
(https://goo.gl/S06Vhx)

Groundwater
Although the contaminated water has traveled more than 100 meters slope may even be reversed. This could lead to the conbefore reaching Well 1, the water moves too rapidly through the
tamination of wells that yielded unpolluted water
cavernous limestone to be purified.

before heavy pumping began (Figure 17.32).
Also recall that the rate of groundwater
movement increases as the slope of the
water table gets steeper. This could
Septic produce problems because a faster
Contaminated
tank
rate of movement allows less time
Well 1 delivering
water
contaminated water
for the water to be purified in the
aquifer before it is pumped to the
surface.
Cavernous
limestone
Other sources and types of
Water
contamination
also threaten groundtable
eks
A.
Time: Days or we
water supplies (Figure 17.33). These include
widely used substances such as highway salt,
fertilizers that are spread across the land surface, and
As the discharge from the septic tank percolates through the
pesticides. In addition, a wide array of chemipermeable sandstone, it moves more slowly and is purified in
cals and industrial materials may leak
a relatively short distance.
from pipelines, storage tanks, landfills, and holding ponds. Some of
these pollutants are classified
as hazardous, meaning that
Septic
they are either flammable,
tank
Contaminated
Permeable
corrosive, explosive, or toxic.
Well 2 delivering
water
sandstone
clean water
In landfills, potential contaminants are heaped onto
mounds or spread directly
Water
over the ground. As rainwater
table
s
ar
ye
oozes
through the refuse, it
or
B.
Time: Months
may dissolve a variety of organic and
inorganic materials. If the leached material reaches the
material long enough for purification to occur. This is the water table, it will mix with the groundwater and contaminate the supply. Similar problems may result from leakage
problem at well 1 in Figure 17.31A.
of shallow excavations called holding ponds into which a
On the other hand, when the aquifer is composed of
variety of liquid wastes are disposed.
sand or permeable sandstone, it can sometimes be puriBecause groundwater movement is usually slow,
fied after traveling only a few dozen meters through it.
polluted water can go undetected for a long time. In
The openings between sand grains are large enough to
fact, contamination is sometimes discovered only
permit water movement, yet the movement of the water
after drinking water has been affected and people
is slow enough to allow ample time for its purification
become ill. By this time, the volume of polluted water
(well 2, Figure 17.31B).
may be very large, and even if the source of contamiSometimes sinking a well can lead to groundwater
nation is removed immediately, the problem is not
pollution problems. If the well pumps a sufficient quantity
solved. Although the sources of groundwater contamiof water, the cone of depression will locally increase the
nation are numerous, there are relatively few solutions.
slope of the water table. In some instances, the original
Originally the outflow from the septic tank moved away
from the small well.

The heavily pumped well changed the slope of the water
table, causing contaminated groundwater to flow toward
the small well.
Irrigation

Well
Septic
tank
Groundwater
movement

Heavily
pumped well
Septic
tank
Groundwater
movement

523

17.8 The Geologic Work of Groundwater

Figure 17.33
Potential sources of
contamination Sometimes
materials leached from
landfills and leaking gasoline storage tanks contaminate an aquifer. (Landfill photo
by Deposit Photos/Glow Images;
storage tank photo by Earth Gallery
environment/Alamy)

Once the source of the problem has been identified
and eliminated, the most common practice is simply to
abandon the water supply and allow the pollutants to
be flushed away gradually. This is the least costly and
easiest solution, but the aquifer must remain unused for
many years. To accelerate this process, polluted water is
sometimes pumped out and treated. Following removal
of the tainted water, the aquifer is allowed to recharge
naturally, or in some cases the treated water or other
freshwater is pumped back in. This process is costly,
time-consuming, and may be risky because there is no
way to be certain that all of the contamination has been
removed. Clearly, the most effective solution to groundwater contamination is prevention.

17.8

17.7

Concept Checks

1. Describe the problem associated with pumping
groundwater for irrigation in the southern High
Plains.
2. Explain why ground may subside after
groundwater is pumped to the surface.
3. Which aquifer would be most effective in purifying
polluted groundwater: coarse gravel, sand, or
cavernous limestone?
4. Describe a significant problem that may arise when
groundwater is heavily pumped at a coastal site.

The Geologic Work of Groundwater
Explain the formation of caverns and the development of karst topography.

Groundwater dissolves rock. This fact is key to understanding how caverns and sinkholes form
(Figure 17.34). Soluble rocks, especially limestone, underlie millions of square kilometers of Earth’s
surface, and it is in these rocks that groundwater carries on its important role as an erosional agent.
Limestone is nearly insoluble in pure water but is quite easily dissolved by water containing small
quantities of carbonic acid, and most groundwater contains this acid. It forms because rainwater
readily dissolves carbon dioxide from
the air and from decaying plants.
SmartFigure 17.34
When groundwater comes in contact
Kentucky’s Mammoth Cave
with limestone, the carbonic acid
area Portions of Kentucky
are underlain by limestone.
reacts with the calcite (calcium carDissolution by groundwater has
bonate) in the rocks to form calcium
created a landscape characterbicarbonate, a soluble material that is
ized by caves and sinkholes.
(Photo by Michael Collier)
then carried away in solution.
(http://goo.gl/jsqQfh)

Caverns
The most spectacular results of groundwater’s
erosional handiwork are limestone caverns.
In the United States alone, about 17,000 caves
have been discovered, and more are being
found every year. Although most are relatively

524

CHAPTER 17

Groundwater

Figure 17.35
Cave decorations
Speleothems are of many
types, including stalactites,
stalagmites, and columns.
A. Close-up of a delicate
live soda-straw stalactite
in Chinn Springs Cave,
Independence County,
Arkansas. (Photo by Dante
Fenolio/Science Source) B.
Stalagmites and stalactites
in New Mexico’s Carlsbad
Caverns National Park.
(Photo by Deposit Photos/Glow
Images)

A.

small, some have spectacular dimensions.
Mammoth Cave in Kentucky and Carlsbad
Caverns in southeastern New Mexico are
famous examples. The Mammoth Cave system
is the most extensive in the world, with more
B.
than 540 kilometers (335 miles) of interconnected passages. The dimensions at Carlsbad
Caverns are impressive in a different way. Here we find the
largest and perhaps most spectacular single chamber. The
Big Room at Carlsbad Caverns has an area equivalent to 14
football fields and enough height to accommodate the U.S.
Capitol building.

Cavern Development Most caverns are created at or
just below the water table, in the zone of saturation. Here
acidic groundwater follows lines of weakness in the rock,
such as joints and bedding planes. As time passes, the
dissolving process slowly creates cavities and gradually
enlarges them into caverns. Material that is dissolved by
the groundwater is eventually discharged into streams
and carried to the ocean.
In many cases, cavern development has occurred at
several levels, with the current cavern-forming activity
occurring at the lowest elevation. This situation reflects
the close relationship between the formation of major
subterranean passages and the river valleys into which

they drain. As streams cut their valleys deeper, the
water table drops as the elevation of the river drops.
Consequently, during periods when surface streams are
rapidly downcutting, surrounding groundwater levels
drop rapidly, and cave passages are abandoned by the
water while the passages are still relatively small in
cross-sectional area. Conversely, when the entrenchment of streams is slow or negligible, there is time for
large cave passages to form.

How Dripstone Forms Certainly the features that
arouse the greatest curiosity for most cavern visitors are
the stone formations that give some caverns a wonderland appearance. These are not erosional features, like
the cavern itself, but depositional features created by the
seemingly endless dripping of water over great spans of
time. Recall from our discussion of hot springs that the
calcium carbonate left behind produces the limestone
we call travertine. These cave deposits, however, are also

17.8 The Geologic Work of Groundwater

commonly called dripstone, an obvious reference to their
mode of origin. Although the formation of caverns takes
place in the zone of saturation, the deposition of dripstone
is not possible until the caverns are above the water table
in the unsaturated zone. As soon as the chamber is filled
with air, the stage is set for the decoration phase of cavern
building to begin.
_TT64


525

Karst Topography
Many areas of the world have landscapes that, to a
large extent, have been shaped by the dissolving power
of groundwater. Such areas are said to exhibit karst
topography, named for the Krs Plateau in Slovenia,
located along the northeastern shore of the Adriatic Sea,
where such topography is strikingly developed. In the
United States, karst landscapes occur in many areas
that are underlain by limestone, including portions of
Kentucky, Tennessee, Alabama, southern Indiana, and
central and northern Florida (Figure 17.36). Generally,
arid and semiarid areas are too dry to develop karst
topography. When these features exist in such regions,
they are likely to be remnants of a time when rainier
conditions prevailed.

Dripstone Features—Speleothems The various
dripstone features found in caverns are collectively called
speleothems (spelation = cave, them = put), and no
two of them are exactly alike. Perhaps the most familiar
speleothems are stalactites (stalaktos = trickling). These
icicle-like pendants hang from the ceiling of a cavern
and form where water seeps through cracks above. When
the water reaches air in the cave, some of the dissolved
carbon dioxide escapes from the drop, and calcite preSinkholes Karst areas typically have irregular terrain
cipitates. Deposition occurs as a ring around the edge of
punctuated with many depressions, called sinkholes, or
the water drop. As drop after drop follows, each leaves
Figure 17.36
an infinitesimal trace
During early stages,
Development of a karst
of calcite behind, and a
groundwater percolandscape
lates through
hollow limestone tube
Sink holes
limestone along joints
Water
is created. Water then
and bedding planes.
table
moves through the tube, Solution activity
creates and enlarges
remains suspended
caverns at and below
momentarily at the end,
the water table.
Limestone
contributes a tiny ring
of calcite, and falls to
the cavern floor. The
T
stalactite just described
I
Sinking
stream
M
is appropriately called a
E
soda straw (Figure 17.35A). With time, caverns grow
Sink
Often the hollow tube of larger and the number and
holes
size of sinkholes increase.
the soda straw becomes
Surface drainage is
plugged, or its supply of
frequently funneled below
water increases. In either ground.
case, the water is forced
Water
table
to flow and hence deposit
Sinking
stream
along the outside of the
tube. As deposition continues, the stalactite takes
Sinking
on the more common
stream
conical shape.
Sink holes
Solution
Collapse of caverns and coalescence
Speleothems that
valley
of sinkholes form larger, flat-floored
form on the floor of
depressions. Eventually solution
a cavern and reach
activity may remove most of the
limestone from the area, leaving
upward toward the
Springs
isolated remnants as in Figure 17.38.
ceiling are called staCollapse
sink
lagmites (stalagmos
= dropping). The water supplying the calcite for stalagmite growth falls from the ceiling and splatters
over the surface. As a result, stalagmites do not have a
central tube and are usually more massive in appearWater
ance and rounded on their upper ends than stalactites.
table
Given enough time, a downward-growing stalactite
and an upward-growing stalagmite may join to form a
column (Figure 17.35B).

526

CHAPTER 17

Figure 17.37
Sinkholes Karst landscapes are typically punctuated with these depressions. The white spots in
the top photo are grazing
sheep. (Top photo by David Wall/
Alamy Images; bottom photo by AP
Photo/The Florida Times-Union,
Jon M. Fletcher)

Figure 17.38
Tower karst in China One
of the best-known and
most distinctive regions of
tower karst development
is along the Li River in the
Guilin District of southeastern China. The painting
“Peach Garden Land of
Immortals” clearly depicts
this distinctive landscape.
(Landscape photo Philippe Michel/
AGE Fotostock; painting photo by
Qiu Ying)

Groundwater

fractures grow in size, soil
subsides into the widening voids, from which it is
This small sinkhole formed suddenly
when the roof of a cavern collapsed,
removed by groundwater
eliminating the backyard of this house
flowing in the passages
in Lake City, Florida.
below. These depressions
are usually shallow and
have gentle slopes.
In contrast, sinkholes
can also form abruptly and
without warning when the
roof of a cavern collapses
under its own weight.
Typically, the depressions
sinks (Figure 17.37). In the limestone areas
created in this manner
of Florida, Kentucky, and southern Indiana,
are steep-sided and deep.
there are tens of thousands of these depresWhen they form in popusions, varying in depth from just 1 or 2
lous areas, they may repmeters (3 or 7 feet) to more than 50 meters
resent a serious geologic
(165 feet).
hazard. Such a situation is
Sinkholes commonly form in two
shown in the lower photo of
ways. Some develop gradually over many
Figure 17.37.
years, without any physical disturbance
In addition to a
to the rock. In these situations, the limesurface pockmarked by
stone immediately below the soil is dissinkholes, karst regions
solved by downward-sweeping rainwater that is freshly
characteristically show a striking lack of surface draincharged with carbon dioxide. With time, the bedrock
age (streams). Following rainfall, the runoff is quickly
surface is lowered,
funneled belowground through sinks. It then flows
and the fractures into
through caverns until it finally reaches the water table.
which the water seeps
Where streams do exist at the surface, their paths are
are enlarged. As the
usually short. The names of such streams often give
Groundwater was responsible for creating these sinkholes
west of Timaru on New Zealand’s South Island.

17.8 The Geologic Work of Groundwater

a clue to their fate. In the Mammoth Cave area of
Kentucky, for example, there is Sinking Creek, Little
Sinking Creek, and Sinking Branch. Some sinkholes
become plugged with clay and debris, creating small
lakes or ponds.

Tower Karst Some regions of karst development
exhibit landscapes that look very different from the
sinkhole-studded terrain depicted in Figure 17.36.
One striking example is an extensive region in southern China that is described as exhibiting tower karst.
As Figure 17.38 shows, the term tower is appropriate
because the landscape consists of a maze of isolated
steep-sided hills that rise abruptly from the ground.
Each is riddled with interconnected caves and passageways. This type of karst topography forms in wet
tropical and subtropical regions having thick beds of
highly jointed limestone. Here groundwater has dissolved large volumes of limestone, leaving only these

residual towers. Karst development occurs more rapidly
in tropical climates due to the abundant rainfall and the
greater availability of carbon dioxide from the decay of
lush tropical vegetation. The extra carbon dioxide in the
soil means there is more carbonic acid for dissolving
limestone. Other tropical areas of advanced karst development include portions of Puerto Rico, western Cuba,
and northern Vietnam.

17.8

Concept Checks

1. How does groundwater create caverns?
2. What causes cavern formation to stop at one level
(depth) but continue or begin at a lower level?
3. How do stalactites and stalagmites form?
4. Describe two ways in which sinkholes form.

527

18
Glaciers and
Glaciation

Hikers next to Exit Glacier in Alaska’s Kenai Fiords
National Park. (Photo by Michael Collier)

C

limate has

a strong influence on the nature and intensity of Earth’s external
processes. This fact is dramatically illustrated in this chapter because the existence
and extent of glaciers is largely controlled by Earth’s changing climate.
Like the running water and groundwater that were the focus of the preceding two
chapters, glaciers represent a significant erosional process. These moving masses of ice
are responsible for creating many unique landforms and are part of an important link
in the rock cycle in which the products of weathering are transported and deposited as
sediment.
Today glaciers cover nearly 10 percent of Earth’s land surface; however, in the recent
geologic past, ice sheets were three times more extensive, covering vast areas with ice
thousands of meters thick. Many regions still bear the marks of these glaciers. The
landscapes of such diverse places as the Alps, Cape Cod, and Yosemite Valley were
fashioned by now-vanished masses of glacial ice. Moreover, Long Island, the Great
Lakes, and the fiords of Norway and Alaska all owe their existence to glaciers. Glaciers,
of course, are not just a phenomenon of the geologic past. As you will see, they are still
sculpting the landscape and depositing debris in many regions today.

18.1

Glaciers: A Part of Two Basic Cycles
Explain the role of glaciers in the hydrologic and rock cycles and describe the
different types of glaciers, their characteristics, and their present-day distribution.

Glaciers are a part of two fundamental cycles in the Earth system: the hydrologic cycle and the
rock cycle. The water of the hydrosphere is constantly cycled through the atmosphere, biosphere,
and geosphere. Time and time again, water evaporates from the oceans into the atmosphere, precipitates on the land, and flows in rivers and underground back to the sea. However, when precipitation falls at high elevations or high latitudes, the water may not immediately make its way toward
the sea. Instead, it may become part of a glacier. Although the ice will eventually melt, allowing the
water to continue its path to the sea, water can be stored as glacial ice for many tens, hundreds, or
even thousands of years.
A glacier is a thick ice mass that forms over hundreds or thousands of years. It originates on land from
the accumulation, compaction, and recrystallization
of snow. A glacier appears to be motionless, but it is
not; glaciers move very slowly. Like running water,
groundwater, wind, and waves, glaciers are dynamic
erosional agents that accumulate, transport, and deposit
sediment. As such, glaciers are among the agents that
perform a basic function in the rock cycle. Although glaciers are found in many parts of the world today, most
are located in remote areas, either near Earth’s poles or
in high mountains.

Valley (Alpine) Glaciers
Literally thousands of relatively small glaciers exist in
lofty mountain areas, where they usually follow valleys
that were originally occupied by streams. Unlike the
rivers that previously flowed in these valleys, glaciers
advance slowly, perhaps only a few centimeters per
day. Because of their setting, these moving ice masses
are termed valley glaciers, or alpine glaciers (Figure
18.1). Each glacier actually is a stream of ice, bounded
by precipitous rock walls, that flows downvalley from
an accumulation center near its head. Like rivers,

535
Figure 18.1
Valley glacier This tongue
of ice, also called an alpine
glacier, is still eroding the
Alaskan landscape. Dark
stripes of sediment within
these glaciers are called
medial moraines. This is
Johns Hopkins Glacier
in Alaska’s Glacier Bay
National Park. (Photo by
Michael Collier)

valley glaciers can be long or short, wide or narrow,
single or with branching tributaries. Generally, alpine
glaciers are longer than they are wide. Some extend for
just a fraction of a kilometer, whereas others go on for
many tens of kilometers. The west branch of the Hubbard Glacier, for example, runs through 112 kilometers
(nearly 70 miles) of mountainous terrain in Alaska and
the Yukon Territory.

Ice Sheets
In contrast to valley glaciers, ice sheets exist on a much
larger scale. The low total annual solar radiation reaching the poles makes these regions hospitable to great ice

accumulations. Presently both of Earth’s polar regions
support ice sheets: Greenland in the Northern Hemisphere and Antarctica in the Southern Hemisphere
(Figure 18.2).

Ice Age Ice Sheets About 18,000 years ago, glacial
ice covered not only Greenland and Antarctica but also
large portions of North America, Europe, and Siberia.
That period in Earth history is appropriately known as
the Last Glacial Maximum. The term implies that there
were other glacial maximums, which is indeed the case.
Throughout the Quaternary period, which began about
2.6 million years ago and extends to the present, ice
sheets have formed, advanced over broad areas, and then

536

CHAPTER 18

SmartFigure 18.2
Ice sheets The only
present-day ice sheets are
those covering Greenland
and Antarctica. Their
combined areas represent almost 10 percent of
Earth’s land area.

Glaciers and Glaciation
Greenland's ice sheet occupies 1.7 million square kilometers
(663,000 square miles), about 80 percent of the island.
A r c ti c C ir c l e

(https://goo.gl/JdyThn)

North
Pole

Greenland
Antarctic
Peninsula

Ronne-Filchner
Ice Shelf
Ross Ice
Shelf

Larsen B
Ice Shelf
Weddell
Sea

South
Pole

Antarctica

Antar

c ti c C i r c l e

The area of the Antarctic Ice Sheet is almost 14 million square
kilometers (5,460,000 square miles). Ice shelves occupy an
additional 1.4 million square kilometers (546,000 square miles).

melted away. These alternating glacial and interglacial
periods have occurred over and over again.

Greenland and Antarctica Some people mistakenly
think that the North Pole is covered by glacial ice,

but this is not the case. The ice that covers the Arctic Ocean is sea ice—frozen seawater. Sea ice floats
because ice is less dense than liquid water. Although
sea ice never completely disappears from the Arctic,
the area covered with sea ice expands and contracts
with the seasons. The thickness of sea ice ranges from
a few centimeters for new ice to 4 meters (13 feet) for
sea ice that has survived for years. By contrast, glaciers
can be hundreds or thousands of meters thick.
Glaciers form on land, and in the Northern Hemisphere, Greenland supports an ice sheet. Greenland
extends between about 60 and 80 degrees north
latitude. This largest island on Earth is covered by
an imposing ice sheet that occupies 1.7 million square
kilometers (more than 660,000 square miles), or
about 80 percent of the island. Averaging nearly 1500
meters (5000 feet) thick, the ice extends 3000 meters
(10,000 feet) above the island’s bedrock floor in some
places.
In the Southern Hemisphere, practically all of Antarctica is covered by two huge ice sheets that extend
over an area of more than 13.9 million square kilometers
(5.4 million square miles). Because of the proportions of
these huge features, they are often called continental ice
sheets. There is more about Antarctica and its ice sheets
in GEOgraphics 18.1. The combined areas of presentday continental ice sheets represent almost 10 percent of
Earth’s land area.
These enormous masses flow out in all directions
from one or more snow-accumulation centers and
completely obscure all but the highest areas of underlying terrain. Even sharp variations in the topography
beneath a glacier usually appear as relatively subdued
undulations on the surface of the ice. Such topographic
differences, however, affect the behavior of the ice
sheets, especially near their margins, by guiding flow
in certain directions and creating zones of faster and
slower movement.

Ice Shelves Along portions of the Antarctic coast,

Figure 18.3
Ice shelves An ice shelf
forms when a glacier or
an ice sheet flows into the
adjacent ocean.

Icebergs

In shallow water,
the ice shelf is
grounded.

In deeper
water the ice
shelf floats.

As ice melts, material transported by the
glacier is released and falls to the ocean
floor. The rocks are called dropstones.

glacial ice flows into the adjacent ocean,
creating features called ice shelves.
These large, relatively flat masses of glacial ice extend seaward from the coast
but remain attached to the land
along one or more sides. About
80 percent of the ice lies below
the surface of the ocean, so
in shallow water, the ice shelf
“touches bottom” and is said to
be grounded. In deeper water, the
ice shelf floats (Figure 18.3). There are ice
shelves along more than half of the Antarctic coast, but there are relatively few in
Greenland.
These shelves are thickest on their
landward sides and become thinner seaward. They are sustained by ice from the

537

18.1 Glaciers: A Part of Two Basic Cycles

Figure 18.4

Icebergs produced by
the breakup of ice shelf

Ice shelf
before
breakup

January 31, 2002
50km

adjacent ice sheet, and they are also nourished by
snowfall on their surfaces and the freezing of seawater to their bases. Antarctica’s ice shelves extend over
approximately 1.4 million square kilometers (0.6 million square miles). The Ross and Ronne-Filchner Ice
Shelves are the largest, with the Ross Ice Shelf alone
covering an area approximately the size of Texas (see
Figure 18.2). In recent years, satellite monitoring has
shown that some ice shelves are unstable and breaking
apart. For example, during a 35-day span in February
and March 2002, an ice shelf on the eastern side of
the Antarctic Peninsula, known as the Larsen B Ice
Shelf, broke apart and separated from the continent.
Thousands of icebergs were set adrift in the adjacent
Weddell Sea. The event was captured in satellite imagery (Figure 18.4). This was not an isolated happening but
part of a trend related to accelerated climate change.
In fact, a 2015 NASA study predicts that the last remnant of the once-vast Larsen B Ice Shelf will break
apart by 2020.

Other Types of Glaciers
In addition to valley glaciers and ice sheets, scientists
have identified other types of glaciers. Covering some
uplands and plateaus are masses of glacial ice called
ice caps. Like ice sheets, ice caps completely bury
the underlying landscape, but they are much smaller
than the continental-scale features. Ice caps occur in
many places, including Iceland and several of the large
islands in the Arctic Ocean (Figure 18.5).
Often ice caps and ice sheets feed outlet glaciers.
These tongues of ice flow down valleys, extending outward from the margins of these larger ice masses. The

Collapse of an ice
shelf These satellite
images document the
breakup of the Larsen
B Ice Shelf adjacent to
the Antarctic Peninsula
in 2002. Thousands of
icebergs were created in
the process. (NASA)

March 7, 2002
50km

tongues are essentially valley glaciers that are avenues
for ice movement from an ice cap or ice sheet through
mountainous terrain to the sea. Where they encounter
the ocean, some outlet glaciers spread out as floating ice shelves. Often large numbers of icebergs are
produced.
SmartFigure 18.5

ICELAND
Reykjavik

Iceland’s Vatnajökull ice
cap In 1996 the Grímsvötn
Volcano erupted beneath
this ice cap, an event that
triggered melting and
floods. (NASA) (http://goo.gl/
RsbHWM).

Va t n a j ö k u l l
ice cap

Ice caps completely bury the underlying terrain but are much
smaller than ice sheets.

John Goodge/NSF

Michael Collier

What if the ice melted? The discharge at the mouth of the
Mississippi River is 17,300 cubic meters (593,000 cubic feet)
per second. If Antarctica's ice sheets melted at a suitable
rate, they could maintain the flow of the Mississippi River for
more than 50,000 years! If all of the continent's ice were to
melt, sea level would rise by an estimated 56 meters (more
than 180 feet). Antarctica's ice represents about 65 percent
of Earth's entire supply of freshwater.
.

The Transantarctic Mountains are a 3300-kilometer(2600-mile-) long range that separates the West
Antarctic Ice Sheet and the East Antarctic Ice Sheet.
Vinson Massif is the highest peak at 4892 meters
(16,050 feet). Most of the mountains are buried beneath
the continent's huge ice sheets.

Questions:
1. Is the glacial ice thickest in East Antarctica or West Antarctica?
2. If all of Antarctica’s ice were to melt, about how much would
sea level rise?

ZUMA Wire Service/Alamy

McMurdo Station is the main U.S.
scientific research station. It is the
largest installation on the continent,
capable of supporting more than 1200
residents. The total population at all
research stations is about 4000 in
summer and 1000 in winter. There are
no permanent (indigenous) human
residents on the continent.

Dan Leeth/Alamy

539

Rick Price/Getty Images

2.2 Continental Drift: An Idea Before Its Time

About half of the continent's coastal areas are
characterized by ice shelves. The Ross Ice Shelf is
about the size of France, whereas the
Ronne-Filchner Ice Shelf has an
area similar to that of
Spain.

540

CHAPTER 18

Glaciers and Glaciation

Figure 18.6

Valley glacier

Piedmont glacier Piedmont
glaciers occur where valley
glaciers exit a mountain
range onto broad lowlands.

Piedmont glacier

individual piedmont glaciers vary greatly. Among the
largest is the broad Malaspina Glacier along the coast
of southern Alaska. It covers thousands of square kilometers of the flat coastal plain at the foot of the lofty
St. Elias Range.

18.1

Concept Checks

1. Where are glaciers found today? What
percentage of Earth’s land surface do they cover?
When a valley glacier is no longer confined, it spreads out to
become a piedmont glacier.

Piedmont glaciers occupy broad lowlands at
the bases of steep mountains and form when one or
more alpine glaciers emerge from the confining walls
of mountain valleys. Here the advancing ice spreads
out to form a broad lobe (Figure 18.6). The sizes of

18.2

2. Describe how glaciers fit into the hydrologic
cycle. What role do they play in the rock cycle?
3. List and briefly distinguish among four types of
glaciers.
4. What is the difference between an ice sheet and
an ice shelf? How are they related?

Formation and Movement of Glacial Ice
Describe how glaciers move, the rates at which they move, and the significance
of the glacial budget.

Snow is the raw material from which glacial ice originates; therefore, glaciers form in areas where
more snow falls in winter than melts during the summer. Glaciers develop in the high-latitude
polar realm because, even though annual snowfall totals are modest, temperatures are so low
that little of the snow melts. Glaciers can form in mountains because temperatures drop with
an increase in altitude. So even near the equator, glaciers may form at elevations above about
5000 meters (16,400 feet). For example, Tanzania’s Mount Kilimanjaro, which is located practically
astride the equator at an altitude of 5895 meters (19,336 feet), has glaciers at its summit. The elevation above which snow remains throughout the year varies with latitude. Near the equator, this
boundary occurs high in the mountains, whereas in the vicinity of the 60th parallel, it is at or near
sea level. Before a glacier is created, however, snow must be converted into glacial ice.

Glacial Ice Formation
When temperatures remain below freezing following
a snowfall, the fluffy accumulation of delicate hexagonal crystals soon changes. As air infiltrates the spaces
between the crystals, the extremities of the crystals
evaporate, and the water vapor condenses near the centers of the crystals. In this manner, snowflakes become
smaller, thicker, and more spherical, and the large pore
spaces disappear. As air is forced out, what was once
light, fluffy snow is recrystallized into a much denser
mass of small grains having the consistency of coarse
sand. This granular recrystallized snow is called firn
and is commonly found making up old snow banks near
the end of winter. As more snow is added, the pressure
on the lower layers gradually increases, compacting the
ice grains at depth. Once the thickness of ice and snow
exceeds 50 meters (165 feet), the weight is sufficient to

fuse firn into a solid mass of interlocking ice crystals.
Glacial ice has now been formed.
The rate at which this transformation occurs varies.
In regions where the annual snow accumulation is great,
burial is relatively rapid, and snow may turn to glacial ice
in a matter of a decade or less. Where the yearly addition
of snow is less abundant, burial is slow, and the transformation of snow to glacial ice may take hundreds of years.

How Glaciers Move
The movement of glacial ice is generally referred to as
flow. The fact that glacial movement is described in this
way seems paradoxical; how can a solid flow? The way in
which ice moves is complex and is of two basic types. The
first of these, plastic flow, involves movement within the
ice. Ice behaves as a brittle solid until the pressure upon

541

18.2 Formation and Movement of Glacial Ice

it is equivalent to the weight
of about 50 meters (165 feet)
Ice in the zone of fracture is
of ice. Once that load is surcarried along "piggyback" style.
passed, ice behaves as a plastic material, and flow begins.
Below a depth of about
To
50 meters (160 feet),
Such flow occurs because of
movetal
ice behaves plastically
ment
the molecular structure of
ice. Glacial ice consists of lay- (deforms without
breaking) and gradually
ers of molecules stacked one
Zone
flows.
of fra
Intern
upon the other. The bonds
cture
al
flow
between layers are weaker
Basal slip occurs
than those within each layer.
episodically. Ice in
Therefore, when a stress
contact with the valley
Sliding
exceeds the strength of the
floor remains fixed as
Bedrock
stress builds to the
bonds between the layers,
point that the glacier
the layers remain intact and
lurches forward.
slide over one another.
A second and often
equally important mechanism of glacial movement conOther factors may also contribute to the presence
sists of an entire ice mass slipping along the ground. With
of meltwater deep within a glacier. Temperatures may
the exception of some glaciers located in polar regions
be increased by plastic flow (an effect similar to heating
where the ice is probably frozen to the solid bedrock floor, due to friction), by heat added from Earth below, and
most glaciers are thought to move by this sliding process,
by the refreezing of meltwater that has seeped down
called basal slip. In this process, meltwater probably acts from above. This last process relies on the fact that as
as a hydraulic jack and perhaps as a lubricant that helps
water changes state from liquid to solid, heat (termed
the ice move over the rock. The source of the liquid water latent heat of fusion) is released.
is related in part to the fact that the melting point of ice
Figure 18.7 illustrates the effects of these two basic
decreases as pressure increases. Therefore, deep within a
types of glacial motion. This vertical profile through a
glacier, the ice may be at the melting point even though
glacier also shows that not all the ice flows forward at the
its temperature is below 0°C (32°F).
same rate. Frictional drag with the bedrock floor causes
the lower portions of the glacier to move more slowly.

18.1

T

he central focus of this satellite image is Byrd
Glacier in Antarctica. In this region, the glacier
advances at a rate of about 0.8 kilometer (0.5 mile)
per year. Take note of its position in relation to other
labeled features. (Photo by NASA)

Ice sheet

Tr
an
sa
nta
rct

ic
Mo
un
tai
ns

QUESTION 1 Is Byrd Glacier flowing toward the top or the
bottom of the image? How did you figure this out?
QUESTION 2 What term describes this type of glacier?

Ross Ice Shelf

Byrd Glaci
er

E Y E ON E A R T H

Tra
nsa
Mo ntarc
unt
t
ain ic
s

SmartFigure 18.7
Movement of a
glacier This vertical cross
section through a glacier
shows that movement is
divided into two components. Also notice that the
rate of movement is slowest
at the base of the glacier,
where frictional drag is
greatest. (https://goo.gl/adFVVp)

542

CHAPTER 18

Figure 18.8
Crevasses As a glacier
moves, internal stresses
cause large cracks to
develop in the brittle upper
portion of the glacier,
called the zone of fracture.
Crevasses can extend to
depths of 50 meters (165
feet) and can make travel
across glaciers dangerous.

Glaciers and Glaciation

in cracks called crevasses (Figure 18.8).
These gaping cracks may extend to depths
of 50 meters (160 feet) and can make
travel across glaciers dangerous. Below
this depth, plastic flow seals them off.

Observing and Measuring
Movement

Unlike the movement of water in streams,
the movement of glacial ice is not obvious.
If we could watch a valley glacier move,
we would see that, as with the water in a
river, the ice moves downstream at different rates. Flow is greatest in the center
of the glacier because the drag created by
the walls and floor of the valley slow the
base and sides.
Early in the nineteenth century, the
first experiments on glacier movement
were designed and carried out in the
Alps. Markers were placed in a straight
line across an alpine glacier, and the
line’s position was marked on the valley
walls so that if the ice moved, the change
in position could be detected. Periodically the positions of the markers were
recorded, showing the movement just
described. Although most glaciers move
too slowly for direct visual detection, the
experiments successfully demonstrated
In contrast to the lower portion of the glacier, the
that movement nevertheless occurs. The experiment,
upper 50 meters (160 feet) or so are not under sufficient
illustrated in Figure 18.9, was carried out at Switzerland’s
pressure to exhibit plastic flow. Rather, the ice in this
Rhône Glacier later in the nineteenth century. It not only
uppermost zone is brittle, and this zone is appropriately
traced the movement of markers within the ice but also
referred to as the zone of fracture. The ice in the zone
mapped the position of the glacier’s terminus.
of fracture is carried along “piggyback” style by the ice
For many years, time-lapse photography has
below. When the glacier moves over irregular terrain,
allowed us to observe glacial movement. Images are
the zone of fracture is subjected to tension, resulting
taken from the same vantage point on a regular basis
(for example, once per day) over an extended span and
SmartFigure 18.9
Original position then played back like a movie. More recently, satelMeasuring the movement of a glacier Ice
lites let us track the movement of glaciers and
of stakes (1874)
movement and changes in the terminus of
observe glacial behavior. This is espeRhône Glacier, Switzerland. In this classic
cially useful because the remoteness and
study of a valley glacier, the movement
extreme weather associated with many
of stakes clearly shows that glacial ice
glacial areas limit on-site study.
moves and that movement along
the sides of the glacier is slower
How rapidly does glacial ice move?
than movement in the center.
Average rates vary considerably from one
1878 position
Also notice that even though
glacier to another. Some glaciers move so
of stakes
the ice front was retreating,
slowly that trees and other vegetation may
1882 position
the ice within the glacier
become well established in the debris that
of stakes
was advancing.
accumulates on the glacier’s surface. Others
(https://goo.gl/JoKPM3)
Terminus
advance up to several meters each day. Recent
in 1882
satellite imaging provided insights into movements
Terminus
within the Antarctic Ice Sheet. An examination of
in 1878
Terminus of
Figure 18.10 shows that portions of some outlet glaciers
glacier in 1874
move at rates greater than 800 meters (2600 feet) per

(Photo by Wave/Glow Images)

543

18.2 Formation and Movement of Glacial Ice

The slowest movement
occurs along divides.

Figure 18.10

Lambert Glacier drains about
900,000 square kilometers
(500,000 square miles) of
East Antarctica.
Amery
Ice
Shelf

Area of more
rapid movement.

Ice Velocity (m/year)
0

400

800

1200

Movement of Antarctic
ice These maps result
from thousands of satellite
measurements taken over
several years. Outflow from
the interior is organized into
a series of drainage basins
separated by ice divides.
Flow is concentrated into
narrow, mountain-bound
glaciers or into relatively
fast-moving ice streams
surrounded by slowermoving ice. (NASA)

RonneFilchner
Ice Shelf
Divide separating
glacier basins.

Ross
Ice Shelf
0

Divides are generally over
mountains that shape the
flow of ice.

Budget of
a Glacier:
Accumulation
Versus Wastage

ZONE OF ACCUMULATION
More snow falls each
winter than melts
each summer

Snow is the raw material
from which glacial ice originates; therefore, glaciers
form in areas where more
snow falls in winter than
melts during the summer.
Glaciers are constantly
gaining and losing ice.

1000 km

Velocity (meters per year)
<1.5

year; on the other hand, ice in some interior regions
creeps along at less than 2 meters (6.5 feet) per year.
Movement of some glaciers is characterized by occasional periods of extremely rapid advance called surges,
followed by periods of much slower movement.

500

10

100

1000

the accumulation and wasting of glacial ice are equal.
As noted earlier, the elevation of this boundary varies greatly, from sea level in polar regions to altitudes
approaching 5000 meters (16,000 feet) near the equator.
Above the snowline, in the zone of accumulation, the
addition of snow thickens the glacier and promotes movement. Below the snowline is the zone of wastage. Here
SmartFigure 18.11
ZONE OF WASTAGE
All the snow from the
previous winter melts along
with some glacial ice

Snowline

Crevasses

Glacial Zones Snow accumulation and
ice formation occur in the zone of accumulation
(Figure 18.11). Its outer limits are defined by the snowline, or equilibrium line—the elevation at which

Braided
streams

Zones of a glacier The
snowline separates the
zone of accumulation
and the zone of wastage. Whether the ice front
advances, retreats, or
remains stationary depends
on the balance or lack of
balance between accumulation and wastage (ablation). (https://goo.gl/25XUcw)

544

CHAPTER 18

Glaciers and Glaciation

Figure 18.12
Examples of ablation
A. Melting at Alaska’s Root
Glacier created this river
atop the glacier. Notice the
large rocks exposed as the
ice wastes away. (Photo by
Michael Collier) B. Ice loss by
calving at Beloit Glacier.
When valley glaciers or
outlet glaciers terminate
in the ocean, they may
also be called tidewater
glaciers. It is common for
large blocks to break off
the front of the glacier and
form icebergs. (Photo by
Michael Collier)

A.

B.

there is a net loss to the glacier as all of the snow from
the previous winter melts, as does some of the glacial ice
(see Figure 18.11).
The loss of ice by a glacier is termed ablation. In
addition to melting, glaciers waste away as large pieces
of ice break off the front of the glacier in a process
called calving (Figure 18.12). Calving creates icebergs
in places where the glacier has reached the sea or a lake
(Figure 18.13). Because icebergs are just slightly less dense
than seawater, they float very low in the water, with more
than 80 percent of their mass submerged. Along the
margins of Antarctica’s ice shelves, calving is the primary
Figure 18.13
Icebergs Icebergs form
when large masses of ice
break off from the front of
a glacier after it reaches a
water body, in a process
known as calving. Other
examples of icebergs
appear in Figures 18.3,
18.4, and 18.12. (Photo by
Radius Images/Photolibrary)

Only about 20 percent or less of an
iceberg protrudes above the waterline.

means by which these masses lose ice. The relatively flat
icebergs produced here can be several kilometers across
and up to about 600 meters (2000 feet) thick (see the icebergs in Figure 18.3 and 18.4). By comparison, thousands
of irregularly shaped icebergs are produced by outlet glaciers flowing from the margins of the Greenland ice sheet.
Many drift southward and find their way into the North
Atlantic, where they can be hazardous to navigation.

Glacial Budget Whether the margin of a glacier is
advancing, retreating, or remaining stationary depends
on the budget of the glacier. The glacial budget is the
balance, or lack of balance, between accumulation at
the upper end of the glacier and ablation at the lower
end. If ice accumulation exceeds ablation, the glacial
front advances until the two factors balance. When this
happens, the terminus of the glacier is stationary.
If a warming trend increases ablation and/or if
reduced snowfall decreases accumulation, the ice front
will retreat. As the terminus of the glacier retreats, the
extent of the zone of wastage diminishes. Therefore, in
time a new balance will be reached between accumulation and wastage, and the ice front will again become
stationary.
Whether the margin of a glacier is advancing,
retreating, or stationary, the ice within the glacier

545
Figure 18.14

About 200 years ago Bear Glacier
extended to the end moraine at
the bottom of the image.
_TT65


Retreating glaciers A. Bear Glacier is
a tidewater glacier that flows out of the
Harding Icefield near Seward, Alaska. Like
most other glaciers in Alaska, Bear Glacier
is retreating back into the mountains. (Photo
by Michael Collier) B. These two images were
taken 78 years apart, from about the same
vantage point, along the southwest coast of
Greenland. Between 1935 and 2013, the
outlet glacier that is the primary focus of
these photos retreated about 3 kilometers
(about 2 miles). (National Snow and Ice Data Center)

Bear Glacier

End moraine marking the
farthest advance of a
glacier

A.

1935

2013

B.

continues to flow forward. In the case of a receding glacier, the ice still flows forward but not rapidly enough
to offset ablation. This point is illustrated well in Figure
18.9. As the line of stakes within the Rhône Glacier continued to move downvalley, the terminus of the glacier
slowly retreated upvalley.

glaciers in Montana’s Glacier National Park. Today only
37 remain.

18.2

Concept Checks

1. Describe two components of glacial movement.

Glaciers in Retreat: Unbalanced Glacial Budgets
Because glaciers are sensitive to changes in temperature
and precipitation, they provide clues about changes in
climate. With few exceptions, valley glaciers around the
world have been retreating at unprecedented rates over
the past century. Bear Glacier is one example (Figure
18.14A). The photos in Figure 18.14B illustrate another
example. Many valley glaciers have disappeared altogether. For example, 150 years ago, there were 147

2. How rapidly does glacial ice move? Provide some
examples.
3. What are crevasses, and where do they form?
4. Relate the glacial budget to the two zones of a
glacier.
5. Under what circumstances will the front of a
glacier advance? Retreat? Remain stationary?

546

CHAPTER 18

Glaciers and Glaciation

E Y E ON E A R T H

18.2

T

his photo shows an iceberg floating in the ocean
near the coast of Greenland. (Photo by Andrzej
Gibasiewicz/Shutterstock)

QUESTION 1 How do icebergs form? What term applies
to this process?

QUESTION 2 Using the knowledge you have gained
about these features, explain the common phrase “It’s
only the tip of the iceberg.”
QUESTION 3 Is an iceberg the same as sea ice?
Explain.
QUESTION 4 If this iceberg were to melt, how would
sea level be affected?

18.3

Glacial Erosion
Discuss the processes of glacial erosion. Identify and describe major topographic
features created by glacial erosion.

Glaciers are capable of great erosion. For anyone who has observed the terminus of an alpine glacier, the evidence of its erosive force is clear (Figure 18.15). The release of rock material of various
sizes from the ice as it melts leads to the conclusion that the ice has scraped, scoured, and torn rock
from the floor and walls of the valley and carried it downvalley. It should be pointed out, however,
that in mountainous regions, mass-wasting processes also make substantial contributions to the
sediment load of a glacier.
Once rock debris is acquired by a glacier, the enormous
competence of ice will not allow the debris to settle out
like the load carried by a stream or by the wind. For example, notice in Figure 18.12A the masses of rock exposed
Figure 18.15
Evidence of glacial
erosion As the terminus
of a glacier wastes away,
it deposits large quantities
of sediment. This close-up
view shows the rock debris
dropped by the melting
ice. The glacier clearly
acquired a significant
quantity of rock debris as
it advanced across the
landscape. (Photo by Michael
Collier)

within the glacier as the ice melts. Indeed, as a medium of
sediment transport, ice has no equal. Consequently, glaciers can carry large blocks that no other erosional agent
could possibly budge. Although today’s glaciers are of limited importance as erosional agents, many landscapes that
were modified by the widespread glaciers of the Ice Age
still reflect, to a high degree, the work of ice.

How Glaciers Erode

The rock debris dropped by melting ice is a
jumbled mixture of different size sediments.

Glaciers erode the land primarily in two ways: plucking
and abrasion. First, as a glacier flows over a fractured
bedrock surface, it loosens and lifts blocks of rock and
incorporates them into the ice. This process, known as
plucking, occurs when meltwater penetrates the cracks
and joints of bedrock beneath a glacier and freezes. As
the water expands, it exerts tremendous leverage that
pries the rock loose. In this manner, sediment of all sizes
becomes part of the glacier’s load.

547

18.3 Glacial Erosion

Figure 18.16
Glacial abrasion Moving
glacial ice, armed with
sediment, acts like
sandpaper, scratching and
polishing rock. (Photos by
Michael Collier)

Glacially polished granite in
California’s Yosemite National Park.
B.

Glacial abrasion created the scratches
and grooves in this bedrock.
A.

The second major erosional process is abrasion
(Figure 18.16). As the ice and its load of rock fragments
slide over bedrock, they function like sandpaper,
smoothing and polishing the surface
below. The pulverized rock produced by
the glacial “grist mill” is appropriately
called rock flour. So much rock flour
may be produced that meltwater streams
flowing out of a glacier often have the
cloudy appearance of skim milk and
offer visible evidence of the grinding
power of ice. Lakes fed by such streams
frequently have a distinctive turquoise
color (Figure 18.17).
When the ice at the bottom of a
glacier contains large rock fragments,
long scratches and grooves called glacial
striations may even be gouged into the
bedrock (see Figure 18.16A). These linear
grooves provide clues to the direction of
ice flow. By mapping the striations over
large areas, patterns of glacial flow can
often be reconstructed. On the other
hand, not all abrasive action produces
striations. The rock surfaces over which
the glacier moves may also become
highly polished by the ice and its load
of finer particles. The broad expanses of
smoothly polished granite in Yosemite
National Park provide an excellent example (see Figure 18.16B).

As is the case with other agents of erosion, the rate
of glacial erosion is highly variable. This differential
erosion by ice is largely controlled by four factors: (1)
rate of glacial movement; (2) thickness of the ice; (3)
shape, abundance, and hardness of the rock fragments
contained in the ice at the base of the glacier; and (4)
erodibility of the surface beneath the glacier. Variations
in any or all of these factors from time to time and/or
from place to place mean that the features, effects, and
Figure 18.17
Distinctive color caused
by rock flour Many lakes
that are fed by glaciers
have a distinctive turquoise
color. The distinctive color
occurs because the rock
flour suspended in the lake
reflects different parts of
the visible spectrum more
strongly than others. (Photo
by Grant/Shutterstock)

548

CHAPTER 18

Glaciers and Glaciation

SmartFigure 18.18
Erosional landforms
created by alpine
glaciers The unglaciated
landscape (A) is modified
by valley glaciers (B). After
the ice recedes (C), the
terrain looks very different than it looked before
glaciation. You can see
several of the landforms
depicted here by viewing SmartFigure Mobile
Field Trip 4.14, Yosemite:
Granite and Glaciers (page
118). (Arête photo by James E.
Patterson; cirque photo by Marli
Miller; hanging valley photo by
John Warden/SuperStock)
(https://goo.gl/XPgbvY)

V-shaped
valley

Arête

Cirques

A. Unglaciated
topography
Medial
moraine

Arête

Horn

Cirque
Main
glacier

T

B. Region during period
of maximum glaciation

Hanging
valley

Arête

I
M
E

Tarn

Horn

Cirques

Glacial
trough

Pater noster
lakes
Truncated
spurs

Hanging
valley

C. Glaciated
topography

degree of landscape modification in glaciated regions
can vary greatly.

Landforms Created by Glacial Erosion
The erosional effects of valley glaciers and ice sheets are
quite different. A visitor to a glaciated mountain region
is likely to see a sharp and angular topography. This
is because as the more confined alpine glaciers move
downvalley, they tend to accentuate the irregularities
of the mountain landscape by creating steeper canyon
walls and making bold peaks even more jagged. By
contrast, continental ice sheets generally override the
terrain and hence subdue rather than accentuate the
irregularities they encounter. Although the erosional

potential of ice sheets is enormous, landforms carved by
these huge ice masses usually do not inspire the same
wonderment and awe as do the erosional features created by valley glaciers. Much of the rugged mountain
scenery so celebrated for its majestic beauty is produced
by erosion by alpine glaciers. Figure 18.18 shows a hypothetical mountain area before, during, and after glaciation. You will refer to this figure often in the following
discussion.

Glaciated Valleys A hike up a glaciated valley reveals
a number of striking ice-created features. The valley
itself is often a dramatic sight. Unlike streams, which
create their own valleys, glaciers take the path of least
resistance and follow existing stream valleys. Prior to

549

18.3 Glacial Erosion

SmartFigure 18.19
A U-shaped glacial
trough Prior to glaciation, a
mountain valley is typically
narrow and V-shaped.
During glaciation, an alpine
glacier widens, deepens,
and straightens the valley,
creating the classic
U-shape shown here.
(Photo by Michael Collier)
(https://goo.gl/bE8IYT)

glaciation, mountain valleys are characteristically narrow and V-shaped because streams are well above base
level and are therefore downcutting (see Chapter 16).
However, during glaciation, these narrow valleys are
transformed as the glacier widens and deepens them,
creating a U-shaped glacial trough (see Figure 18.18
and Figure 18.19). In addition to producing a broader and
deeper valley, the glacier also straightens the valley. As
ice flows around sharp curves, its great erosional force
removes the spurs of land that extend into the valley. The
results of this activity are triangular-shaped cliffs called
truncated spurs.
The amount of glacial erosion that takes place will
vary in different valleys in a mountainous area. Prior to
glaciation, the mouths of tributary streams join the main
valley (or trunk valley) at the elevation of the stream in
that valley. During glaciation, the amount of ice flowing
through the main valley can be much greater than the
amount advancing down each tributary. Consequently,
the valley containing the main glacier (or trunk glacier) is
eroded deeper than the smaller valleys that feed it. Thus,
after the ice has receded, the valleys of tributary glaciers
are left standing above the main glacial trough and are
termed hanging valleys (see Figure 18.18C). Rivers
flowing through hanging valleys can produce spectacular waterfalls, such as those in Yosemite National Park,
California.

As hikers walk up a glacial trough, they may pass a
series of bedrock depressions on the valley floor, probably
created by plucking and then scouring by the abrasive
force of the ice. If these depressions are filled with water,
they are called pater noster lakes (see Figure 18.18C).
The Latin name means “our Father” and is a reference to
a string of rosary beads.

Cirques At the head of a glacial valley is a characteristic and often imposing feature associated with an alpine
glacier, called a cirque. As the photo in Figure 18.18
illustrates, these bowl-shaped depressions have precipitous walls on three sides but are open on the downvalley
side. The cirque is the focal point of the glacier’s growth
because it is the area of snow accumulation and ice formation. Cirques begin as irregularities in the mountainside that are subsequently enlarged by frost wedging and
plucking along the sides and bottom of the glacier. The
glacier in turn acts as a conveyor belt that carries away
the debris. After the glacier has melted away, the cirque
basin is sometimes occupied by a small lake called a tarn
(see Figure 18.18C).
Sometimes, when two glaciers exist on opposite
sides of a divide, each flowing away from the other,
the dividing ridge between their cirques is largely
eliminated as plucking and frost action enlarge each
one. When this occurs, the two glacial troughs come to

550

CHAPTER 18

Glaciers and Glaciation

Figure 18.20
The Matterhorn Horns are
sharp, pyramid-like peaks
that were shaped by alpine
glaciers. The Matterhorn, in
the Swiss Alps, is a famous
example. (Photo by Andy
Selinger/age fotostock)

intersect, creating a gap or pass from one valley into the
other. Such a feature is termed a col. Some important
and well-known mountain passes that are cols include
St. Gotthard Pass in the Swiss Alps, Tioga Pass in California’s Sierra Nevada, and Berthoud Pass in the Colorado Rockies.
Figure 18.21
Roche moutonnée This
classic example is in
Yosemite National Park,
California. The gentle slope
was abraded, and the steep
slope was plucked. The
glacier moved from right to
left. (Photo by E. J. Tarbuck)

Arêtes and Horns The Alps, Northern
Rockies, and many other mountain landscapes sculpted by valley glaciers reveal
more than glacial troughs and cirques.
In addition, sinuous, sharp-edged ridges
called arêtes (French for “knife-edge”)
and sharp, pyramid-like peaks termed
horns project above the surroundings
(see Figure 18.18C). Both features can
originate from the same basic process:
the enlargement of cirques produced by
plucking and frost action. Several cirques
around a single high mountain create the
spires of rock called horns. As the cirques
enlarge and converge, an isolated horn is
produced. A famous example is the Matterhorn in the Swiss Alps (Figure 18.20).
Arêtes can form in a similar manner,
except that the cirques are not clustered
around a point but rather exist on opposite
sides of a divide. As the cirques grow, the
divide separating them is reduced to a very
narrow, knifelike partition. An arête can
also be created in another way. When two
glaciers occupy parallel valleys, an arête
can form when the land separating the
moving tongues of ice is progressively narrowed as the
glaciers scour and widen their valleys.
Roche Moutonnée In many glaciated landscapes, but
most frequently where continental ice sheets have modified the terrain, the ice carves
small streamlined hills from protruding bedrock knobs. Such an
asymmetrical knob of bedrock
is called a roche moutonnée
(French for “sheep rock”). These
features are formed when glacial
abrasion smooths the gentle slope
facing the oncoming ice sheet and
plucking steepens the opposite
side as the ice rides over the knob
(Figure 18.21). Roches moutonnées indicate the direction of glacial flow because
the gentler slope is generally
on the side from which the
ice advanced.
Fiords Sometimes spectacular steep-sided inlets of the
sea called fiords are present at high latitudes where
mountains are adjacent to the
ocean (Figure 18.22). They are

551

18.3 Glacial Erosion

Figure 18.22

W

AY

Fiords The coast of
Norway is known for its
many fiords. Frequently
these ice-sculpted inlets
of the sea are hundreds of
meters deep. (Satellite images

N

O

R

courtesy of NASA; photo by Inger
Yoshio Tomii/SuperStock)

“drowned” glacial troughs that became submerged as
the ice left the valleys and sea level rose following the
Ice Age. The depths of fiords may exceed 1000 meters
(3300 feet). However, the great depths of these flooded
troughs are only partly explained by the post–Ice Age
rise in sea level. Unlike the situation governing the
downward erosional work of rivers, sea level does not
act as base level for glaciers. As a consequence, glaciers
are capable of eroding their beds far below the surface of the sea. For example, a 300-meter- (1000-foot-)
thick glacier can carve its valley floor more than 250
meters (820 feet) below sea level before downward erosion ceases and the ice begins to float. Norway, British
Columbia, Greenland, New Zealand, Chile, and Alaska
all have coastlines characterized by fiords.

E Y E ON E A R T H

T

his mountain landscape is in Montana’s
Glacier National Park. Lake St. Mary
occupies a glacial trough. (Photo by Dan

Sherwood/age fotostock)

QUESTION 1 How does the current shape of the
valley compare to its shape prior to glaciation?
Explain.
QUESTION 2 What term is applied to the narrow
ridge indicated by the arrow?

18.3

18.3

Concept Checks

1. How do glaciers acquire their load of sediment?
2. What are some visible effects of glacial erosion?
3. What factors influence a glacier’s ability to erode?
4. How does a glaciated mountain valley differ in
appearance from a mountain valley that was not
glaciated? Describe the features created by valley
glaciers.
5. Relate fiords to glacial troughs.

552

CHAPTER 18

Glaciers and Glaciation

18.4

Glacial Deposits
Distinguish between the two basic types of glacial drift. List and describe the major
depositional features associated with glacial landscapes.

A glacier picks up and transports a huge load of rock debris as it slowly advances across the land.
Ultimately when the ice melts, these materials are deposited. In regions where glacial sediment is
deposited, it can play a significant role in forming the physical landscape. For example, in many
areas once covered by the continental ice sheets of the recent Ice Age, the bedrock is rarely
exposed because glacial deposits that are tens or even hundreds of meters thick completely mantle
the terrain. The general effect of these deposits is to reduce the local relief and thus level the
topography. Indeed, rural country scenes that are familiar to many of us—rocky pastures in New
England, wheat fields in the Dakotas, rolling farmland in the Midwest—result directly from glacial
deposition.

Glacial Drift
Long before the theory of an extensive Ice Age was ever
proposed, much of the soil and rock debris covering portions of Europe was recognized as having come from
somewhere else. At the time, these “foreign” materials
were believed to have been “drifted” into their present
positions by floating ice during an ancient flood. As a
consequence, the term drift was applied to this sediment.
Although rooted in an incorrect concept, this term was so
well established by the time the true glacial origin of the
debris became widely recognized that it remained part of
the basic glacial vocabulary. Today glacial drift is an allembracing term for sediments of glacial origin, no matter
how, where, or in what shape they were deposited.
Figure 18.23

Glacial till is an unsorted
mixture of many different
sediment sizes.

Glacial till Unlike sediment deposited by running
water and wind, material
deposited directly by a
glacier is not sorted. Figure
18.15 provides an example
of till being deposited at the
terminus of a glacier. (Top
photo by Michael Collier; bottom
photo by E. J. Tarbuck)
_TT66


A close
examination of
glacial till
often reveals
cobbles that
have been
scratched as
they were
dragged along
by the ice.

Geologists divide glacial drift into two distinct types:
(1) materials deposited directly by the glacier, which
are known as till, and (2) sediments laid down by glacial
meltwater, called stratified drift.

Glacial Till As glacial ice melts and drops its load of
rock fragments, till is deposited. Unlike moving water
and wind, ice cannot sort the sediment it carries; therefore, deposits of till are characteristically unsorted mixtures of many particle sizes (Figure 18.23). A close examination of this sediment shows that many of the pieces are
scratched and polished as a result of being dragged along
by the glacier. Such pieces help distinguish till from other
deposits that are a mixture of different sediment sizes,
such as material from a debris flow or a rockslide.
Boulders found in the till or lying free on the surface are called glacial erratics if they are different
from the bedrock below (Figure 18.24). Of course, this
means that they must have been derived from a source
outside the area where they are found. Although the
source for most erratics is unknown, the origin of
some can be determined. In many cases, boulders
were transported as far as 500 kilometers (300 miles)
from their source area and, in a few instances, more
than 1000 kilometers (600 miles). Therefore, by studying glacial erratics as well as the mineral composition
of the remaining till, geologists are sometimes able to
trace the path of a lobe of ice.
In portions of New England and other areas, erratics dot pastures and farm fields. In fact, in some places,
these large rocks were cleared from fields and piled to
make fences and walls. Keeping the fields clear, however, is an ongoing chore because each spring, newly
exposed erratics appear. Wintertime frost heaving lifts
them to the surface.
Stratified Drift As the name implies, stratified drift
is sorted according to the size and weight of the particles. Ice is not capable of sorting sediment the way

553

18.4 Glacial Deposits

running water can. Therefore, stratified drift is not deposited directly by
the glacier the way till is, but instead
reflects the sorting action of glacial
meltwater.
Some deposits of stratified drift
are made by streams issuing directly
from the glacier. Other stratified
deposits involve sediment that was
originally laid down as till and later
picked up, transported, and redeposited by meltwater beyond the
margin of the ice. Accumulations of
stratified drift often consist largely
of sand and gravel because the meltwater is not capable of moving larger
material and because the finer rock
flour remains suspended and is
commonly carried far from the glacier. Evidence that stratified drift consists primarily of
sand and gravel can be seen in many areas where these
deposits are actively mined as aggregate for road work
and other construction projects.

Landforms Made of Till
Perhaps the most widespread features created by glacial
deposition are moraines, which are simply layers or ridges
of till. Several types of moraines are identified; some are
common in mountain valleys, and others are associated
with areas affected by either ice sheets or valley glaciers.
Lateral and medial moraines fall in the first category,
whereas end moraines and ground moraines are in the
second.

Lateral and Medial Moraines
Alpine glaciers produce two
types of moraines that occur
exclusively in mountain valleys.
The first of these is called a
lateral moraine. As discussed
earlier, when an alpine glacier
moves down a valley, the ice
erodes the sides of the valley
with great efficiency. In addition, large quantities
of debris are added to
the glacier’s surface as
rubble falls or slides
from higher up on the
valley walls and collects
on the margins of the
moving ice. When the
ice eventually melts, this
accumulation of debris is
dropped next to the valley walls. These ridges of

Figure 18.24
Glacial erratic This large
glacially transported boulder, called Doane Rock, is
a prominent feature near
Nauset Bay on Cape Cod.
Such boulders are called
glacial erratics. (Photo by
Michael Collier)

till paralleling the sides of the valley constitute the lateral
moraines.
The second type of moraine that is unique to alpine
glaciers is the medial moraine (Figure 18.25). Medial
moraines are created when two alpine glaciers coalesce
to form a single ice stream. The till that was once carried along the sides of each glacier joins to form a single
dark stripe of debris within the newly enlarged glacier.
The sketch in Figure 18.25 illustrates this nicely. The
creation of these dark stripes within the ice stream is
one obvious proof that glacial ice moves because the
moraine could not form if the ice did not flow downvalley. It is common to see several medial moraines
within a single large alpine glacier because a streak will

SmartFigure 18.25
Formation of a medial
moraine Kennicott Glacier is
a 43-kilometer- (27-mile-) long
valley glacier that is sculpting
the mountains in Alaska’s
Wrangell–St. Elias National Park.
The dark stripes of sediment are
medial moraines. (Photo by Michael
Collier) (http://goo.gl/jkqqPA)

554

CHAPTER 18

Glaciers and Glaciation

SmartFigure 18.26

the end moraine grows. The
longer the ice front remains
stable (with ablation and
accumulation in balance), the
0
150mi
larger the ridge of till will
0
150 km
become.
Eventually, ablation
exceeds nourishment. At this
point, the front of the glacier begins to recede in the
direction from which it originally advanced. However,
as the ice front retreats, the
conveyor-belt action of the
glacier continues to provide
fresh supplies of sediment to
the terminus. In this manner, a large quantity of till
is deposited as the ice melts
away, creating a rock-strewn,
undulating plain. This gently
rolling layer of till deposited
as the ice front recedes is termed ground moraine. It
has a leveling effect, filling in low spots and clogging old
stream channels, often leading to a derangement of the
existing drainage system. In areas where this layer of till
is still relatively fresh, such as the northern Great Lakes
region, poorly drained swampy lands are quite common.
Periodically, a glacier will retreat to a point where
ablation and nourishment once again balance. When this
happens, the ice front stabilizes, and a new end moraine
forms. The pattern of end moraine formation and ground
moraine deposition may be repeated many times before
the glacier has completely vanished. Such a pattern is
illustrated in Figure 18.26. The very first end moraine
to form signifies the farthest advance of the glacier
and is called the terminal end moraine. End moraines
that form as the ice front occasionally stabilizes during
retreat are termed recessional end moraines. Terminal
and recessional moraines are essentially alike; the only
difference between them is their relative positions.
End moraines deposited by the most recent stage
of Ice Age glaciation are prominent features in many
parts of the U.S. Midwest and Northeast. In Wisconsin, the wooded, hilly terrain of the Kettle Moraine
End moraines:
Wisconsinan Age
End moraines:
Illinoian Age

End moraines of the
Great Lakes region End
moraines deposited
during the most recent
(Wisconsinan) stage are the
most prominent.
(https://goo.gl/QNwbma)

Driftless
area

Extent of
Wisconsinan
glaciation

Extent of
Illinoian glaciation

form whenever a tributary glacier joins the main valley
glacier.

End and Ground Moraines Sometimes a glacier is
compared to a conveyor belt. No matter whether the
front of a glacier or ice sheet is advancing, retreating, or
stationary, it is constantly moving sediment forward and
dropping it at its terminus. This is a useful analogy when
considering end and ground moraines.
An end moraine is a ridge of till that forms at the
terminus of a glacier. End moraines are characteristic
of ice sheets and valley glaciers alike. These relatively
common landforms are deposited when a state of equilibrium is attained between ablation and ice accumulation. That is, the end moraine forms when the ice is
melting and evaporating near the end of the glacier at
a rate equal to the forward advance of the glacier from
its region of nourishment. Although the terminus of the
glacier is stationary, the ice continues to flow forward,
delivering a continuous supply of sediment in the same
way a conveyor belt delivers goods to the end of a production line. As the ice melts, the till is dropped, and
SmartFigure 18.27
Two significant end moraines in the Northeast The Ronkonkoma
moraine, deposited about 20,000 years ago, extends through
central Long Island, Martha’s Vineyard, and Nantucket. The
Harbor Hill moraine formed about 14,000 years ago and extends
along the north shore of Long Island, through southern Rhode
Island and Cape Cod. A portion of the Mobile Field Trip explores
the glacial origins of Cape Cod. (http://goo.gl/MfwH34)

CT

MA

Boston

RI

Cape
Cod

Harbor Hill moraine
NY

Martha’s
Vineyard

NJ

Long Island

Ronkonkoma moraine

Nantucket

555

18.4 Glacial Deposits
Drumlin
Esker
Drumlin field

Esker
Retreating
glacier

Outwash
plain

Braided
river

End
moraine

Kame
Kettle lake
Kame
Bedrock

Ground
moraine

Braided
river

SmartFigure 18.28
Common depositional landforms This diagram depicts a hypothetical area affected by ice sheets in the recent geologic past.
(Drumlin photo courtesy of Ward’s Natural Science Establishment; esker photo by Richard P. Jacobs/JLM Visuals; kame photo by John Dankwardt; kettle lake
photo by Carlyn Iverson/Science Source; braided river photo by Michael Collier) (https://goo.gl/7TDPkt)

near Milwaukee is a particularly picturesque example.
A well-known example in the Northeast is Long
Island. This linear strip of glacial sediment extending
northeastward from New York City is part of an end
moraine complex that stretches from eastern Pennsylvania to Cape Cod, Massachusetts (Figure 18.27).
Figure 18.28 represents a hypothetical area during
glaciation and after the retreat of ice sheets. This figure
depicts landscape features such as the end moraines just
described as well as depositional landforms, similar to
what might be encountered if you were traveling in the
upper Midwest or New England. You will be referred to
this figure several times as you read the following paragraphs on glacial deposits.

kilometer long. The steep side of the hill faces the direction from which the ice advanced, whereas the gentler,
longer slope points in the direction the ice moved. Drumlins are not found as isolated landforms but rather occur
in clusters called drumlin fields (Figure 18.29). One such
cluster, east of Rochester, New York, is estimated to contain about 10,000 drumlins. Although drumlin formation
is not fully understood, the streamlined shape of drumlins indicates that they were molded in the zone of plastic
flow within an active glacier. It is believed that many
drumlins originate when glaciers advance over previously
deposited drift and reshape the material.

Drumlins Moraines are not the only landforms com-

Much of the material acquired and transported by a
glacier is ultimately deposited by streams of glacial
meltwater flowing on, within, beneath, and beyond
a glacier. This sediment is termed stratified drift.
Unlike glacial till, stratified drift shows some degree
of sorting. There are two basic categories of features
composed of stratified drift: Ice-contact deposits accumulate on, within, or immediately adjacent to a glacier.
Outwash sediment, or simply outwash, is material
deposited by meltwater streams beyond the terminus
of a glacier.

posed of till. In some areas that were once covered by
continental ice sheets, a special variety of glacial landscape exists—one characterized by smooth, elongate, parallel hills called drumlins (see Figure 18.28). Certainly
one of the best-known drumlins is Bunker Hill in Boston,
the site of the famous Revolutionary War battle in 1775.
An examination of Bunker Hill or other less famous
drumlins would show that drumlins are streamlined,
asymmetrical hills composed largely of till. They range
in height from about 15 to 50 meters and may be up to 1

Landforms Made of Stratified Drift

Kettle lake

556

CHAPTER 18

Glaciers and Glaciation

Figure 18.29
Drumlin field A portion
of the drumlin field shown
on the Palmyra, New York,
7.5-minute topographic
map. North is at the top.
The drumlins are steepest
on the north side, indicating that the ice advanced
from this direction.
_TT67


Drumlins

example is Walden Pond near Concord, Massachusetts. It
is here that Henry David Thoreau lived alone for 2 years
in the 1840s and about which he wrote his famous book
Walden; or, Life in the Woods.

Lake Ontario

554

543

560

600

0

56

600

650

BM

650

570

600

589

650

650

600

600

600

600

650

orah

Hill Cum

Angel Moroni
Monument

Outwash Plains and Valley Trains At the same time
that an end moraine is forming, water from the melting
glacier cascades over the till, sweeping some of it out in
front of the growing ridge of unsorted debris. Meltwater
generally emerges from the ice in rapidly moving streams
that are often choked with suspended material and carry
a substantial bed load as well. Water leaving the glacier
moves onto the relatively flat surface beyond and rapidly
loses velocity. As a consequence, much of its bed load is
dropped, and the meltwater begins weaving a complex
pattern of braided channels (see Figure 18.28). In this
way, a broad, ramplike surface composed of stratified
drift is built adjacent to the downstream edge of most
end moraines. When the feature is formed in association
with an ice sheet, it is termed an outwash plain, and
when largely confined to a mountain valley, it is usually
called a valley train.
Outwash plains and valley trains often are pockmarked with basins or depressions known as kettles
(see Figure 18.28). Kettles also occur in deposits of till.
Kettles are formed when blocks of stagnant ice become
wholly or partly buried in drift and eventually melt, leaving pits in the glacial sediment. Although most kettles
do not exceed 2 kilometers in diameter, some with
diameters exceeding 10 kilometers occur in Minnesota.
Likewise, the typical depth of most kettles is less than
10 meters, although the vertical dimensions of some
approach 50 meters. In many cases water eventually fills
the depression and forms a pond or lake. One well-known

Ice-Contact Deposits When the melting terminus of
a glacier shrinks to a critical point, flow virtually stops,
and the ice becomes stagnant. Meltwater that flows over,
within, and at the base of the motionless ice lays down
deposits of stratified drift. Then, as the supporting ice
melts away, the stratified sediment is left behind in the
form of hills, terraces, and ridges. Such accumulations
are collectively termed ice-contact deposits and are
classified according to their shapes.
When the ice-contact stratified drift is in the form
of a mound or steep-sided hill, it is called a kame (see
Figure 18.28). Some kames represent bodies of sediment deposited by meltwater in openings within or
depressions on top of the ice. Others originate as deltas
or fans built outward from the ice by meltwater streams.
Later, when the stagnant ice melts away, these various
accumulations of sediment collapse to form isolated,
irregular mounds.
When glacial ice occupies a valley, kame terraces
may be built along the sides of the valley. These features
commonly are narrow masses of stratified drift laid down
between the glacier and the side of the valley by meltwater streams that drop debris along the margins of the
shrinking ice mass.
A third type of ice-contact deposit is a long, narrow,
sinuous ridge composed largely of sand and gravel. Some
are more than 100 meters high, with lengths in excess
of 100 kilometers. The dimensions of many others are
far less spectacular. Known as eskers, these ridges are
deposited by meltwater rivers flowing within, on top of,
and beneath a mass of motionless, stagnant glacial ice
(see Figure 18.28). Many sediment sizes are carried by
the torrents of meltwater in the ice-banked channels,
but only the coarser material can settle out of the turbulent stream.

18.4

Concept Checks

1. What term can be applied to any glacial deposit?
Distinguish between till and stratified drift.
2. How are medial moraines and lateral moraines
related? In what kind of setting do these features
form?
3. Contrast end moraine and ground moraine.
Relate these features to the budget of a glacier.
4. Sketch a profile (side view) of a drumlin. Include
an arrow to indicate the direction from which the
ice advanced.
5. Distinguish between outwash deposits and icecontact deposits.

557

18.5 Other Effects of Ice Age Glaciers

E Y E ON E A R T H

18.4

T

his is a ridge of glacial drift that was deposited
at the terminus of Exit Glacier in Alaska’s Kenai
Fiords National Park. (Photo by Michael Collier)

QUESTION 1 Is this a deposit of stratified drift or a
deposit of till? Explain.
QUESTION 2 Describe the budget of the glacier
(accumulation versus ablation) as this ridge of sediment
accumulated.
QUESTION 3 What term is applied to features such as
the one pictured here?

18.5

Other Effects of Ice Age Glaciers
Describe and explain several important effects of Ice Age glaciers other than
erosional and depositional landforms.

In addition to the massive erosional and depositional work carried out by Ice Age glaciers, the ice
sheets had other effects, sometimes profound, on the landscape. For example, as the ice advanced and
retreated, animals and plants were forced to migrate. This led to stresses that some organisms could
not tolerate. Hence, a number of plants and animals became extinct. Other effects of Ice Age glaciers
that are described in this section involve adjustments in Earth’s crust due to the addition and removal
of ice, and sea-level changes associated with the formation and melting of ice sheets. The advance and
retreat of ice sheets also led to significant changes in the routes taken by rivers. In some regions, glaciers acted as dams that created large lakes. When these ice dams failed, the effects on the landscape
were profound. In areas that today are deserts, lakes of another type, called pluvial lakes, formed.

Crustal Subsidence and Rebound
In areas that were major centers of ice accumulation,
such as Scandinavia and the Canadian Shield, the land
has been slowly rising over the past several thousand
years. Uplifting of almost 300 meters (1000 feet) has
occurred in the Hudson Bay region. This, too, is the
result of the continental ice sheets. But how can glacial ice cause such vertical crustal movement? We now
In northern Canada and Scandinavia, where the greatest
accumulation of glacial ice occurred, the added weight caused
downwarping of the crust.

understand that the land is rising because the added
weight of the 3-kilometer- (2-mile-) thick mass of ice
caused downwarping of Earth’s crust. For example,
scientists have determined that Antarctica’s ice sheets
depress Earth’s crust by an estimated 900 meters (3000
feet) or more in some places. Following the removal
of this immense load, the crust adjusts by gradually
rebounding upward (Figure 18.30).*
* For a detailed explanation of this concept, termed isostatic adjustment, see
the discussion of isostasy in the section “Vertical Movements of the Crust” in
Chapter 14.

Figure 18.30

Crust
Crust
Mantle

Mantle
Ever since the ice melted, there has been gradual uplift or
rebound of the crust.

Crustal subsidence and
rebound These simplified
diagrams illustrate subsidence and rebound resulting from the addition and
removal of continental ice
sheets.

Glaciers and Glaciation

.
Red R

Sea-Level Changes
Miss

M
R.

s

R.

Illino

i

r

i

ippi R.
iss
iss

ou

Ohio

R

A. This map shows the Great Lakes and the familiar present-day
pattern of rivers. Quaternary ice sheets played a major role in
creating this pattern.

Mis

souri

r

Uppe

R.

M
issi

ssi
M

.
i R

er

pp

Low

is

so

ri

Teays R.

R.
R

.

u

One of the most interesting and perhaps dramatic effects
of the Ice Age was the fall and rise of sea level that
accompanied the advance and retreat of the glaciers.
Although the total volume of glacial ice today is
great, exceeding 25 million cubic kilometers, during
the Last Glacial Maximum the volume of glacial ice
amounted to about 70 million cubic kilometers, or 45
million cubic kilometers more than at present. Because
we know that the snow from which glaciers are made
ultimately comes from the evaporation of ocean water,
the growth of ice sheets must have caused a significant
worldwide drop in sea level (Figure 18.31). Indeed, estimates suggest that sea level was as much as 100 meters
(330 feet) lower than it is today. Thus, land that is presently flooded by the oceans was dry. The Atlantic coast
of the United States lay more than 100 kilometers (60
miles) to the east of New York City, France and Britain
were joined where the famous English Channel is today,
Alaska and Siberia were connected across the Bering
Strait, and Southeast Asia was tied by dry land to the
islands of Indonesia. Conversely, if the water currently
locked up in the Antarctic ice sheet were to melt completely, sea level would rise by an estimated 60 or 70
meters. Such an occurrence would flood many densely
populated coastal areas.

.

CHAPTER 18

Red R.

558

Ohio

Changes to Rivers and Valleys
Among the effects associated with the advance and
retreat of North American ice sheets were changes in the
routes of many rivers and the modification in the size and
shape of many valleys. If we are to understand the present pattern of rivers and lakes in the central and northeastern United States (and many other places as well), we

Changing sea level As ice
sheets form and then melt
away, sea level falls and
rises, causing the shoreline
to shift. (https://goo.gl/fKN1kJ)

During the Last Glacial
Maximum, about 18,000
years ago, sea level was
nearly 100 meters (330
feet) lower than it is
today.

– 60
– 80

Last glacial
maximum

20 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4
Thousands of years ago

Maximum extent
of glaciation

Changing rivers The advance and retreat of ice sheets caused
major changes in the routes followed by rivers in the central
United States.

Upper Mississippi Drainage Basin

– 40

– 100

Figure 18.32

need to be aware of glacial history. Two examples illustrate these effects.

Present
level
– 20

Mean sea level (m)

SmartFigure 18.31

B. Reconstruction of drainage systems prior to the Ice Age. The
pattern was very different from today, and the Great Lakes did
not exist.

2

0

Coastline
18,000
years ago

During the Last Glacial Maximum, the shoreline extended out
onto the present-day continental shelf.

Figure 18.32A

shows the familiar present-day pattern of rivers in the
central United States, with the Missouri, Ohio, and Illinois Rivers as major tributaries to the Mississippi. Figure
18.32B depicts drainage systems in this region prior to the
Ice Age. The pattern is very different from the present.
This remarkable transformation of river systems resulted
from the advance and retreat of the ice sheets.
Notice that prior to the Ice Age, a significant part of
the Missouri River drained north toward Hudson Bay.
Moreover, the Mississippi River did not follow the present
Iowa–Illinois boundary but rather flowed across westcentral Illinois, where the lower Illinois River flows today.
The preglacial Ohio River barely reached to the presentday state of Ohio, and the rivers that today feed the Ohio
in western Pennsylvania flowed north and drained into the
North Atlantic. The Great Lakes were created by glacial
erosion during the Ice Age. Prior to the Pleistocene epoch,

559

18.5 Other Effects of Ice Age Glaciers

(600 feet) deep at its lowest point, and Cayuga Lake is
nearly 135 meters (450 feet) deep—and the beds of both
lakes lie below sea level. The depth to which the glaciers
carved these basins is much greater. There are hundreds
of feet of glacial sediment in the deep rock troughs below
the lake beds.

Ice Dams Create Proglacial Lakes
Ice sheets and alpine glaciers can act
as dams to create lakes by trapping
glacial meltwater and blocking the
flow of rivers. Some of these lakes are
relatively small, short-lived impoundLake Canandaigua
ments. Others can be large and exist
for hundreds or thousands of years.
Figure 18.34 is a map of Lake Agassiz—the largest lake to form during
the Ice Age in North America. It came
into existence about 12,000 years ago
and lasted for about 4500 years. With
the retreat of the ice sheet came enormous volumes of meltwater. The Great
Plains generally slope upward to the
west. As the terminus of the ice sheet
Figure 18.33
receded northeastward, meltwater was trapped between
New York’s Finger Lakes The long, narrow basins occupied
the ice on one side and the sloping land on the other, causby these lakes were created when ice sheets scoured these
river valleys into deep troughs. (Satellite image courtesy of NASA; photo ing Lake Agassiz to deepen and spread across the landby James Schwabel/Alamy Images)
scape. Such water bodies are termed proglacial lakes,
referring to their position just beyond the outer limits of a
the basins occupied by these huge lakes were lowlands
glacier or an ice sheet. The history of Lake Agassiz is comwith rivers that ran eastward to the Gulf of St. Lawrence.
plicated by the dynamics of the ice sheet, which, at various
The large Teays River was a significant feature prior
times, readvanced and affected lake levels and drainage
to the Ice Age (see Figure 18.32B). The Teays flowed from systems. Where drainage occurred depended on the water
West Virginia across Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois, and it dis- level of the lake and the position of the ice sheet.
charged into the Mississippi River not far from present-day
Lake Agassiz left marks over a broad region. Former
Peoria. This river valley, which would have rivaled the Mis- beaches, now many kilometers from any water, mark
sissippi in size, was completely obliterated during the
Pleistocene, buried by glacial deposits hundreds of
MANITOBA
Hudson Bay
feet thick. Today the sands and gravels in the buried
Teays valley make it an important aquifer.

New York’s Finger Lakes The recent geologic
history of west-central New York State south of
Lake Ontario was dominated by ice sheets. We
have already noted the drumlins in the vicinity of
Rochester (see Figure 18.29). Many other depositional features and erosional effects are found
in the region. Perhaps the best known are the
Finger Lakes, 11 long, narrow, roughly parallel
water bodies oriented north–south like fingers on
a pair of outstretched hands (Figure 18.33). Prior to
the Ice Age, the Finger Lakes area consisted of a
series of river valleys that were oriented parallel
to the direction of ice movement. Multiple episodes of glacial erosion transformed these valleys
into deep, steep-walled lakes. Two of the lakes are
very deep—Seneca Lake is more than 180 meters

Lac La Ronge

Cedar
Lake

Lake
Winnipegosis
SASKATCHEWAN

Lake
Manitoba

NORTH DAKOTA

ONTARIO

Lake
Winnipeg

Lake of
the Woods
Red
Lakes

Lake

Glacial Lake Agassiz
Remnant lakes

MINNESOTA

rior

Supe

WISCONSIN
_TT68


Figure 18.34
Glacial Lake Agassiz This
lake was an immense
feature—bigger than
all of the present-day
Great Lakes combined.
Modern-day remnants of
this proglacial water body
are still major landscape
features.

560

CHAPTER 18

Figure 18.35
Lake Missoula and the
Channeled Scablands
During a span of 1500
years, more than 40 megafloods from Lake Missoula
carved the Channeled
Scablands. (Photo by John S.

This prehistoric proglacial lake in western
Montana periodically
broke through the ice
dam that created it. This
resulted in huge floods
(megafloods) that shaped
the landscape of eastern
Washington State.

Shelton/University of Washington
Libraries)

The Purcell lobe blocks the river creating
a 600 meter- (2000-foot-) high dam.

Cordilleran ice sheet

Cl

Area
of
Missoula
flooding
Yakima

a Ri ve
Co l u m b i

ar

k

Spokane

Fo

rk

Riv

er

Lake Missoula
was up to 300
kilometers (185
miles) long and
held more water
than present-day
Lake Ontario.

Lake
Missoula

Missoula

WASHINGTON

Lewiston

r
OREGON

IDAHO

MONTANA

of the former lake basin are
now fertile agricultural land.
Research shows that the
shifting of glaciers and the
failure of ice dams can cause
the rapid release of huge volumes of water. Such events
occurred during the history
of Lake Agassiz. A dramatic
example of such glacial outbursts occurred in the Pacific
Northwest between about
15,000 and 13,000 years ago
and is briefly described in
Figure 18.35.

Pluvial Lakes

Figure 18.36
Pluvial lakes During the
Ice Age, the Basin and
Range region experienced
a wetter climate than it has
today. Many basins turned
into large lakes.

While the formation and
growth of ice sheets was
an obvious response to significant changes in climate,
the existence of the glaciers
themselves triggered imporThe towering mass of rushing water from each megaflood stripped away layers of sediment
tant climatic changes in the
and soil and cut deep canyons (coulees) into the underlying layers of basalt to create the
regions beyond their marChanneled Scablands.
gins. In arid and semiarid
former shorelines. Several modern river valleys, including
areas on all the continents, temperatures were lower and
the Red River and the Minnesota River, were originally cut thus evaporation rates were lower, but at the same time,
by water entering or leaving the lake. Present-day remnants precipitation totals were moderate. This cooler, wetter
of Lake Agassiz include Lake Winnipeg, Lake Manitoba,
climate formed many pluvial lakes (pluvia = rain). In
Lake Winnipegosis, and Lake of the Woods. The sediments North America the greatest concentration of pluvial lakes
occurred in the vast Basin and Range region of Nevada
and Utah (Figure 18.36). By far the largest of the lakes in
this region was Lake Bonneville. With maximum depths
The Great Salt Lake
exceeding 300 meters (1000 feet) and an area of 50,000
is a remnant of Lake
square kilometers (20,000 square miles), Lake Bonneville
Bonneville
OREGON IDAHO
was nearly the same size as present-day Lake Michigan.
As the ice sheets waned, the climate again grew more
NEVADA
arid, and the lake levels lowered in response. Although
most of the lakes completely disappeared, a few small
remnants of Lake Bonneville remain, the Great Salt Lake
Lake
being the largest and best known.
Lahontan

CALIFORNIA

Lake Bonneville was
nearly the size of
present-day Lake
Michigan

18.5

1. List and briefly describe five effects of Ice Age
glaciers aside from the formation of major
erosional and depositional features.

UTAH
ARIZONA
WA

MT
ID

OR

0
0

NV

120 mi
120 km

Concept Checks

UT

CA
AZ

2. Examine Figure 18.31 and determine how much sea
level has changed since the Last Glacial Maximum.
3. Compare the two parts of Figure 18.32 and
identify three major changes to the flow of rivers
in the central United States during the Ice Age.
4. Contrast proglacial lakes and pluvial lakes. Give
an example of each.

561

18.6 The Ice Age

18.6

The Ice Age
Briefly discuss the development of glacial theory and summarize current ideas
on the causes of ice ages.

In the preceding pages, we mentioned the Ice Age, a time when ice sheets and alpine glaciers were
far more extensive than they are today. As noted, there was a time when the most popular explanation for what we now know to be glacial deposits was that the materials had been drifted in by means
of icebergs or perhaps simply swept across the landscape by a catastrophic flood. What convinced
geologists that an extensive ice age was responsible for these deposits and many other glacial features?

Historical Development
of the Glacial Theory
In 1821 a Swiss engineer, Ignaz Venetz, presented a paper
suggesting that glacial landscape features occurred at considerable distances from the existing glaciers in the Alps.
This implied that the glaciers had once been larger and
occupied positions farther downvalley. Another Swiss scientist, Louis Agassiz, doubted the proposal of widespread
glacial activity put forth by Venetz. He set out to prove
that the idea was not valid. However, his 1836 fieldwork
in the Alps convinced him of the merits of his colleague’s
hypothesis. In fact, a year later Agassiz hypothesized a
great ice age that had extensive and far-reaching effects—
an idea that was to give Agassiz widespread fame.
The proof of the glacial theory proposed by Agassiz
and others constitutes a classic example of applying the
principle of uniformitarianism. Realizing that certain
features are produced by no other known process but
glacial action, the scientists were able to begin reconstructing the extent of now-vanished ice sheets based on
the presence of features and deposits found far beyond
the margins of present-day glaciers and ice sheets. In this
manner, the development and verification of the glacial
theory continued during the nineteenth century, and
through the efforts of many scientists, a knowledge of the
nature and extent of former ice sheets became clear.
By the beginning of the twentieth century, geologists
had largely determined the extent of the Ice Age glaciation.
Further, during the course of their investigations, they
discovered that many glaciated regions had not one but
several layers of drift. Moreover, close examination of these
older deposits showed well-developed zones of chemical
weathering and soil formation, as well as the remains of
plants that require warm temperatures. The evidence was
clear: There had been not just one glacial advance but
many, each separated by extended periods when climates
were as warm as or even warmer than the present. The
Ice Age had not simply been a time when the ice advanced
over the land, lingered for a while, and then receded.
Rather, the period was a very complex event, characterized
by a number of advances and withdrawals of glacial ice.
By the early twentieth century, a fourfold division of
the Ice Age had been established for both North America
and Europe. These divisions were based largely on studies of glacial deposits. In North America each of the four

major stages was named for the midwestern state where
deposits of that stage were well exposed and/or were first
studied. These are, in order of occurrence, the Nebraskan,
Kansan, Illinoian, and Wisconsinan. These traditional
divisions remained in place for many years, until it was
learned that sediment cores from the ocean floor contain
a much more complete record of climate change during
the Ice Age. Unlike the glacial record on land, which is
punctuated by many unconformities, seafloor sediments
provide an uninterrupted record of climatic cycles for this
period (Figure 18.37). Studies of these seafloor sediments
showed that glacial/interglacial cycles had occurred about
every 100,000 years. About 20 such cycles of cooling and
warming were identified for the span we call the Ice Age.
During the Ice Age, ice left its imprint on almost 30
percent of Earth’s land area, including about 10 million
square kilometers of North America, 5 million square kilometers of Europe, and 4 million square kilometers of Siberia (Figure 18.38). The amount of glacial ice in the Northern
Hemisphere was roughly twice that in the Southern Hemisphere. The primary reason is that the southern polar ice
could not spread far beyond the margins of Antarctica.
By contrast, North America and Eurasia provided great
expanses of land for the spread of ice sheets.
Today we know that the Ice Age began between
2 million and 3 million years ago. This means that most
of the major glacial stages occurred during a division of
the geologic time scale called the Quaternary period.
However, this period does not encompass all of the last
glacial period. The Antarctic ice sheet, for example, probably formed at least 30 million years ago.
Figure 18.37
Evidence from the
seafloor Cores of seafloor
sediment provided
data that led to a more
complete understanding
of the complexity of Ice
Age climates. (Photo by Gary
Braasch/ZUMA Press/Newscom)

562

CHAPTER 18

Glaciers and Glaciation

Figure 18.38

RUSSIA

Where was the ice? This
map shows the maximum
extent of ice sheets in the
Northern Hemisphere
during the Ice Age.

North Pole
Arctic
Ocean
GREENLAND

Alps

Pacific
Ocean
CANADA

Atlantic
Ocean

UNITED STATES

Glacial ice

Sea ice

Causes of Ice Ages
A great deal is known about glaciers and glaciation. Much
has been learned about glacier formation and movement,
the extent of glaciers past and present, and the features
created by glaciers, both erosional and depositional. However, the causes of ice ages are not completely understood.
Although widespread glaciation has been rare in
Earth’s history, the Ice Age that encompassed most of
the Quaternary period is not the only glacial period for
which records exist. Earlier glaciations are indicated
by deposits called tillite, a sedimentary rock formed
when glacial till becomes lithified (Figure 18.39). Such
deposits, found in strata of several different ages, usually contain striated rock fragments, and some overlie
grooved and polished bedrock surfaces or are associated
with sandstones and conglomerates that show features of
outwash deposits. For example, our Chapter 2 discussion
Figure 18.39
Tillite When glacial till is
lithified, it becomes the
sedimentary rock known
as tillite. Tillite strata are
evidence for ice ages
that occurred prior to the
Quaternary period.
(Photo by Brian Roman)

of evidence supporting the continental drift hypothesis
mentioned a glacial period that occurred in late Paleozoic time (see Figure 2.7, page 42). Two Precambrian glacial episodes have been identified in the geologic record,
the first approximately 2 billion years ago and the second
about 600 million years ago.
Any theory that attempts to explain the causes of ice
ages must successfully answer two basic questions:
r What causes the onset of glacial conditions? For
continental ice sheets to have formed, average
temperature must have been somewhat lower than
at present, and perhaps substantially lower than
throughout much of geologic time. Thus, a successful theory would have to account for the cooling that
finally leads to glacial conditions.
r What caused the alternating glacial and interglacial
stages that have been documented for the Quaternary
period? Whereas the first question deals with long-term
trends in temperature on a scale of millions of years,
this question relates to much shorter-term changes.
Although the scientific literature contains many hypotheses
related to possible causes of glacial periods, we will discuss
only a few major ideas to summarize current thought.

Plate Tectonics Probably the most attractive proposal for
explaining the fact that extensive glaciations have occurred
only a few times in the geologic past comes from the theory
of plate tectonics. Because glaciers can form only on land,
we know that landmasses must exist somewhere in the
higher latitudes before an ice age can commence. Many
scientists suggest that ice ages have occurred only when
Earth’s shifting crustal plates have carried the continents
from tropical latitudes to more poleward positions.
Glacial features in present-day Africa, Australia,
South America, and India indicate that these regions,
which are now tropical or subtropical, experienced an ice
age near the end of the Paleozoic era, about 250 million
years ago. However, there is no evidence that ice sheets
existed during this same period in what are today the
higher latitudes of North America and Eurasia. For many
years this puzzled scientists. Was the climate in these
relatively tropical latitudes once like it is today in Greenland and Antarctica? Why did glaciers not form in North
America and Eurasia? Until the plate tectonics theory was
formulated, there had been no reasonable explanation.
Today scientists understand that the areas containing these ancient glacial features were joined together
as a single supercontinent called Pangaea, located at
latitudes far to the south of their present positions. Later
this landmass broke apart, and its pieces, each moving on
a different plate, migrated toward their present locations
(Figure 18.40). Now we know that during the geologic
past, plate movements accounted for many dramatic
climate changes, as landmasses shifted in relation to one
another and moved to different latitudinal positions.
Changes in oceanic circulation also must have occurred,

563

18.6 The Ice Age

r Changes in obliquity—that is, changes in the angle that
Earth’s axis makes with the plane of our planet’s orbit
r The wobbling of Earth’s axis, called precession
Equator

Ice mass

North
America

Eurasia

South Africa
America
India

Australia

Antarctica

The supercontinent Pangaea showing the area covered by
glacial ice near the end of the Paleozoic era.

Using these factors, Milankovitch calculated variations in the receipt of solar energy and the corresponding
surface temperature of Earth back into time, in an attempt
to correlate these changes with the climate fluctuations of
the Quaternary. In explaining climate changes that result
from these three variables, note that they cause little or
no variation in the total solar energy reaching the ground.
Instead, their impact is felt because they change the degree
of contrast between the seasons. Somewhat milder winters
in the middle to high latitudes mean greater snowfall totals,
whereas cooler summers bring a reduction in snowmelt.
Among the studies that have added credibility to the
astronomical hypothesis of Milankovitch is one in which

Equator

SmartFigure 18.41

Circular
orbit

The shape of Earth's
orbit changes during
a cycle that spans
about 100,000 years.
It gradually changes
from nearly circular
to more elliptical and
then back again. This
diagram greatly
exaggerates the
amount of change.

The continents as they appear today. The white areas indicate
where evidence of the late Paleozoic ice sheets exists.

Figure 18.40
A late Paleozoic ice age Shifting tectonic plates sometimes
move landmasses to high latitudes, where the formation of ice
sheets is possible.

Elliptical
orbit

altering the transport of heat and moisture and consequently the climate as well. Because the rate of plate
movement is very slow—a few centimeters annually—
appreciable changes in the positions of the continents
occur only over great spans of geologic time. Thus, climate changes triggered by shifting plates are extremely
gradual and happen on a scale of millions of years.

Variations in Earth’s Orbit Because climatic changes
brought about by moving plates are extremely gradual,
the plate tectonics theory cannot be used to explain the
alternating glacial and interglacial climates that occurred
during the Pleistocene epoch. Therefore, we must look
to some other triggering mechanism that might cause
climate change on a scale of thousands, rather than millions, of years. Today many scientists strongly suspect that
the climate oscillations that characterized the Quaternary period are linked to variations in Earth’s orbit. This
hypothesis, first developed and strongly advocated by the
Serbian astrophysicist Milutin Milankovitch, is based on
the premise that variations in incoming solar radiation
are a principal factor in controlling Earth’s climate.
Milankovitch formulated a comprehensive
mathematical model based on the following elements
(Figure 18.41):
r Variations in the shape (eccentricity) of Earth’s orbit
about the Sun

Maximum tilt
Today’s tilt
Minimum tilt

24 1/2
°
23 1/2
°
22°

Plane of Earth’s orbit

Today the axis of rotation is
tilted about 23.5 degrees to
the plane of Earth's orbit.
During a cycle of 41,000
years, this angle varies from
21.5 to 24.5 degrees.

North
Star

Vega
Precession
23 1/2

°

Precession

Earth's axis wobbles like a spinning top. Consequently, the axis
points to different spots in the sky during a cycle of about
26,000 years.

Orbital variations Periodic
variations in Earth’s orbit are
linked to alternating glacial
and interglacial conditions
during the Ice Age.
(https://goo.gl/Kf87Ky)

564

CHAPTER 18

Glaciers and Glaciation

Figure 18.42
Ice cores contain clues to
shifts in climate This scientist is slicing an ice core from
Antarctica for analysis. He
is wearing protective clothing and a mask to minimize
contamination of the sample.
Chemical analyses of ice
cores can provide important
data about past climates.
(Photo by British Antarctic Survey/
Science Source)

deep-sea sediments containing certain climatically sensitive
microorganisms were analyzed to establish a chronology
of temperature changes going back nearly a half-million
years. This time scale of climate change was then compared
to astronomical calculations of eccentricity, obliquity, and
precession to determine whether a correlation existed.
Although the study was very involved and mathematically complex, the conclusions were straightforward: The
researchers found that major variations in climate over the
past several hundred thousand years were closely associated
with changes in the geometry of Earth’s orbit; that is, cycles
of climate change were shown to correspond closely with
the periods of obliquity, precession, and orbital eccentricity.
More specifically, the authors stated: “It is concluded that
changes in the earth’s orbital geometry are the fundamental cause of the succession of Quaternary ice ages.”*
To briefly summarize the ideas just described, plate
tectonics theory provides an explanation for the widely
spaced and nonperiodic onset of glacial conditions at various times in the geologic past, whereas the theory proposed
by Milankovitch and supported by the work of J. D. Hays
and his colleagues furnishes an explanation for the alternating glacial and interglacial episodes of the Quaternary.

Other Factors Variations in Earth’s orbit correlate closely
with the timing of glacial–interglacial cycles. However, the
variations in solar energy reaching Earth’s surface caused
by these orbital changes do not adequately explain the
magnitude of the temperature changes that occurred during the most recent Ice Age. Other factors must also have
contributed. One factor involves variations in the composition of the atmosphere. Other influences are related to
changes in the reflectivity of Earth’s surface and in ocean
circulation. Let’s take a brief look at these factors.
Chemical analyses of air bubbles trapped in glacial
ice at the time of ice formation indicate that the Ice Age
*J. D. Hays, John Imbrie, and N. J. Shackelton, “Variations in the Earth’s Orbit:
Pacemaker of the Ice Ages,” Science 194 (1976): 1121–1132.

atmosphere contained less carbon dioxide and methane
than the post–Ice Age atmosphere (Figure 18.42). Carbon
dioxide and methane are important “greenhouse” gases,
which means they trap radiation emitted by Earth and
contribute to atmospheric heating. When the amount of
carbon dioxide and methane in the atmosphere increases,
global temperatures rise, and when there is a reduction in
these gases, as occurred during the Ice Age, temperatures
fall. Therefore, reductions in the concentrations of greenhouse gases help explain the magnitude of the temperature drop that occurred during glacial times. Although
scientists know that concentrations of carbon dioxide and
methane dropped, they do not know what caused the
drop. As often occurs in science, observations gathered
during one investigation yield information and raise questions that require further analysis and explanation.
Obviously, whenever Earth enters an ice age, extensive areas of land that were once ice free are covered
with ice and snow. In addition, a colder climate causes
the area covered by sea ice (frozen surface seawater) to
expand. Ice and snow reflect a large portion of incoming
solar energy back to space. Thus, energy that would have
warmed Earth’s surface and the air above is lost, and
global cooling is reinforced.
Yet another factor that influences climate during glacial times relates to ocean currents. Research has shown
that ocean circulation changes during ice ages. For example, studies suggest that the warm current that transports
large amounts of heat from the tropics toward higher latitudes in the North Atlantic was significantly weaker during
the Ice Age. This would lead to a colder climate in Europe,
amplifying the cooling attributable to orbital variations.
In conclusion, we emphasize that the ideas just discussed do not represent the only possible explanations
for ice ages. Although interesting and attractive, these
proposals are certainly not without critics, nor are they
the only possibilities currently under study. Other factors
may be, and probably are, involved.

18.6

Concept Checks

1. What was the best source of data showing Ice
Age climate cycles?
2. About what percentage of Earth’s land surface
has been affected by glaciers during the
Quaternary period?
3. Where were ice sheets more extensive during
the Ice Age: the Northern Hemisphere or the
Southern Hemisphere? Why?
4. How does the theory of plate tectonics help us
understand the causes of ice ages? Does this
theory explain alternating glacial/interglacial
climates during the Ice Age?
5. Briefly summarize the climate change hypothesis
that involves variations in Earth’s orbit.

19
Deserts
and Wind

These huge sand dunes are among the tallest on Earth. Some
approach 300 meters (nearly 1000 feet) high. They are located
in the Namib Desert, a coastal desert in southern Africa.
(Photo by FRIEDRICHSMEIER/Alamy)

C

limate has

a strong influence on the nature and intensity of Earth’s external
processes. This was clearly demonstrated in the preceding chapter on glaciers. Desert
landscapes and their development provide another excellent example of the strong link
between climate and geology. The word desert literally means “deserted” or “unoccupied.” For many dry regions this is an appropriate description, although where water is
available in deserts, plants and animals thrive. Nevertheless, the world’s dry regions are
probably the least familiar land areas on Earth outside the polar realm.
As you will see, arid regions are not dominated by a single geologic process. Rather,
the effects of tectonic forces, running water, and wind are all apparent. Because these
processes combine in different ways from place to place, the appearance of desert
landscapes varies a great deal as well.

19.1

Distribution and Causes of Dry Lands
Describe the general distribution of Earth’s dry lands and explain why deserts form
in the subtropics and middle latitudes.

Desert landscapes frequently appear stark. Their profiles are not softened by a continuous carpet of
soil and abundant plant life. Instead, barren rocky outcrops with steep, angular slopes are common.
At some places the rocks are tinted orange and red. At others they are gray and brown and streaked
with black. For many visitors, desert scenery exhibits a striking beauty; to others, the terrain seems
bleak. No matter which feeling is elicited, it is clear that deserts are very different from the more
humid places where most people live.

What Is Meant by Dry
We all recognize that deserts are dry places, but just
what is meant by the term dry? That is, how much rain
defines the boundary between humid and dry regions?
Sometimes it is arbitrarily defined by a single rainfall
figure, such as 25 centimeters (10 inches) per year of precipitation. However, the concept of dryness is a relative
one that refers to any situation in which an ongoing water
deficiency exists.

Dry Climates Climatologists define dry climate as
a climate in which yearly precipitation is not as great as
the potential loss of water by evaporation. Therefore,
dryness is not only related to annual rainfall totals but
is also a function of evaporation, which in turn is closely
dependent on temperature. As temperatures climb,
potential evaporation also increases. As little as 15 to 25
centimeters (6 to 10 inches) of precipitation per year may
be sufficient to support coniferous forests in northern
Scandinavia or Siberia, where evaporation into the cool,
humid air is slight and a surplus of water remains in the
soil. However, the same amount of rain falling on Nevada
or Iran supports only a sparse vegetative cover because
evaporation into the hot, dry air is great. So, clearly, no

specific amount of precipitation can serve as a universal
boundary for dry climates.
The dry regions of the world encompass about 42
million square kilometers (16 million square miles), a
surprising 30 percent of Earth’s land surface. No other
climate category covers so large a land area. Within
water-deficient regions, two climatic types are commonly
recognized: desert, or arid, and steppe, or semiarid.
The two share many features; their differences are primarily a matter of degree. The steppe is a marginal and
more humid variant of the desert and is a transition zone
that surrounds the desert and separates it from bordering humid climates. The world map of the distribution of
desert and steppe regions shows that dry lands are concentrated in the subtropics and in the middle latitudes
(Figure 19.1).

Are Deserts Expanding? Desertlike conditions are
expanding worldwide. This important environmental problem, called desertification, refers to the persistent degradation of dry-land ecosystems primarily due to human
activities. It most often, but not always, takes place on the
margins of desert and steppe regions and involves a continuum of change, from slight to severe alteration of plant

160°

140°

120°

100°

80°

60°

20°

40°

20°

0°

40°

60°

80°

100°

120°

573

140°

60°

Gobi

Turkestan

40°

Taklamakan

Sahara

Tropic of Cancer

Arabian
Iranian Great
Indian

20°

Equator

0°

SmartFigure 19.1
Dry climates Arid and
semiarid climates cover
about 30 percent of Earth’s
land surface. The dry
region of the American
West is commonly divided
into four deserts, two of
which extend into Mexico.
(https://goo.gl/HxXqnO)

Great
Basin

Great
Sandy

Namib

Atacama

Tropic of Capricorn

20°

Kalahari

Mojave

Desert (arid)

Patagonian

Sonoran

Simpson

40°

Steppe (semiarid)
60°

Chihuahuan

and soil resources. Desertification occurs when deforestation and overgrazing reduce or completely remove the
tree and plant cover that anchors the soil. In some regions,
intensive and unsustainable farming practices destroy the
natural vegetation and deplete soil nutrients. Wind and
water erosion aggravate the damage by carrying away
topsoil. When drought occurs on these lands without
sufficient vegetation to hold the soil against erosion, the
destruction can be irreversible. Desertification is occurring in many places but is parA. Subtropical deserts
ticularly serious in the region
and steppes are centered
south of the Sahara Desert
between 20° and 30°
north and south latitude
known as the Sahel.

Subtropical Deserts
and Steppes

in association with the
subtropical high-pressure
belts. Dry subsiding air
inhibits cloud formation
and precipitation.

The heart of the subtropical
dry climates lies in the vicinities of the
Tropics of Cancer and Capricorn.
Figure 19.1 shows a virtually
unbroken desert environment
stretching for more than 9300
kilometers (5800 miles) from
the Atlantic coast of North
Africa to the dry lands of
northwestern India. In
addition to this single great
expanse, the Northern Hemisphere contains another, much
smaller area of subtropical desert
and steppe in northern Mexico and
the southwestern United States.

In the Southern Hemisphere, dry climates dominate
Australia. Almost 40 percent of the continent is desert,
and much of the remainder is steppe. In addition, arid
and semiarid areas occur in southern Africa and make a
limited appearance in coastal Chile and Peru.

Subsiding Air Masses What causes these bands of
low-latitude desert? The answer is the global distribution of air pressure and winds. Figure 19.2A, an idealized
Subpolar
low

Polar high

Polar easterlies
60°

Polar front
30°
S

ub

tro Westerlies
pica
l high

NE
trade winds

0°

Equ
atoria
l low

Subt
ro

pical high

B. In this view from space, the Sahara
Desert, the adjacent Arabian Desert
and the Kalahari and Namib deserts
are clearly visible as tan-colored,
cloud-free zones. The band of clouds
across central Africa and the adjacent
oceans coincides with the equatorial
low-pressure belt.

SmartFigure 19.2
Subtropical deserts The
distribution of subtropical
deserts and steppes is
closely related to the global
distribution of air pressure.
(Photo courtesy of NASA)
(https://goo.gl/ONZDSx)

574

CHAPTER 19

Deserts and Wind

diagram of Earth’s general circulation, helps visualize
the relationship. Heated air in the pressure belt known
as the equatorial low rises to great heights (usually
between 15 and 20 kilometers) and then spreads out. As
the upper-level flow reaches 20 to 30 degrees latitude,
north or south, it sinks toward the surface. Air that rises
through the atmosphere expands and cools, a process
that leads to the development of clouds and precipitation. For this reason, the areas under the influence of
the equatorial low are among the rainiest on Earth. Just
the opposite is true for the regions in the vicinity of
30 degrees north and south latitude, where high pressure predominates. Here, in the zones known as the
subtropical highs, air is subsiding. When air sinks, it is
compressed and warmed. Such conditions are just the
opposite of what is needed to produce clouds and precipitation. Consequently, these regions are known
for their clear skies, sunshine, and ongoing dryness
(Figure 19.2B).

West Coast Subtropical Deserts Where subtropical
deserts are found along the west coasts of continents,
cold ocean currents have a dramatic influence on
the climate. The principal examples are the Atacama
Desert in South America, which is adjacent to the
cold Peru Current, and the Namib Desert in southwestern Africa, which parallels the cold Benguela Current (see Figure 19.1). These dry lands deviate considerably from the general image we have of subtropical
deserts.
The most obvious effect of the cold current is
reduced temperatures. Furthermore, although these
SmartFigure 19.3
Rainshadow deserts
Mountains frequently
contribute to the aridity
of middle-latitude deserts
and steppes by creating a rainshadow. The
Great Basin Desert is a
rainshadow desert that
covers nearly all of Nevada
and portions of adjacent
states. (Photo on left by Dean
Pennala/Shutterstock; photo on
right by Dennis Tasa)
(https://goo.gl/xfTCht)

When moving air meets a
mountain barrier, it is forced to
rise. Clouds and precipitation on
the windward side often result.
Coast Range

Windward
(wet)
Wind

deserts are adjacent to the ocean, their yearly rainfall
totals are among the lowest in the world. The aridity
of these coastal areas is intensified because the lower
air is chilled by the cold offshore waters. When air is
cooled from below, it resists the upward movement
needed for cloud formation and precipitation. In addition, the cold current often chills the air enough to
cause fog to form. Thus, not all subtropical deserts are
sunny and hot. Cold offshore currents cause west coast
subtropical deserts to be relatively cool places that
sometimes are foggy.
The Atacama along the west coast of South America
has the distinction of being the world’s driest desert.
The average rainfall at the Atacama’s wettest locations
is not more than 3 millimeters (0.12 inch) per year. At
Arica, a coastal town near Chile’s border with Peru,
the average annual rainfall is a mere 0.5 millimeter
(0.02 inch). Further inland, some stations have never
recorded rainfall.

Middle-Latitude Deserts and Steppes

Unlike their low-latitude counterparts, middle-latitude
deserts and steppes are not controlled by the subsiding air masses associated with zones of high pressure.
Instead, many of these dry lands exist because they are
sheltered in the deep interiors of large landmasses. They
are far removed from the ocean, which is the ultimate
source of moisture for cloud formation and precipitation.
One well-known example is the Gobi Desert of central
Asia (see Figure 19.1).
The presence of high mountains
across the paths of prevailing winds is
Air descending
the leeward side another factor that separates middlelatitude arid and semiarid areas from
is much drier.
Sierra Nevada
water-bearing, maritime air masses.
Range
Mountains force the air masses
Rainshadow
to lose much of their water. The
mechanism is straightforward:
Leeward
Great
(dry)
As prevailing winds meet mounBasin
tain barriers, the air is forced to
ascend. When air rises, it expands
and cools, a process that can produce clouds and precipitation.
The windward sides of
mountains, therefore, often
have high precipitation. By
contrast, the leeward sides
of mountains are usually
much drier (Figure 19.3).
This situation exists because
air reaching the leeward
side has lost much of its
moisture, and if the air
descends, it is compressed

575

19.1 Distribution
and Causes of Dry Lands
250

and warmed, making cloud formation even less
likely. The dry region that results on this leeward
side is often referred to as a rainshadow. Figure
19.4, which shows the distribution of precipitation
in western Washington State, is a good example.
When prevailing winds from the Pacific Ocean to
the west (left) meet the
mountains, rainfall totals
ANNUAL PRECIPITATION
are high. By comparicm
in.
son, precipitation on the
>500
>200
leeward (eastern) side
405–499
160–199
of the mountains is rela250–404
100–159
tively meager. In North
150–249
60–99
America, the foremost
50–149
20–59
mountain barriers to mois25–49
10–19
ture from the Pacific are
<25
<10
the Coast Ranges, Sierra
Nevada, and Cascades. In
Asia, the great Himalayan
chain prevents the summertime monsoon flow of moist
Indian Ocean air from reaching the interior of the
continent.
Because the Southern Hemisphere lacks extensive
land areas in the middle latitudes, only small areas of
desert and steppe occur in this latitude range, existing
primarily near the southern tip of South America in the
rainshadow of the towering Andes.
The middle-latitude deserts provide an example
of how tectonic processes affect climate. Rainshadow
deserts exist because of the mountains produced when
plates collide. Without such mountain-building episodes,
wetter climates would prevail where many dry regions
exist today.
_TT69


E Y E ON E A R T H

150
250

50

Figure 19.4
50

Olympic 50
Mountains 150

405
150
25

500

Cascade
Mountains

150

405

250
50
150

250
150

250

150

50
150

50

250
25
150

19.1

50

50

Concept Checks

1. Explain why the boundary between humid and
dry climates cannot be defined by a single rainfall
amount.
2. How extensive are the desert and steppe regions
of Earth?
3. What is the primary cause of subtropical deserts
and steppes? How do cold ocean currents
influence some subtropical deserts?
4. Why do middle-latitude dry regions exist? What
role do mountains play?
5. In which hemisphere (Northern or Southern) are
middle-latitude deserts most common? Explain.

19.1

T

his view of Earth from space was acquired in
April 2015. The image shows southern Africa
and adjacent ocean areas. Two cloud-free desert
areas are identified by the letters A and B.

QUESTION 1 Name the two deserts shown on this
image.
QUESTION 2 Both deserts result from the same basic
cause. What is it?

Africa

B

A

QUESTION 3 Although both deserts form from the
same process, desert B exhibits some characteristics
that are quite different from desert A. Describe how
they differ and why.
QUESTION 4 Name another desert that has
characteristics similar to desert B.
(NASA)

Distribution of precipitation in western
Washington State The
Olympic and Cascade
Mountains receive abundant rainfall. The semiarid
eastern portion of the
area shown here is in a
rainshadow.

576

CHAPTER 19

Deserts and Wind

19.2

Geologic Processes in Arid Climates
Summarize the geologic roles of weathering, running water, and wind in arid and
semiarid climates.

The angular hills, the sheer canyon walls, and the desert surface of pebbles or sand contrast sharply
with the rounded hills and curving slopes of more humid places. To a visitor from a humid region,
a desert may seem to have been shaped by forces different from those operating in well-watered
areas. However, although the contrasts may be striking, arid and humid landscapes do not reflect
different processes. They merely disclose the differing effects of the same processes that operate
under contrasting climatic conditions.

Dry-Region Weathering

Figure 19.5
Ephemeral stream This
example is near Arches
National Park in southern
Utah. (Photos by E. J. Tarbuck;
inset photo by Demetrio Carrasco/
Dorling Kindersley, Ltd)

in humid regions, but practically all desert streambeds
are dry most of the time. Deserts have intermittent
Recall from Chapter 6 that water plays an important role in
streams, or ephemeral streams (ephemero = shortchemical weathering. Consequently, chemical weathering
lived), which means they carry water only in response to
processes are not as prominent in regions with dry climates
specific episodes of rainfall (Figure 19.5).
as in wetter regions. In humid regions, relatively fineA typical ephemeral stream might flow only a few
textured soils support an almost continuous cover of vegdays or perhaps just a few hours during the year, foletation that mantles the surface. The slopes and rock edges
lowing sporadic rains. In some years the channel might
are rounded, reflecting the strong influence of chemical
carry no water at all. This fact is obvious even to the
weathering in a humid climate. By contrast, much of the
casual traveler who notices numerous bridges with no
weathered debris in deserts consists of unaltered rock and
streams beneath them or numerous dips in the road
mineral fragments—the result of mechanical weatherwhere dry channels cross. When the rare heavy showing processes. In dry lands, rock weathering of any type
ers do come, however, so much rain falls in such a
is greatly reduced because of the lack of moisture and the
short time that all of it cannot soak in. Because desert
scarcity of organic acids from decaying plants. However,
vegetative cover is sparse, runoff is largely unhindered
chemical weathering is not completely lacking in deserts.
and consequently rapid, often creating flash floods
Over long spans of time, clays and thin soils do form, and
along valley floors. These floods are quite unlike floods
many iron-bearing silicate minerals oxidize, producing the
in humid regions. A flood on a river like the Missisrust-colored stain that tints some desert landscapes.
sippi may take several days to reach its crest and then
subside. But desert floods arrive suddenly and subside
quickly. Because much surface material in a desert is
The Role of Water
not anchored by vegetation, the amount of erosional
Deserts have scant precipitation and few major rivers.
work that occurs during a single short-lived rain event is
Nevertheless, water plays an important role in shaping
*
landscapes in dry regions. Permanent streams are normal impressive.
In the dry western United States, different names
are used for ephemeral streams, including wash and
arroyo. In other parts of the world, a dry desert stream
may be a wadi (Arabian PenAn ephemeral stream shortly
insula and North Africa), a
after a heavy shower.
donga (South America), or a
Although such floods are
short-lived, they cause large nullah (India). The satellite
amounts of erosion.
images in Figure 19.6 show a
wadi in the Sahara Desert.
Humid regions are
notable for their integrated
drainage systems. But in arid
regions, streams usually lack
an extensive system of tributaries. In fact, a basic charMost of the time desert
acteristic of desert streams
stream channels are dry.
is that they are small and die
out before reaching the sea.
A familiar sign in desert
Because the water table is
areas. Roads dip into washes
which can rapidly fill with
water following a heavy rain.

*See Chapter 16 for more information on
flash flooding.

577

19.3 Basin and Range: The Evolution of a Desert Landscape

usually far below the surface, few desert streams
Following a rainy period,
The wadi in its usual
can draw upon it as streams do in humid regions
freshly sprouted vegetation
dry state.
(see Figure 17.8, page 506). Without a steady supturns the wadi green.
ply of water, the combination of evaporation and
infiltration soon depletes the stream.
The few permanent streams that do cross arid
regions, such as the Colorado and Nile Rivers,
originate outside the desert, often in well-watered
mountains. Here the water supply must be great,
or the stream will lose all its water as it crosses the
desert. For example, after the Nile leaves its headwaters in the lakes and mountains of central Africa,
it traverses almost 3000 kilometers (1900 miles) of
the Sahara without a single tributary. By contrast,
in humid regions the discharge of a river grows as it
flows downstream because tributaries and groundwater contribute additional water along the way.
It should be emphasized that running water,
although infrequent, nevertheless does most of the erosional work in deserts. This is contrary to the common
1. How does the rate of rock weathering in dry
belief that wind is the most important erosional agent
climates compare to the rate in humid regions?
sculpturing desert landscapes. Although wind erosion
2. What is an ephemeral stream?
is indeed more significant in dry areas than elsewhere,
most desert landforms are carved by running water.
3. When a permanent stream such as the Nile River
As you will see in Section 19.4, the main role of wind
crosses a desert, does the river’s discharge
increase or decrease? How does this compare to
is the transport and deposition of sediment, which crea river in a humid area?
ates and shapes the ridges and mounds we call dunes.
Other misconceptions about deserts are presented in
3. What is the most important erosional agent in
GEOgraphics 19.1.
deserts?

19.2

Concept Checks

19.3 Basin and Range: The Evolution of a Desert
Landscape
Discuss the stages of landscape evolution in the Basin and Range region of the
western United States.

As discussed above, arid regions typically lack permanent streams and often have interior
drainage. This means that they exhibit a discontinuous pattern of intermittent streams that do not
flow out of the desert to the ocean. In the United States, the dry Basin and Range region provides
an excellent example. The region includes southern Oregon, all of Nevada, western Utah, southeastern California, southern Arizona, and southern New Mexico. The name Basin and Range is an
apt description for this almost 800,000-square-kilometer (300,000-square-mile) region because it
is characterized by more than 200 relatively small mountain ranges that rise 900 to 1500 meters
(3000 to 5000 feet) above the basins that separate them. The origin of these fault-block mountains
is examined in Chapter 14. The Mobile Field Trip associated with SmartFigure 10.18 (page 314)
also provides worthwhile insight into Basin and Range geology. In this discussion we look at how
surface processes change the landscape.
In this region, as in others like it around the world,
erosion mostly occurs without reference to the ocean
(ultimate base level) because the interior drainage never
reaches the sea. Even where permanent streams flow to
the ocean, few tributaries exist, and thus only a narrow

strip of land adjacent to the stream has sea level as its
ultimate level of land reduction.
The block models in Figure 19.7 depict how the
landscape has evolved in the Basin and Range region
and illustrate the landforms described in the following

Figure 19.6
Wadi in North Africa
These two satellite images
show how rain transformed
a wadi in Niger. (NASA)

580

CHAPTER 19

SmartFigure 19.7

Deserts and Wind
Playa lakes

Alluvial fans

Landscape evolution in
the Basin and Range
region As erosion of the
mountains and deposition
in the basins continue,
relief diminishes.
(https://goo.gl/dkNCpX)

Bajada
Playa
Early
stage

T

I

Basin
and
Range
M

E

Playa

Inselberg
Middle
stage

paragraphs. During and following the uplift of the mountains, running water begins carving the elevated mass
and depositing large quantities of debris in the basin. The
relief is greatest during this early stage because as erosion lowers the mountains and sediment fills the basins,
elevation differences gradually diminish.
When the occasional torrents of water produced
by sporadic rains move down the mountain canyons,
they are heavily loaded with sediment. Emerging from
the confines of the canyon, the runoff spreads over the
gentler slopes at the base of the mountains and quickly
loses velocity. Consequently, most of its load is dumped
within a short distance. The result is a cone of debris at
the mouth of a canyon known as an alluvial fan. Because
the coarsest (heaviest) material is dropped first, the head
SmartFigure 19.8
Bajada As neighboring
canyons keep depositing
sediment, their alluvial fans
grow and coalesce to form
a bajada—a continuous
apron across the base of the
mountain. (Photo by Michael
Collier) (https://goo.gl/bqOZ5R)

Late
stage

of the fan is steepest, having a slope of perhaps 10 to 15
degrees. Moving down the fan, the size of the sediment
and the steepness of the slope decrease, and the fan
merges imperceptibly with the basin floor. An examination of the fan’s surface would likely reveal a braided
channel pattern because of the water shifting its course as
successive channels became choked with sediment. Over
the years a fan enlarges, eventually coalescing with fans
from adjacent canyons to produce an apron of sediment
called a bajada along the mountain front (Figure 19.8).
On the rare occasions of
abundant rainfall, streams may
flow across the bajada to the
center of the basin, converting
the basin floor into a shallow
playa lake. Playa lakes are temporary features that last only a
few days or at best a few weeks
before evaporation and infiltration remove the water. The
dry, flat lake bed that remains
is called a playa. Playas are
typically composed of fine silts
and clays and are occasionally
encrusted with salts precipitated
during evaporation (Figure 19.9).
These precipitated salts may be
unusual. A case in point is the
sodium borate (better known as
_TT70


581

19.3 Basin and Range: The Evolution of a Desert Landscape

Figure 19.10
Death Valley: A classic
Basin and Range landscape Shortly before this
satellite image was taken in
February 2005, heavy rains
led to the formation of a
small playa lake—the pool
of greenish water on the
basin floor. By May 2005,
the lake had reverted to a
salt-covered playa. (NASA)

PANAMINT RANGE

Bajada

Salt
flat

Alluvial
fans

Salt
flat

Figure 19.9
Playa in Death Valley These dry, flat lake beds on the floor of
the basin are typically composed of silt and clay. Sometimes,
as in this example, they are encrusted with salt. (Photo by Michael
Collier)

borax) mined from ancient playa lake deposits in Death
Valley, California.
With the ongoing erosion of the mountain mass and
the accompanying sedimentation, the local relief continues to diminish. Eventually, nearly the entire mountain
mass is gone. Thus, by the late stages of erosion, the
mountain areas are reduced to a few large bedrock knobs
projecting above the surrounding sediment-filled basin.
These isolated erosional remnants on a late-stage desert
landscape are called inselbergs, a German word meaning “island mountains.”
Each of the stages of landscape evolution in an arid
climate depicted in Figure 19.7 can be observed in the
Basin and Range region. Recently uplifted mountains in

AMARGOSA RANGE

Bajada

Playa
lake

an early stage of erosion are found in southern Oregon
and northern Nevada. Death Valley, California, and
southern Nevada fit into the more advanced middle
stage, whereas the late stage, with its inselbergs, can be
seen in southern Arizona.
Figure 19.10 is a satellite image of a portion of Death
Valley that shows many of the features just described.
The image was taken in February 2005, shortly after
a rare heavy rain. As has occurred many times over
thousands of years, a wide, shallow playa lake formed in
the lowest spot. By May 2005, only 3 months after the
storm, the valley floor had returned to being a dry, saltencrusted playa.

19.3

Concept Checks

1. What is meant by interior drainage?
2. Describe the features and characteristics
associated with each stage in the evolution of a
mountainous desert.
3. Where in the United States can each stage of
desert landscape evolution be observed?

582

CHAPTER 19

Deserts and Wind

19.4

Transportation of Sediment by Wind
List and describe the ways that wind transports sediment.

Moving air, like moving water, is turbulent and able to pick up loose debris and transport it to other
locations. Just as in a stream, the wind velocity increases with height above the surface. Also as with
a stream, wind transports fine particles in suspension, while heavier ones are carried as bed load.
However, the transport of sediment by wind differs from that of running water in two significant
ways. First, wind’s lower density compared to water renders it less capable of picking up and transporting coarse materials. Second, because wind is not confined to channels, it can spread sediment
over large areas, as well as high into the atmosphere.
SmartFigure 19.11
Transporting sand
The bed load that wind
carries consists of sand
grains that move by bouncing along the surface. Sand
never travels far from the
surface, even when winds
are very strong. (Photo by

resting particles. At first the sand rolls along the surface.
When a moving sand grain strikes another grain, one or
both of them may jump into the air. Once in the air, the
grains are carried forward by the wind until gravity pulls
them back toward the surface. When the sand hits the
surface, it either bounces back into the air or dislodges
other grains, which then jump upward. In this manner,
a chain reaction is established, filling the air near the
ground with saltating sand grains in a short period of
time (Figure 19.11).
Bouncing sand grains never travel far from the surface.
Even when winds are very strong, the height of the saltating sand seldom exceeds 1 meter and usually is no greater
than 0.5 meter. Some sand grains are too large to be
thrown into the air by impact from other particles. When
this is the case, the energy provided by the impact of the
smaller saltating grains drives the larger grains forward.
Estimates indicate that between 20 and 25 percent of the
sand transported in a sandstorm is moved in this way.

Saltating sand grains.

Bernd Zoller/Photolibrary)
(https://goo.gl/Dk0bTa)

Bed Load
The bed load that wind carries consists of sand grains.
Observations in the field and experiments using wind
tunnels indicate that windblown sand moves mainly by
skipping and bouncing along the surface—a process
termed saltation (Latin for “to jump”).
The movement of sand grains begins when wind
reaches a velocity sufficient to overcome the inertia of the
SmartFigure 19.12
Wind’s suspended
load These are two
dramatic examples of
suspended load. Dust
storms can cover huge
areas, and dust can
be transported great
distances. (Black-and-white

Suspended Load
Unlike sand, finer particles of dust can be swept high
into the atmosphere by the wind. Because dust is often
composed of rather flat particles that have large surface
areas compared to their weight, it is relatively easy for
turbulent air to counterbalance the pull of gravity and
keep these fine particles airborne for hours or even days.
A dust storm in Africa produced a plume that reached
South America. Each year such plumes transport about
40 million tons of dust from the Sahara to the Amazon Basin.

A dust storm blackens the Colorado sky in this
historic image from the Dust Bowl of the 1930s.

North Atlantic
Africa

Dust plume

image courtesy of U.S.D.A./Natural
Resources Conservation Service;
satellite image courtesy of NASA)
(https://goo.gl/ALuj15)

Dust plume

South America

A.

B.

583

19.5 Wind Erosion

Although both silt and clay can be carried in suspension,
silt commonly makes up the bulk of the suspended
load because the reduced level of chemical weathering
in deserts provides only small amounts of clay.
Fine particles are easily carried by the wind, but
they are not so easily picked up to begin with. This is
because wind velocity is practically zero within a very
thin layer close to the ground. Thus, the wind cannot lift
the sediment by itself. Instead, the dust must be ejected
or spattered into the moving air by bouncing sand grains
or other disturbances. This idea is illustrated nicely by
a dry, unpaved country road on a windy day. When the
road is undisturbed, the wind raises little dust. However,
as a car or truck moves over the road, the layer of silt is
kicked up, creating a thick cloud of dust. Although the
suspended load is usually deposited relatively near its

19.5

source, high winds are capable of carrying large quantities of dust great distances. In the 1930s, silt that was
picked up in Kansas was transported to New England
and beyond, into the North Atlantic (Figure 19.12A). Similarly, dust blown from the Sahara has been traced as far
as South America (Figure 19.12B).

19.4

Concept Checks

1. Describe the way in which wind transports sand.
When winds are strong, how high above the
surface can sand be carried?
2. How does wind’s suspended load differ from its
bed load?

Wind Erosion
Describe the processes and features associated with wind erosion.

Compared to running water and glaciers, wind is a relatively insignificant erosional agent. Recall
that even in deserts, most erosion is performed by intermittent running water, not by wind. Wind
erosion is more effective in arid lands than in humid areas because in humid places moisture binds
particles together, and vegetation anchors the soil. For wind to be an effective erosional force, dryness and scant vegetation are important prerequisites. When such circumstances exist, wind may
pick up, transport, and deposit great quantities of fine sediment. During the 1930s, parts of the
Great Plains experienced vast dust storms (see GEOgraphics 6.3, page 204). The plowing under of
the natural vegetative cover for farming, followed by severe drought, exposed the land to wind erosion, giving the area its Dust Bowl label.
Figure 19.13

Deflation and Blowouts
One way that wind erodes is by deflation (de = out, flat
= blow), the lifting and removal of loose material. Deflation sometimes is difficult to notice because the entire
surface is being lowered at the same time, but it can be
significant. In portions of the 1930s Dust Bowl, vast
areas of land were lowered by as much as 1 meter in only
a few years.
The most noticeable results of deflation in some
places are shallow depressions appropriately called
blowouts (Figure 19.13). In the Great Plains region,
from Texas north to Montana, thousands of blowouts
are visible on the landscape. They range from small
dimples less than 1 meter deep and 3 meters wide to
depressions that approach 50 meters deep and several
kilometers across. The factor that controls the depths
of these basins (that is, acts as base level) is the local
water table. When blowouts are lowered to the water
table, damp ground and vegetation prevent further
deflation.

Blowout

Blowouts Deflation is
especially effective in
creating these depressions when the land is dry
and largely unprotected
by anchoring vegetation.
(Photo courtesy of U.S.D.A./Natural
Resources Conservation Service)

In this example, deflation has removed about
1.2 meters (4 feet) of soil–the distance from
the man's outstretched arm to his feet.

584

CHAPTER 19

Deserts and Wind

Figure 19.14
Desert pavement This
closely packed veneer of
pebbles and cobbles is
only one or two stones
thick. It is underlain by
material containing a significant proportion of finer
particles. (Photo by Bobbé

Lens cap

Christopherson)

Desert Pavement
In portions of many deserts, the surface consists of a
closely packed layer of coarse particles. This veneer of
pebbles and cobbles, called desert pavement, is only
one or two stones thick (Figure 19.14). Beneath is a layer
containing a significant proportion of silt and sand. When
desert pavement is present, it is an important control on
wind erosion because pavement stones are too large for
deflation to remove. When this armor is disturbed, wind
can easily erode the exposed fine silt.
For many years, the most common explanation
for the formation of desert pavement was that it develops when wind removes sand and silt from poorly
sorted surface deposits. As Figure 19.15A illustrates, the
SmartFigure 19.15
Formation of desert
pavement A. This model
shows an area with poorly
sorted surface deposits.
Over time, deflation lowers
the surface, and coarse
particles become concentrated. B. In this model, the
surface is initially covered
with cobbles and pebbles.
Over time, windblown dust
accumulates at the surface
and gradually sifts downward. (https://goo.gl/6diZff)

Deflation
Deflation

Deflation begins
A.

Deflation continues
to remove finer
particles
Ti m e

B.

Weathered pebbles
and cobbles on
bedrock

Wind-blown silt
accumulates and sifts
downward through
coarse particles

concentration of larger particles at the surface
gradually increases as the finer particles are
blown away. Eventually the surface is completely covered with pebbles and cobbles too
large to be moved by the wind.
Studies have shown that the process
depicted in Figure 19.15A is not an adequate
explanation for all environments in which
desert pavement exists. For example, in many
places, desert pavement is underlain by a
relatively thick layer of silt that contains few
if any pebbles and cobbles. In such a setting,
deflation of fine sediment could not leave
behind a layer of coarse particles. Geologists have also found that in some areas, the
pebbles and cobbles composing desert pavement have all been exposed at the surface for
about the same length of time. This would not
be the case for the process shown in Figure
19.15A. Here, the coarse particles that make
up the pavement reach the surface over an
extended time span, as deflation gradually removes the
fine material.
As a result, an alternate explanation for desert pavement was formulated (Figure 19.15B). This hypothesis
suggests that pavement develops on a surface that initially consists of coarse particles. Over time, protruding
cobbles trap fine, windblown grains that settle and sift
downward through the spaces between the larger surface
stones. The process is aided by infiltrating rainwater. In
this model, the cobbles composing the pavement were
never buried. Moreover, it successfully explains the lack
of coarse particles beneath the desert pavement.

Ventifacts and Yardangs
Like glaciers and streams, wind also erodes by abrasion.
In dry regions as well as along some beaches, windblown
sand cuts and polishes
exposed rock surfaces.
Desert pavement
Abrasion sometimes creates
interestingly shaped stones
called ventifacts (Figure
19.16A). The side of such a
Desert pavement
stone that is exposed to the
established,
prevailing wind is abraded,
deflation ends
leaving it polished, pitted,
and with sharp edges. If
the wind is not consistently
from one direction, or if the
pebble becomes reoriented,
it may have several faceted
surfaces.
Unfortunately, abrasion is often given credit for
Silt continues to
accumulate and lift
accomplishments beyond its
desert pavement
capabilities. Such features as

585

19.5 Wind Erosion
Ventifacts are stones that are shaped
and polished by sandblasting.

Figure 19.16

Yardangs are usually small,
wind-sculpted landforms that
are aligned parallel with the wind.

Shaped by the wind The
sandblasting effect of the
wind creates ventifacts A.
and yardangs B. (Photo A by
Richard M. Busch; photo B by
Mike P. Shepherd/Alamy Images)

B.

19.5

Concept Checks

1. Why is wind erosion relatively more important in
dry regions than in humid areas?
2. What factor limits the depths of blowouts?
3. Briefly describe two hypotheses used to explain
the formation of desert pavement.
4. What are yardangs and ventifacts?

19.2

en
t

Afghanistan

ed
im

E Y E ON E A R T H

Ica Valley contains yardangs that approach 100 meters
(330 feet) in height and several kilometers in length.
Some yardangs in the desert of Iran reach 150 meters
(nearly 500 feet) in height.

ns

T

-b
low

his satellite image shows a large plume of windblown
sediment covering large portions of Iran, Afghanistan,
and Pakistan in March 2012. The airborne material
is thick enough to completely hide the area beneath it. On
either side of the plume, skies are mostly clear.

ind

balanced rocks that stand high atop narrow pedestals and
intricate detailing on tall pinnacles are not the results of
abrasion. Sand seldom travels more than 1 meter above
the surface, so the wind’s sandblasting effect is obviously
limited in vertical extent.
In addition to creating ventifacts, wind erosion is
responsible for creating much larger features, called
yardangs (from the Turkistani word yar, meaning “steep
bank”). A yardang is a streamlined, wind-sculpted
landform that is oriented parallel to the prevailing wind
(Figure 19.16B). Individual yardangs are generally small
features that stand less than 5 meters (16 feet) high and
no more than about 10 meters (33 feet) long. Because the
sand-blasting effect of wind is greatest near the ground,
these abraded bedrock remnants are usually narrower at
their base. Sometimes yardangs are large features. Peru’s
_TT71


Iran

W

A.

QUESTION 1 What term is applied to the erosional process
responsible for producing this plume?
QUESTION 2 Is the wind-transported material in the image
more likely bed load or suspended load?
QUESTION 3 People sometimes refer to events like the
one pictured here as “sandstorms.” Is that an appropriate
description? Why or why not?

Pakistan

N

100 km

Arabian Sea
(NASA)

586

CHAPTER 19

Deserts and Wind

19.6

Wind Deposits
Discuss dune formation and movement and distinguish among different dune
types. Explain how loess deposits differ from deposits of sand.

Although wind is relatively unimportant in producing erosional landforms, significant depositional
landforms are created by the wind in some regions. Accumulations of windblown sediment are
particularly conspicuous in the world’s dry lands and along many sandy coasts. Wind deposits are of
two distinctive types: (1) mounds and ridges of sand from the wind’s bed load, which we call dunes,
and (2) extensive blankets of silt, called loess, that once were carried in suspension.

Sand Deposits

grains moving with the wind come to rest in these
wind shadows. As the accumulation of sand continAs is the case with running water, wind drops its load of
ues, it becomes a more imposing barrier to the wind
sediment when velocity falls and the energy available for
and thus a more efficient trap for even more sand. If
transport diminishes. Thus, sand begins to accumulate
there is a sufficient supply of sand and the wind blows
wherever an obstruction across the path of the wind
steadily for a long enough time, the mound of sand
slows its movement. Unlike many deposits of silt, which
grows into a dune.
form blanketlike layers over large areas, winds comMany dunes have an asymmetrical profile, with the
monly deposit sand in mounds or ridges called dunes
leeward (sheltered) slope being steep and the windward
(Figure 19.17).
slope more gently inclined. The dunes in Figure 19.17 are
Moving air encountering an object, such as a
a good example. Sand moves up the gentler slope on the
clump of vegetation or a rock, sweeps around and over
windward side by saltation. Just beyond the crest of the
the object, leaving a “shadow” of slower-moving air
dune, where the wind velocity is reduced, the sand accubehind the obstacle and a smaller zone of quieter air
mulates. As more sand collects, the slope steepens, and
just in front of the obstacle. Some of the saltating sand
eventually some of it slides under the pull of gravity. In
this way, the leeward slope of the dune, called the
slip face, maintains an angle of about 34 degrees,
the angle of repose for loose dry sand. (Recall from
Chapter 15 that the angle of repose is the steepest
Wind
angle at which loose material remains stable.) Continued sand accumulation, coupled with periodic
slides down the slip face, results in the slow migration of the dune in the direction of air movement.
As sand is deposited on the slip face, layers form that are inclined in the direction the
wind is blowing. These sloping layers are called
Strong winds move sand up the
cross-beds (Figure 19.18). When the dunes are
relatively gentle windward slope.
eventually buried under other layers of sediment
SmartFigure 19.17
and become part of the sedimentary rock record,
White Sands National
their asymmetrical shape is destroyed, but the
Monument The dunes at this
cross-beds remain as testimony to their origin.
landmark in southeastern
New Mexico are composed
Nowhere is cross-bedding more prominent than
of gypsum. The dunes slowly
in the sandstone walls of Zion Canyon in southern
migrate with the wind. (Photos by
Utah (see Figure 19.18).
Michael Collier) (http://goo.gl/m8eYBH)
For some areas, moving sand is troublesome.
In Figure 19.19, dunes are advancing across irrigated fields in Egypt. In portions of the Middle
East, valuable oil rigs must be protected from
encroaching dunes. In some cases, fences are
As sand
accumulates
built sufficiently upwind of the dunes to stop their
at the dune
migration. As sand continues to collect, however,
crest, the
the fences must be built higher. In Kuwait protecslope steepens
and some of
tive fences extend for almost 10 kilometers
the sand slides
(6 miles) around one important oil field. Migrating
down the steep
dunes can also pose a problem to the construction
slip face.

587

19.6 Wind Deposits
Wind

Wind

Dunes commonly have an asymmetrical
shape and migrate with the wind.
Slip face
Cross bedding

When dunes are buried and become part of the sedimentary
rock record, the cross bedding is preserved.

SmartFigure 19.18
Cross-bedding As sand
is deposited on the slip
face, layers form that are
inclined in the direction the
wind is blowing. With time,
complex patterns develop in
response to changes in wind
direction. (Photo by Dennis Tasa)
(https://goo.gl/Ewb76M)

Wind

Sand grains deposited on the slip face at the angle of
repose create the cross bedding of dunes.

and maintenance of highways and railroads that
cross sandy desert regions. For example, to keep a
portion of Highway 95 near Winnemucca, Nevada,
open to traffic, sand must be taken away about three
times a year. Each time, between 1500 and 4000
cubic meters of sand are removed. Attempts at stabilizing the dunes by planting different varieties of
grasses have been unsuccessful because the meager rainfall cannot support the plants.

Types of Sand Dunes
Dunes are not just random heaps of windblown sediment. Rather, they are accumulations that usually assume
patterns that are surprisingly consistent. A leading early
investigator of dunes, the British engineer R. A. Bagnold,
observed: “Instead of finding chaos and disorder, the
observer never fails to be amazed at a simplicity of form,
an exactitude of repetition, and a geometric order.” A
broad assortment of dune forms exists, generally simplified to a few major types for discussion.
Of course, gradations exist among different forms,
and there are also irregularly shaped dunes that do
not fit easily into any category. Several factors influence the form and size
that dunes ultimately
assume. These include
wind direction and
velocity, availability of
sand, and amount of
vegetation present. Six
basic dune types are
shown in Figure 19.20,
with arrows indicating
wind directions.

Barchan Dunes Solitary sand dunes shaped
like crescents and with
their tips pointing

Cross bedding is an obvious characteristic of the
Navajo Sandstone in Zion National Park, Utah.

downwind are called barchan dunes (see Figure 19.20A).
These dunes form where supplies of sand are limited and
the surface is relatively flat, hard, and lacking vegetation.
They migrate slowly with the wind at a rate of up to 15
meters (50 feet) per year. Their size is usually modest, with
the largest barchans reaching heights of about 30 meters
(100 feet), while the maximum spread between their tips
approaches 300 meters (1000 feet). When the wind direction is nearly constant, the crescent form of these dunes is
nearly symmetrical. However, when the wind direction is
not perfectly fixed, one tip becomes larger than the other.

Transverse Dunes In regions where the prevailing
winds are steady, sand is plentiful, and vegetation is
sparse or absent, the dunes form a series of long ridges
that are separated by troughs and oriented at right angles
to the prevailing wind. Because of this orientation, they
Figure 19.19
Migrating dunes These
desert dunes in Egypt are
encroaching on irrigated
farm fields. (Photo by George
Gerster/Photo Researchers, Inc.)

588

CHAPTER 19

Wind

A. Barchan

Deserts and Wind

Wind

Wind

B. Transverse

C. Barchanoid

Wind
Wind

Wind

D. Longitudinal

E. Parabolic

F. Star

SmartFigure 19.20
Types of sand dunes
Factors that influence the
form and size of dunes
include wind direction and
velocity, the availability of
sand, and the amount of
vegetation. (https://goo.gl/fuZU6X)

are termed transverse dunes (see Figure 19.20B). Many
coastal dunes are of this type. In addition, transverse
dunes are common in many arid regions where the extensive surface of wavy sand is sometimes called a sand sea.
In some parts of the Sahara and Arabian Deserts, transverse dunes reach heights of 200 meters (660 feet), are 1
to 3 kilometers (0.6 to 2 miles) across, and can extend for
distances of 100 kilometers (60 miles) or more.
There is a relatively common dune form that is intermediate between isolated barchans and extensive waves of
transverse dunes. Such dunes, called barchanoid dunes,
form scalloped rows of sand oriented at right angles to
the wind (see Figure 19.20C). The rows resemble a series of
barchans that have been positioned side by side.

Longitudinal Dunes Long ridges of sand that form
more or less parallel to the prevailing wind where sand
supplies are moderate are called longitudinal dunes
(see Figure 19.20D). Apparently, the prevailing wind direction must vary somewhat but still remain in the same
quadrant of the compass. Although the smaller types
are only 3 or 4 meters high and several dozens of meters
long, in some large deserts, longitudinal dunes can reach
great size. For example, in portions of North Africa,
Arabia, and central Australia, these dunes may approach
a height of 100 meters (330 feet) and extend for distances
of more than 100 kilometers (62 miles).
Parabolic Dunes Unlike the other dune types described
thus far, parabolic dunes form where vegetation partially covers the sand. The shape of these dunes resembles
the shape of barchans except that their tips point into the
wind rather than downwind (see Figure 19.20E). Parabolic

dunes often form along coasts where there are strong
onshore winds and abundant sand. If the sand’s sparse
vegetative cover is disturbed at some spot, deflation
creates a blowout. Sand is then transported out of the
depression and deposited as a curved rim, which grows
higher as deflation enlarges the blowout.

Star Dunes Confined largely to parts of the Sahara
and Arabian Deserts, star dunes are isolated hills of
sand that exhibit a complex form (see Figure 19.20F). Their
name is derived from the fact that the bases of these
dunes resemble multipointed stars. Usually three or four
sharp-crested ridges diverge from a central high point
that in some cases may approach a height of 90 meters
(300 feet). As their form suggests, star dunes develop
where wind directions are variable.

Loess (Silt) Deposits
In some parts of the world, the surface topography is
mantled with deposits of windblown silt, called loess.
Over periods of perhaps thousands of years, dust
storms deposited this material. When loess is breached
by streams or road cuts, it tends to maintain vertical
cliffs and lacks any visible layers, as you can see in
Figure 19.21.
The distribution of loess worldwide indicates that
there are two primary sources for this sediment: deserts
and glacial outwash deposits. The thickest and most
extensive deposits of loess on Earth occur in western
and northern China. They were blown there from the
extensive desert basins of central Asia. Accumulations
of 30 meters (100 feet) are common, and thicknesses of

19.6 Wind Deposits

589

Figure 19.21
more than 100 meters (330 feet) have
This vertical bluff near the
Loess In some regions, the surface is
been measured. It is this fine, buffMississippi River in southern
mantled with deposits of windblown
colored sediment that gives the Yellow
Illinois is about 3 meters
silt. (Top photo by James E. Patterson; bottom
River (Huang Ho) its name.
(10 feet) high.
photo by Ashley Cooper/Alamy)
In the United States, deposits of
loess are significant in many areas,
including South Dakota, Nebraska,
Iowa, Missouri, and Illinois, as well
as portions of the Columbia Plateau
in the Pacific Northwest. The correlation between the distribution of loess
and important farming regions in the
Midwest and eastern Washington State
is not just a coincidence because soils
derived from this wind-deposited sediIn parts of China, loess has sufficient structural strength
to permit excavation of cave-like dwellings.
ment are among the most fertile in the
world.
Unlike the deposits in China, which originated in deserts, the loess in the United States
and Europe is an indirect product of glaciation.
Its source is deposits of stratified drift. During the retreat of the ice sheets, many river
valleys were choked with sediment deposited
by meltwater. Strong westerly winds sweeping
across the barren floodplains picked up the
finer sediment and dropped it as a blanket on
the eastern sides of the valleys. Such an origin
is confirmed by the fact that loess deposits are thickest
and coarsest on the leeward side of such major glacial
1. How do sand dunes migrate?
drainage outlets as the Mississippi and Illinois Rivers
2. List and briefly distinguish among basic dune
and rapidly thin with increasing distance from the valtypes.
leys. Furthermore, the angular, mechanically weathered particles composing the loess are essentially the
3. How do loess deposits differ from sand deposits?
same as the rock flour produced by the grinding action
4. How are some loess deposits related to glaciers?
of glaciers.
_TT72


19.6

E Y E ON E A R T H

Concept Checks

19.3

T

his is an aerial view of the Preston Mesa dunes in
northern Arizona.

QUESTION 1 Which one of the basic dune types
is shown here?
QUESTION 2 Sketch a simple profile (side view) of one of
these dunes. Add an arrow to show the prevailing wind
direction and label the dune’s slip face.
QUESTION 3 These dunes gradually migrate across the
surface. Describe this process.

Michael Collier

20
Shorelines

The lower portion of this aerial view shows a sand spit and
a small portion of a beach along the shore of Nantucket, an
island off the coast of Cape Cod. Offshore shoals (sandbars)
are also conspicuous features. (Photo by Michael Collier)

T

he restless

waters of the ocean are constantly in motion. Winds generate
surface currents, the gravity of the Moon and Sun produces tides, and density
differences create deep-ocean circulation. Further, waves carry the energy from storms
to distant shores, where their impact erodes the land.
Shorelines are dynamic environments. Their topography, geologic makeup, and
climate vary greatly from place to place. Continental and oceanic processes converge
along the shore to create landscapes that frequently undergo rapid change. When it
comes to the deposition of sediment, shore areas are transition zones between marine
and continental environments.

Shoreline: A Dynamic Interface
20.1 The
Explain why the shoreline is considered a dynamic interface and identify the basic
parts of the coastal zone.

Nowhere is the restless nature of the ocean’s water more noticeable than along the shore—the
dynamic interface among air, land, and sea. An interface is a common boundary where different
parts of a system interact. This is certainly an appropriate designation for the coastal zone. Here
we can see the rhythmic rise and fall of tides and observe waves constantly rolling in and breaking.
Sometimes the waves are low and gentle. At other times they pound the shore with awesome fury.

The Coastal Zone
Figure 20.1
Cape Cod and Point
Reyes A. A satellite image
of Cape Cod, Martha’s
Vineyard (left), and
Nantucket (right). Although
waves constantly modify
this coastal landscape,
they are not responsible
for creating it. Rather, the
original size and shape of
Cape Cod resulted from
the positioning of moraines
and other glacial materials deposited during the
Quaternary Ice Age (see
Figure 18.27, page 554).
(Image courtesy of Earth Satellite
Corporation/Science Photo Library/
Photo Researchers, Inc.)

B. A high-altitude image of
the Point Reyes area north
of San Francisco. The
5.5-kilometer- (3.4-mile-)
long south-facing cliffs are
exposed to the full force of
the waves from the Pacific
Ocean. Nevertheless, this
promontory retreats slowly
because it is formed from
highly resistant bedrock.
(Image courtesy of USDA-ASCS)

Although it may not be obvious, the shoreline is constantly being modified by waves. For example, along
Cape Cod, Massachusetts, wave activity is eroding
A.

cliffs of poorly consolidated glacial sediment so aggressively that the cliffs are retreating inland up to 1 meter
(3 feet) per year (Figure 20.1A). By contrast, at Point
Reyes, California, the far more durable bedrock cliffs
B.

597

20.1 The Shoreline: A Dynamic Interface

are less susceptible to wave attack
and therefore are retreating much
more slowly (Figure 20.1B). Along
both coasts, wave activity is moving sediment along the shore and
building narrow sandbars that
protrude into and across some
bays.

Figure 20.2

Present-day Shorelines The
nature of present-day shorelines
is not just the result of the relentless attack of the land by the sea.
Rather, the shore has a complex
character that results from multiple
geologic processes. For example,
practically all coastal areas were
affected by the worldwide rise in
sea level that accompanied the melting of glaciers following the Last Glacial Maximum (see Figure 18.31,
page 558). As the sea encroached landward, the shoreline retreated, becoming superimposed upon existing
landscapes that had resulted from such diverse processes
as stream erosion, glaciation, volcanic activity, and the
forces of mountain building.

Human Activity The coastal zone is experiencing
intensive human activity. About half of the world’s
human population lives on or within about 100 kilometers (60 miles) of a coast. Such large numbers of people
so near the shore means that hurricanes and tsunamis
place millions at risk. Unfortunately, people often treat
the shoreline as if it were a stable platform on which
structures can safely be built. This attitude inevitably
leads to conflicts between people and nature. As you
will see, many coastal landforms, especially beaches
and barrier islands, are relatively fragile, short-lived
features that are inappropriate sites for development.
The image of the New Jersey shoreline in Figure 20.2 is
a good example. In the years to come, coastal areas will
be even more vulnerable because sea level is rising due
Low-tide
shoreline

to human-induced climate change. There is more about
this in Chapter 21.

by Mario Tama/Getty Images)

Basic Features of the Coastal Zone
In general conversation, a number of terms are used
to describe the boundary between land and sea. In
the preceding paragraphs, the terms shore, shoreline,
coastal zone, and coast were all used. Moreover, when
many think of the land–sea interface, the word beach
comes to mind. Let’s take a moment to clarify these
terms and introduce some other terminology used by
those who study the land–sea boundary zone. You will
find it helpful to refer to Figure 20.3 , which is an idealized profile of the coastal zone.

Shore and Coast The shoreline is the line that marks
the contact between land and sea. Each day, as tides
rise and fall, the position of the shoreline migrates. Over
longer time spans, the average position of the shoreline
gradually shifts as sea level rises or falls.
The shore is the area that extends between the lowest tide level and the highest elevation on land that is

Shoreline

High-tide
shoreline

Berm

Coastline

Dunes

Figure 20.3
The coastal zone The transition zone between land
and sea consists of several
parts.

Beach
face
Foreshore
Offshore

Nearshore

Hurricane Sandy A portion
of the New Jersey shoreline just south of New
York City shortly after this
huge storm, also called
Superstorm Sandy, struck
in late October 2012.
The extraordinary storm
surge caused the damage
pictured here. The fact that
it struck the most populated metropolitan region
in the United States clearly
contributed to the storm’s
great financial impact.
Many shoreline areas are
intensively developed.
Often the shifting shoreline
sands and the desire of
people to occupy these
areas are in conflict. (Photo

Backshore
Shore

Coast

598

CHAPTER 20

Figure 20.4
Beaches A beach is an
accumulation of sediment
on the landward margin of
an ocean or a lake and can
be thought of as material
in transit along the shore.
Beaches are composed of
whatever material is locally
available. (Photo A by David

Shorelines
This beach on Florida’s Sanibel Island
consists of shells and shell fragments.

R. Frazier/Photo Library/Alamy
Images; photo B by E. J. Tarbuck)

The black sands on this beach in Hawaii were derived
from the weathering of nearby basaltic lava flows.
A.

affected by storm waves. By contrast, the coast extends
inland from the shore as far as ocean-related features can
be found. The coastline marks the coast’s seaward edge,
whereas the inland boundary is not always obvious or
easy to determine.
As Figure 20.3 illustrates, the shore is divided into
the foreshore and the backshore. The foreshore is the
area that is exposed when the tide is out (low tide) and
submerged when the tide is in (high tide). The backshore is landward of the high-tide shoreline. It is usually
dry, being affected by waves only during storms. Two
other zones are commonly identified. The nearshore
zone lies between the low-tide shoreline and the line
where waves break at low tide. Seaward of the nearshore
zone is the offshore zone.

Beaches For many, a beach is the sandy area where people lie in the sun and walk along the water’s edge. Technically, a beach is an accumulation of sediment found along
the landward margin of an ocean or a lake. Along straight
coasts, beaches may extend for tens or hundreds of kilometers. Where coasts are irregular, beach formation may
be confined to the relatively quiet waters of bays.
Beaches consist of one or more berms, which are relatively flat platforms often composed of sand that are adjacent to coastal dunes or cliffs and marked by a change in
slope at the seaward edge. Another part of the beach is the
beach face, which is the wet, sloping surface that extends
from the berm to the shoreline. Where beaches are sandy,
sunbathers usually prefer the berm, whereas joggers prefer
the wet, hard-packed sand of the beach face.

B.

Beaches are composed of whatever material is locally
abundant. The sediment for some beaches is derived
from the erosion of adjacent cliffs or nearby coastal
mountains. Other beaches are built from sediment delivered to the coast by rivers.
Although the mineral makeup of many beaches is
dominated by durable quartz grains, other minerals may
be dominant. For example, in areas such as southern
Florida, where there are no mountains or other sources
of rock-forming minerals nearby, most beaches are composed of shell fragments and the remains of organisms
that live in coastal waters (Figure 20.4A). Some beaches
on volcanic islands in the open ocean are composed of
weathered grains of the basaltic lava that comprise the
islands or of coarse debris eroded from coral reefs that
develop around islands in low latitudes (Figure 20.4B).
Regardless of the composition, the material that
comprises the beach does not stay in one place. Instead,
crashing waves are constantly moving it. Thus, beaches
can be thought of as material in transit along the shore.

20.1

Concept Checks

1. Why is the shoreline described as being an
interface?
2. Distinguish among shore, shoreline, coast, and
coastline.
3. What is a beach? Distinguish between beach face
and berm.

599

20.2 Ocean Waves

Waves
20.2 Ocean
List and discuss the factors that influence the height, length, and period of a wave
and describe the motion of water within a wave.

Ocean waves are caused by energy traveling along the interface between ocean and atmosphere,
often transferring energy from a storm far out at sea over distances of several thousand kilometers.
That’s why even on calm days, the ocean still has waves that travel across its surface. When observing waves, always remember that you are watching energy travel through a medium (water). If you
make waves by tossing a pebble into a pond, or by splashing in a pool, or by blowing across the
surface of a cup of coffee, you are imparting energy to the liquid, and the waves you see are visible
evidence of the energy passing through.
Wind-generated waves provide most of the energy that
shapes and modifies shorelines. Where the land and
sea meet, waves that may have traveled unimpeded for
hundreds or thousands of kilometers suddenly encounter a barrier that will not allow them to advance farther and must absorb their energy. Stated another way,
the shore is the location where a practically irresistible force confronts an almost immovable object. The
conflict that results is never-ending and sometimes
dramatic.

Wave Characteristics

that they topple over, forming ocean breakers called
whitecaps.
For a particular wind speed, there is a maximum
fetch and duration of wind beyond which waves will no
longer increase in size. This is because the waves are losing as much energy through the breaking of whitecaps as
they are receiving from the wind. When the maximum
fetch and duration are reached for a given wind velocity,
the waves are said to be “fully developed.”
When wind stops or changes direction, or if waves
leave the stormy area where they were created, they
continue on unrelated to local winds. The waves also
undergo a gradual change to swells, which are lower and
longer and may carry a storm’s energy to distant shores.
Because many independent wave systems exist at the
same time, the sea surface acquires a complex, irregular
pattern. Hence, the sea waves we watch from the shore
are often a mixture of swells from faraway storms and
waves created by local winds.

Most ocean waves derive their energy and motion from
the wind. When the velocity of a breeze is less than 3
kilometers (2 miles) per hour, only small wavelets appear.
At greater wind speeds, more stable waves gradually form
and advance with the wind.
Characteristics of ocean waves are illustrated in
Figure 20.5, which shows a simple, nonbreaking wave
form. The tops of the waves are the crests, which are
Circular Orbital Motion
separated by troughs. Halfway between the crests and
troughs is the still water level, which is the level the
Waves can travel great distances across ocean basins. In
water would occupy if there were no waves. The vertical
one study, waves generated near Antarctica were tracked
distance between trough and crest is called the wave
as they traveled through the Pacific Ocean basin. After
height, and the horizontal distance between successive
traveling more than 10,000 kilometers (over 6000 miles),
crests (or troughs) is the wavelength. The time it takes
the waves finally expended their energy a week later
one full wave—one wavelength—to pass a fixed position
along the shoreline of Alaska’s Aleutian Islands. The
is the wave period.
water itself doesn’t travel this distance, but the wave form
The height, length, and period that are eventually
achieved by a wave depend on three factors: (1) the
Wave movement
wind speed, (2) the length of time the
Crest
Crest
Crest
wind has blown, and (3) the fetch, or
Trough
Trough
distance that the wind has travWavelength
eled across open water. As the
Wave
height
quantity of energy transferred from the wind to the
Still
Water
water increases, the height
water
particle
level
and steepness of the waves
motion
increase as well. Eventually
Negligible water movement
a critical point is reached
below depth of 1/2 wavelength
where waves grow so tall

SmartFigure 20.5
Wave basics An idealized
nonbreaking wave, showing its basic parts and the
movement of water with
increasing depth.
(https://goo.gl/57GfHI)

600

CHAPTER 20

SmartFigure 20.6
Passage of a wave The
movements of the toy boat
show that the wave form
advances, but the water
does not advance appreciably from the original
position. In this sequence,
the wave moves from left to
right as the boat (and the
water in which it is floating) rotates in an imaginary
circle. (https://goo.gl/ZNaaXT)

Shorelines

forward and backward with each successive wave.
Figure 20.6 shows that a floating object moves up and
backward as the crest approaches, up and forward as
the crest passes, down and forward after the crest, and
down and backward as the trough approaches; it rises
and moves backward again as the next crest advances.
When we trace the movement of the toy boat shown
in Figure 20.6 as a wave passes, we see that the boat
moves in a circle and returns to essentially the same
place. Circular orbital motion allows a wave form (the
wave’s shape) to move forward through the water while
the individual water particles that transmit the wave
move in a circle. Wind moving across a field of wheat
causes a similar phenomenon: The wheat itself doesn’t
travel across the field, but the waves do.
The wind energy given to the water is transmitted
not only along the surface of the sea but also downward.
However, beneath the surface, the circular motion
rapidly diminishes until, at a depth equal to one-half
the wavelength measured from the still water level, the
movement of water particles becomes negligible. This
depth is known as the wave base. The dramatic decrease
of wave energy with depth is shown by the rapidly diminishing diameters of water-particle orbits in Figure 20.5.

Wave movement

Toy boat

Waves in the Surf Zone

does. As the wave travels, the water passes the energy
along by moving in a circle. This movement is called circular orbital motion.
Observation of an object floating in waves reveals
that it moves not only up and down but also slightly
SmartFigure 20.7
Waves approaching the shore When water
depth is less than half the wavelength,
Deep water –
wave speed decreases, and the fasterwaves with constant
moving waves farther from shore begin to
wavelength
catch up causing the distance between
waves (the wavelength) to decrease. This
causes an increase in wave height, to
Waves touch bottom as they
the point where the waves finally pitch
encounter water depths that are
forward and break in the surf zone.
less than half a wavelength
The first portion of the animation
deals with the ideas presented in
this figure. (https://goo.gl/57GfHI)

Depth is >1/2 wavelength

As long as a wave is in deep water, it is unaffected by
water depth (Figure 20.7, left). However, when a wave
approaches the shore, the water becomes shallower
and influences wave behavior. The wave begins to
“feel bottom” at a water depth equal to its wave base.
Such depths interfere with water movement at the
base of the wave and slow its advance (see Figure 20.7,
center).
As a wave advances toward the shore, the slightly
faster waves farther out to sea catch up, decreasing
the wavelength. As the speed and length of the wave

Wave movement
Approaching shore –
waves touch bottom
(wavelength decreases)

Surf zone
(breakers form)

Velocity decreases
(wave height increases)

20.3 Shoreline Processes

diminish, the wave steadily grows higher. Finally, a critical point is reached when the wave is too steep to support
itself and the wave front collapses, or breaks (see Figure
20.7, right), causing water to advance up the shore.
The turbulent water created by breaking waves is
called surf. On the landward margin of the surf zone,
the swash—the turbulent sheet of water from collapsing breakers—moves up the slope of the beach. When
the energy of the swash has been expended, the water
flows back down the beach toward the surf zone as
backwash.

20.2

Concept Checks

1. List three factors that determine the height,
length, and period of a wave.
2. Describe the motion of a floating object as a wave
passes.
3. How do a wave’s speed, wavelength, and height
change as the wave moves into shallow water and
breaks?

Processes
20.3 Shoreline
Explain how waves erode and how waves move sediment along the shore.
During calm weather, wave action is minimal. However, just as streams do most of their work during floods, so too do waves accomplish most of their work during storms. The impact of high, storminduced waves against the shore can be awesome in its violence (Figure 20.8). The discussion of hurricanes later in the chapter serves to reinforce this fact.

Wave Erosion
Each breaking wave may hurl thousands of tons of water
against the land, sometimes causing the ground to literally tremble. The forces exerted by Atlantic waves in
wintertime, for example, average nearly 10,000 kilograms
per square meter (more than 2000 pounds per square
foot). The force during storms is even greater. It is no
wonder that cracks and crevices are quickly opened in
cliffs, seawalls, breakwaters, and anything else that is
subjected to these enormous shocks. Water is forced into

E Y E ON E A R T H

20.1

T

his surfer is enjoying a ride on a large wave along
the coast of Maui. (Photo by Getty Images)

QUESTION 1 What was the source of energy that
created this wave?
QUESTION 2 How was the wavelength changing just
prior to the time when this photo was taken?
QUESTION 3 Why was the wavelength changing?
QUESTION 4 Many waves exhibit circular orbital motion.
Is that true of the wave in this photo? Explain.

every opening, causing air in the cracks to become highly
compressed by the thrust of crashing waves. When the
wave subsides, the air expands rapidly, dislodging rock
fragments and enlarging and extending fractures.
In addition to the erosion caused by wave impact and
pressure, abrasion—the sawing and grinding action of
the water armed with rock fragments—is also important.
In fact, abrasion is probably more intense in the surf
zone than in any other environment. Smooth, rounded
stones and pebbles along the shore are obvious reminders
of the relentless grinding action of rock against rock in

601

602

CHAPTER 20

Shorelines

swash and backwash move
sand toward and away from
the shoreline. Whether there
is a net loss or addition of
sand depends on the level
of wave activity. When wave
activity is relatively light (less
energetic waves), much of the
swash soaks into the beach,
which reduces the backwash.
Consequently, the swash
dominates and causes a net
movement of sand up the
beach face toward the berm.
When high-energy waves
prevail, the beach is saturated
from previous waves, so much
less of the swash soaks in.
As a result, the berm erodes
because backwash is strong
and causes a net movement of

Figure 20.8
Storm waves When large
waves break against the
shore, the force of the
water can be powerful and
the erosional work that
is accomplished can be
great. These storm waves
are breaking along the
coast of Wales. (The Photo
Library/Alamy Images)

the surf zone (Figure 20.9A). Further, the waves use such
fragments as “tools” as they cut horizontally into the land
(Figure 20.9B).

Sand Movement on the Beach
Energy from breaking waves can move large quantities
of sand along the beach face and in the surf zone roughly
parallel to the shoreline. Wave energy also causes sand
to move perpendicular to (toward and away from) the
shoreline.

Movement Perpendicular to the Shoreline If you
stand ankle deep in water at the beach, you will see that
A.

sand down the beach face.
Along many beaches, light wave activity is the rule
during the summer. Therefore, a wide sand berm gradually develops. During winter, when storms are frequent
and more powerful, strong wave activity erodes and
narrows the berm. A wide berm that may have taken
months to build can be dramatically narrowed in just a
few hours by the high-energy waves created by a strong
winter storm.

Wave Refraction The bending of waves, called wave
refraction, plays an important part in shoreline processes (Figure 20.10). It affects the distribution of energy
along the shore and thus strongly influences where and to
B.

Figure 20.9
Abrasion: Sawing and
grinding Breaking waves
armed with rock debris can
do a great deal of erosional
work. (Photo A by Michael Collier;
photo B by Fletcher and Baylis/
Science Source)

Smooth, rounded rocks along the shore are an obvious
reminder that abrasion can be intense in the surf zone.

This sandstone cliff at Gabriola Island, British Columbia,
was undercut by wave action.

603

20.3 Shoreline Processes
As these waves approach nearly straight on, refraction causes the
wave energy to be concentrated at headlands (resulting in erosion)
and dispersed in bays (resulting in deposition).
Beach
deposits

Waves travel
at original speed
in deep water

Waves “feel bottom”
and slow down
in surf zone

Headland

Shoreline

Result: waves bend
so that they strike the
shore more directly
Wave refraction at Rincon Point, California

SmartFigure 20.10

what degree erosion, sediment transport, and deposition
Longshore Transport Although waves are refracted,
will take place.
most still reach the shore at some angle, however slight.
Waves seldom approach the shore straight on.
Consequently, the uprush of water from each breaking
Rather, most waves move toward the shore at an
wave (the swash) is at an oblique angle to the shoreline.
angle. However, when they reach the shallow water
However, the backwash is straight down the slope of the
of a smoothly sloping bottom, they are bent and tend
beach. The effect of this pattern of water movement is to
to become parallel to the shore. Such bending occurs
transport sediment in a zigzag pattern along the beach
because the part of the wave nearest the shore reaches
face (Figure 20.11). This movement is called beach drift,
shallow water and slows first, whereas the end that is still and it can transport sand and pebbles hundreds or even
in deep water continues forward at its full speed. The net thousands of meters each day. However, a more typical
result is a wave front that may approach nearly parallel to rate is 5 to 10 meters per day.
the shore, regardless of the original direction of the wave.
Because of refraction, wave impact is
Path of sand
concentrated against the sides and ends of
particles
Beach
headlands that project into the water, whereas
Net movement
drift
wave attack is weakened in bays.
of sand grains
This differential wave attack
along irregular coastlines is
illustrated in Figure 20.10.
As the waves reach the shalt
urren
low water in front of the
ore c
h
s
g
n
Lo
headland sooner than they do
in adjacent bays, they are bent
more nearly parallel to the
protruding land and strike
Beach drift occurs as incoming waves
it from all three sides. By
carry sand at an angle up the beach,
while the water from spent waves carries
contrast, refraction in the
it directly down the slope of the beach.
bays causes waves to diverge
Similar movements occur offshore in the
and expend less energy. In
surf zone to create the longshore current.
Longsh
these zones of weakened
ore cu
rrent
wave activity, sediments can
These waves approaching the beach at a slight
accumulate and form sandy beaches. Over a long
angle near Oceanside, California, produce a
period, erosion of the headlands and deposition
longshore current moving from left to right.
in the bays will straighten an irregular shoreline.

Wave refraction As waves
first touch bottom in the
shallows along an irregular
coast, they are slowed; they
then bend (refract) and
align nearly parallel to the
shoreline. (Photo by Rich Reid/
National Geographic/Getty Images)
(https://goo.gl/3jlK4V)

SmartFigure 20.11
The longshore transport
system The two components of the transport
system, beach drift and
longshore currents, are
created by breaking waves
that approach the beach at
an angle. These processes
transport large quantities
of material along the beach
and in the surf zone. (Photo
by John S. Shelton/University of
Washington Libraries)
(https://goo.gl/Z0EFUs)

604

CHAPTER 20

Shorelines

Figure 20.12
Rip current These concentrated movements of water
flow opposite the direction
of breaking waves. (Photo by
_TT73


(downhill). Longshore currents
change direction because the
direction that waves approach
the beach changes seasonally.
Nevertheless, longshore currents
generally flow southward along
both the Atlantic and Pacific
shores of the United States.

Rip current extends outward from shore
and interferes with incoming waves.

A. P. Trujillo/APT Photos)

Waves that approach the shore at an angle also produce currents within the surf zone that flow parallel to
the shore and move substantially more sediment than
beach drift. Because the water here is turbulent, these
longshore currents easily move the fine suspended
sand and roll larger sand and gravel along the bottom.
When the sediment transported by longshore currents
is added to the quantity moved by beach drift, the total
amount can be very large. At Sandy Hook, New Jersey,
for example, the quantity of sand transported along the
shore over a 48-year period averaged almost 750,000 tons
annually. For a 10-year period in Oxnard, California,
more than 1.5 million tons of sediment moved along the
shore each year.
Both rivers and coastal zones move water and
sediment from one area (upstream) to another (downstream). As a result, the beach is often characterized as
a “river of sand.” Beach drift and longshore currents,
however, move in a zigzag pattern, whereas rivers flow
mostly in a turbulent, swirling fashion. In addition, the
direction of flow of longshore currents along a shoreline
can change, whereas rivers flow in the same direction

Rip Currents Rip currents are concentrated
movements of water that
flow in the opposite direction of breaking waves.
(Sometimes rip currents are
incorrectly called rip tides,
although they are unrelated to
tidal phenomena.) Most of the
backwash from spent waves finds
its way back to the open ocean as an unconfined flow
across the ocean bottom called sheet flow. However,
sometimes a portion of the returning water moves seaward in the form of surface rip currents. Rip currents
do not travel far beyond the surf zone before breaking up, and they can be recognized by the way they
interfere with incoming waves or by the sediment that
is often suspended within (Figure 20.12). They can be
hazardous to swimmers, who, if caught in them, can be
carried out away from shore. The best strategy for exiting a rip current is to swim parallel to the shore for a
few tens of meters.

20.3

Concept Checks

1. Why do waves approaching the shoreline often
bend?
2. What is the effect of wave refraction along an
irregular coastline?
3. Describe the two processes that contribute to
longshore transport.

Features
20.4 Shoreline
Describe the features typically created by wave erosion and those resulting from
sediment deposited by longshore transport processes.

A fascinating assortment of shoreline features can be observed along the world’s coastal regions.
Although the same processes cause change along every coast, not all coasts respond in the same
way. Interactions among different processes and the relative importance of each process depend
on local factors. The factors include (1) the proximity of a coast to sediment-laden rivers, (2) the
degree of tectonic activity, (3) the topography and composition of the land, (4) prevailing winds and
weather patterns, and (5) the configuration of the coastline and nearshore areas. Features that originate primarily because of erosion are called erosional features, whereas accumulations of sediment
produce depositional features.

605

20.4 Shoreline Features

Figure 20.13

Marine terrace
Wave-cut
platform

Wave-cut platform and
marine terrace This wavecut platform is exposed at
low tide along the California
coast at Bolinas Point near
San Francisco. A wave-cut
platform was uplifted to
create the marine terrace.
(Photo by John S. Shelton/
University of Washington Libraries)

Erosional Features
Many coastal landforms owe their origin to erosional
processes. Such erosional features are common along the
rugged and irregular New England coast and along the
steep shorelines of the west coast of the United States.

Wave-cut Cliffs, Wave-cut Platforms, and Marine
Terraces As the name implies, wave-cut cliffs
originate in the cutting action of the surf against the
base of coastal land. As erosion progresses, rocks
overhanging the notch at the base of the cliff crumble
into the surf, and the cliff retreats. A relatively flat,
benchlike surface, called a wave-cut platform, is left
behind by the receding cliff (Figure 20.13, left). The
platform broadens as wave attack continues. Some

debris produced by the breaking waves remains along
the water’s edge as sediment on the beach, and the
remainder is transported farther seaward. If a wavecut platform is uplifted above sea level by tectonic
forces, it becomes a marine terrace (see Figure 20.13,
right). Marine terraces are easily recognized by their
gentle seaward-sloping shape and are often desirable
sites for coastal roads, buildings, or agriculture.

Sea Arches and Sea Stacks Waves vigorously attack
headlands that extend into the sea because of refraction.
The surf erodes the rock selectively, wearing away the
softer or more highly fractured rock at the fastest rate.
At first, sea caves may form. When two caves on opposite
sides of a headland unite, a sea arch results (Figure 20.14).
Figure 20.14
Sea stack and sea
arch These features at
the tip of Mexico’s Baja
Peninsula resulted from
vigorous wave attack on
a headland. (Photo by Lew

Sea stack

Robertson/Getty Images)

Sea arch

606

CHAPTER 20

Baymouth bar

Spit

Tidal delta

SmartFigure 20.15

Barrier Islands The Atlantic and Gulf coastal

Coastal Massachusetts
A. High-altitude image of a welldeveloped spit and baymouth bar
along the coast of Martha’s Vineyard.
(Image courtesy of USDA-ASCS)

B. This photograph, taken from the
International Space Station, shows
Provincetown Spit at the tip of Cape
Cod. Can you pick out this feature on
the satellite image in Figure 20.1A
(NASA image) (http://goo.gl/MfwH34)

dominant direction of the longshore current (Figure 20.15). The term baymouth bar is applied to a
sandbar that completely crosses a bay, sealing it off
from the open ocean (see Figure 20.15). Such a feature tends to form across a bay where currents are
weak, allowing a spit to extend to the other side. A
tombolo (tombolo = mound), a ridge of sand that
connects an island to the mainland or to another
island, forms in much the same manner as a spit.

A.

Provincetown Spit

plains are relatively flat and slope gently seaward. The shore zone is characterized by barrier islands. These low ridges of land parallel
the coast at distances from 3 to 30 kilometers
offshore. From Cape Cod, Massachusetts, to
Padre Island, Texas, nearly 300 barrier islands
rim the coast (Figure 20.16).
Most barrier islands are 1 to 5 kilometers
wide and 15 to 30 kilometers long. The tallest
features are sand dunes, which usually reach
heights of 5 to 10 meters; in a few areas, unvegetated dunes are more than 30 meters high. The
lagoons separating these narrow islands from the

B.
Albemarle
Sound

VIRGINIA

Eventually the arch falls in, leaving an isolated remnant, or sea
stack, on the wave-cut platform
(see Figure 20.14). In time, it too
will be consumed by the action of
the waves.

NORTH CAROLINA

NC

nd

co
mli

Pa

Depositional Features

Hatteras
Island
Cape Lookout

Sediment eroded from the beach
is transported along the shore and
deposited in areas where wave
energy is low. Such processes
produce a variety of depositional
features.

Hatteras
Island
ATLANTIC
OCEAN

Pamlico Sound

Spits, Bars, and Tombolos
Where beach drift and longshore
currents are active, several features related to the movement
of sediment along the shore may
develop. A spit (spit = spine) is an
elongated ridge of sand that projects from the land into the mouth
of an adjacent bay. Often the
end of a spit that is in the water
hooks landward in response to the

Road

Figure 20.16
Barrier islands Nearly 300 barrier islands rim the Gulf and Atlantic
coasts. The islands along the coast of North Carolina are excellent
examples. In this view, south is at the top of the photo. (Photo by
Michael Collier)

Sou

Dunes
ATLANTIC OCEAN

607

20.4 Shoreline Features

Figure 20.17
The evolving shore These
diagrams illustrate changes
that can take place through
time along an initially
irregular coastline that
remains relatively stable.
The diagrams also illustrate many of the features
described in the section on
shoreline features. (Top and

Bay

Sea arch
Island
Sea arch

bottom photos by E. J. Tarbuck;
middle photo by Michael Collier)

Wave-cut cliff

Spit

Sea stack
Tombolo

Tombolo

T
I
M
E

Spit
Baymouth
bar

Beach
deposits

Wave-cut
cliff

nt

re curre

Longsho

Spit

Wave-cut
platform

shore represent zones of relatively quiet water that allow
small craft traveling between New York and northern Florida to avoid the rough waters of the North Atlantic.
Barrier islands form in several ways. Some originated
as spits that were severed from the mainland by wave erosion or by the general rise in sea level after the last episode
of glaciation. Others are created when turbulent waters in
the line of breakers heap up sand scoured from the ocean
bottom. Because these sand barriers rise above normal
sea level, the sand likely piles up as a result of the work of
storm waves at high tide. Finally, some barrier islands may
be former sand dune ridges that originated along the shore
during the last glacial period, when sea level was lower.
When the ice sheets melted, sea level rose and flooded the
area behind the beach–dune complex.

The Evolving Shore
A shoreline continually undergoes modification, regardless of its initial configuration. At first, most coastlines
are irregular, although the degree of and reason for the
irregularity may vary considerably from place to place.

Along a coastline that is characterized by varied geology,
the pounding surf may at first increase its irregularity
because the waves will erode the weaker rocks more
easily than the stronger ones. However, if a shoreline
remains tectonically stable, marine erosion and deposition will eventually produce a straighter, more regular
coast. Figure 20.17 illustrates the evolution of an initially
irregular coast. As waves erode the headlands, creating
cliffs and a wave-cut platform, sediment is carried along
the shore. Some material is deposited in the bays, while
other debris is formed into spits and baymouth bars. At
the same time, rivers fill the bays with sediment. Ultimately, a generally straight, smooth coast results.

20.4

Concept Checks

1. How is a marine terrace related to a wave-cut
platform?
2. Describe the formation of each labeled feature in
Figure 20.17.
3. List three ways that a barrier island may form.

608

CHAPTER 20

Shorelines

America’s Coasts
20.5 Contrasting
Distinguish between emergent and submergent coasts. Contrast the erosion
problems faced on the Atlantic and Gulf coasts with those along the Pacific coast.

The shoreline along the Pacific coast of the United States is strikingly different from that of the
Atlantic and Gulf coast regions (see GEOgraphics 20.1). Some of the differences are related to plate
tectonics. The west coast represents the leading edge of the North American plate, and because of
this, it experiences active uplift and deformation. By contrast, the east coast is far from any active
plate boundary and relatively quiet tectonically. Because of this basic geologic difference, the
nature of shoreline erosion problems along America’s opposite coasts is different.

Coastal Classification
The great variety of shorelines demonstrates their complexity. Indeed, to understand any particular coastal area,
many factors must be considered, including rock types,
size and direction of waves, frequency of storms, tidal
range, and offshore topography. In addition, recall from
Chapter 18 that practically all coastal areas were affected
by the worldwide rise in sea level that accompanied the
melting of Ice Age glaciers at the close of the Pleistocene
epoch. Finally, tectonic events that elevate or drop the
SmartFigure 20.18

NEW JERSEY

De

MARYLAND

are

law
y

Ba

East coast estuaries The
lower portions of many
river valleys were flooded
by the rise in sea level that
followed the end of the
Quaternary Ice Age, creating large estuaries such as
Chesapeake and Delaware
Bays. (https://goo.gl/iYIc7z)
_TT74


PENNSYLVANIA

DELAWARE

ay
Chesapeake B

VIRGINIA

Emergent Coasts In some areas, the coast is clearly
emergent because rising land or a falling water level
exposes wave-cut cliffs and platforms above sea level.
Excellent examples include portions of coastal California,
where uplift has occurred in the recent geologic past. The
marine terrace shown in Figure 20.13 illustrates this situation. In the case of the Palos Verdes Hills, south of Los
Angeles, seven different terrace levels exist, indicating
seven episodes of uplift. The ever-persistent sea is now
cutting a new platform at the base of the cliff. If uplift follows, it too will become an elevated marine terrace.
Other examples of emergent coasts include regions
that were once buried beneath great ice sheets. When
glaciers were present, their weight depressed the crust,
and when the ice melted, the crust began gradually to
spring back. Consequently, prehistoric shoreline features
may now be found high above sea level. The Hudson
Bay region of Canada is such an area; portions of it are
still rising at a rate of more than 1 centimeter per year.
Submergent Coasts In contrast to the preceding

Atlantic Ocean

NORTH
CAROLINA

land or change the volume of ocean basins must be taken
into account. The myriad factors that influence coastal
areas make shoreline classification difficult.
Many geologists classify coasts based on the changes
that have occurred with respect to sea level. This commonly used classification divides coasts into two general
categories: emergent and submergent. Emergent coasts
develop because an area experiences either uplift or a drop
in sea level. Conversely, submergent coasts are created
when sea level rises or the land adjacent to the sea subsides.

examples, other coastal areas show definite signs of submergence. Shorelines that have been submerged in the
relatively recent past are often highly irregular because
the sea typically floods the lower reaches of river valleys
flowing into the ocean. The ridges separating the valleys,
however, remain above sea level and project into the sea
as headlands. These drowned river mouths, which are
called estuaries (aestus = tide), characterize many coasts
today. Along the Atlantic coastline, the Chesapeake and
Delaware Bays are examples of large estuaries created
by submergence (Figure 20.18). The picturesque coast of
Maine, particularly in the vicinity of Acadia National
Park, is another excellent example of an area that was

609

20.5 Contrasting America’s Coasts
Various attempts to protect the lighthouse failed. They included
building groins and beach nourishment. By 1999, when this photo
was taken, the lighthouse was only 36 meters (120 ft.) from the water.
Former location
of lighthouse

88

4

me

ter

s(

00

ft.
)
To save the famous candy-striped
landmark, the National Park Service
authorized moving the structure. After the
$12 million move, it is expected to be safe for
50 years or more.

Atlantic and Gulf Coasts
Much of the coastal development along the Atlantic and
Gulf coasts has occurred on barrier islands. Typically,
a barrier island, also termed a barrier beach or coastal
barrier, consists of a wide beach that is backed by dunes
and separated from the mainland by marshy lagoons.
The broad expanses of sand and exposure to the ocean
have made barrier islands exceedingly attractive sites
for development. Unfortunately, development has taken
place more rapidly than our understanding of barrier
island dynamics has increased.
Because barrier islands face the open ocean, they
receive the full force of major storms that strike the
coast. When a storm occurs, the barriers absorb the
energy of the waves primarily through the movement of
sand. Figure 20.19, which shows changes at Cape Hatteras
National Seashore, reinforces this point. The process and
problems that result were recognized years ago and accurately described as follows:
Waves may move sand from the beach to offshore
areas or, conversely, into the dunes; they may erode the
dunes, depositing sand onto the beach or carrying it out
to sea; or they may carry sand from the beach and the
dunes into the marshes behind the barrier, a process

Relocating the Cape
Hatteras lighthouse
After the failure of a
number of efforts to protect
this 21-story lighthouse, the
nation’s tallest, from being
destroyed due to a receding shoreline, the structure
finally had to be moved.
(Top photo by Don Smetzer/
PhotoEdit Inc.; bottom photo by
Drew C. Wilson/Virginian-Pilot/
AP Photo)

29

flooded by the postglacial rise in sea level and transformed into a highly irregular coastline.
Keep in mind that most coasts have complicated geologic histories. With respect to sea level, at various times
many coasts have emerged and then submerged. Each
time, they may retain some of the features created during
the previous situation.

Figure 20.19

known as overwash. The common factor is movement.
Just as a flexible reed may survive a wind that destroys
an oak tree, so the barriers survive hurricanes and
nor’easters not through unyielding strength but by giving before the storm.
This picture changes when a barrier is developed
for homes or as a resort. Storm waves that previously
rushed harmlessly through gaps between the dunes now
encounter buildings and roadways. Moreover, since the
dynamic nature of the barriers is readily perceived only
during storms, homeowners tend to attribute damage
to a particular storm, rather than to the basic mobility
of coastal barriers. With their homes or investments at
stake, local residents are more likely to seek to hold the
sand in place and the waves at bay than to admit that
development was improperly placed to begin with.*

Pacific Coast
In contrast to the broad, gently sloping coastal plains of
the Atlantic and Gulf coasts, much of the Pacific coast
is characterized by relatively narrow beaches that are
backed by steep cliffs and mountain ranges (Figure 20.20).
Recall that America’s western margin is a more rugged
and tectonically active region than the eastern margin.
Because uplift continues, a rise in sea level in the west
is not so readily apparent. Nevertheless, like the shoreline erosion problems facing the Atlantic coast’s barrier
islands, west coast difficulties also stem largely from the
alteration of a natural system by people.
*Frank Lowenstein, “Beaches or Bedrooms—The Choice as Sea Level Rises,”
Oceanus 28 (No. 3, Fall 1985): p. 22 © Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute.

612

CHAPTER 20

Figure 20.20

level rises at an increasing rate in the years to come,
increased shoreline erosion and sea-cliff retreat should be
expected along many parts of the Pacific coast. Coastal
vulnerability to sea-level rise is examined in more detail
as part of a discussion of the possible consequences of
global warming in Chapter 21.

Pacific Coast Wave refraction along the coast of
California south of Shelter
Cove. These steep cliffs are
a sharp contrast to typical
scenes along the Atlantic
and Gulf coasts.
(Photo by Michael Collier)

20.5

Concept Checks

1. Are estuaries associated with submergent or
emergent coasts? Explain.
2. What observable features would lead you to
classify a coastal area as emergent?
3. Briefly describe what happens when storm waves
strike an undeveloped barrier island.
4. How might building a dam on a river that flows to
the sea affect a coastal beach?

A major problem facing the Pacific shoreline, and
especially portions of southern California, is a significant
narrowing of many beaches. The bulk of the sand on
many of these beaches is supplied by rivers that transport it from the mountains to the coast. Over the years,
this natural flow of material to the coast has been interrupted by dams built for irrigation and flood control. The
reservoirs effectively trap the sand that would otherwise
nourish the beach environment (Figure 20.21). When the
beaches were wider, they protected the cliffs behind them
from the force of storm waves. Now, however, the waves
move across the narrowed beaches without losing much
energy and cause more rapid erosion of the sea cliffs.
Although the retreat of the cliffs provides material
to replace some of the sand impounded behind dams,
it also endangers homes and roads built on the bluffs.
In addition, development atop the cliffs aggravates the
problem. Urbanization increases runoff, which, if not
carefully controlled, can result in serious bluff erosion.
Watering lawns and gardens high on the cliffs adds significant quantities of water to the slope. This water percolates downward toward the base of the cliff, where
it may emerge in small seeps. This action reduces the
slope’s stability and facilitates mass wasting.
Shoreline erosion along the Pacific coast varies considerably from one year to the next, largely because of the
sporadic occurrence of storms. As a consequence, when
the infrequent but serious episodes of erosion occur, the
damage is often blamed on the unusual storms and not
on coastal development or the sediment-trapping dams
that may be great distances away. If, as predicted, sea

Dam

Figure 20.21
Pacoima Dam and Reservoir Dams such as this one in the
San Gabriel Mountains near Los Angeles trap sediment that
otherwise would have nourished beaches along the nearby
coast. (Photo by Michael Collier)

613

20.6 Hurricanes: The Ultimate Coastal Hazard

20.6

Hurricanes: The Ultimate Coastal Hazard
Describe the basic structure and characteristics of a hurricane and the three
broad categories of hurricane destruction.

Many view the weather in the tropics with favor—and rightfully so. Places such as islands in the
South Pacific and the Caribbean are known for their lack of significant day-to-day variations. Warm
breezes, steady temperatures, and rains that occur as heavy but brief tropical showers are expected.
It is ironic that these relatively tranquil regions occasionally produce some of the world’s most violent storms. Once formed, these storms carry severe conditions far from the tropics.

Profile of a Hurricane
A hurricane is a heat engine fueled by the energy liberated when huge quantities of water vapor condense. The
amount of energy produced by a typical hurricane in just
a single day is truly immense. To get the engine started, a
large quantity of warm, moist air is required, and a continuous supply is needed to keep it going.

Hurricane Formation

As the graph in Figure 20.23
illustrates, hurricanes most often form in late summer
and early fall. It is during this span that sea-surface
temperatures reach 27°C (80°F) or higher and are
thus able to provide the necessary heat and moisture
to the air (Figure 20.24). This ocean-water temperature

Figure 20.22
The eye wall surrounds
the eye and is the most
intense part of the storm

Well-developed eye

N

requirement explains why hurricane formation over the
relatively cool waters of the South Atlantic and eastern
South Pacific is extremely rare. For the same reason,
few hurricanes form poleward of 20 degrees latitude.
Although water temperatures are sufficiently high, hurricanes do not develop within about 5 degrees of the
equator because the Coriolis effect (a force related to
Earth’s rotation that gives storms their “spin”) is too
weak there. Figure 20.25 shows the regions where most
hurricanes form.

Super Typhoon Haiyan
In the Western Pacific,
hurricanes are called
typhoons. This storm
struck portions of the
central Philippines in
November 2013. With
sustained winds estimated
at 315 kilometers (195
miles) per hour, it was the
strongest storm on record
ever to make landfall. The
counterclockwise spiral of
the clouds indicates that it
is a Northern Hemisphere
storm. In the Southern
Hemisphere, the spiral is
clockwise. (NASA)

Pressure Gradient Hurricanes are intense lowpressure centers, which means that as you move toward
Figure 20.23

110
100
Number of storms per 100 years

Whirling tropical cyclones—the greatest storms on
Earth—occasionally have wind speeds exceeding 300
kilometers (185 miles) per hour. In the United States
they are known as hurricanes, in the western Pacific
they are called typhoons, and in the Indian Ocean they
are simply called cyclones. No matter which name is
used, these storms are among the most destructive of
natural disasters (Figure 20.22).
The vast majority of hurricane-related deaths and
damage are caused by relatively infrequent yet powerful
storms. Of course, the deadliest and most costly storm
in recent memory occurred in August 2005, when Hurricane Katrina devastated the Gulf coast of Louisiana,
Mississippi, and Alabama. Although hundreds of thousands of people fled before the storm made landfall,
thousands of others were caught by the storm. In addition
to the human suffering and tragic loss of life left in the
wake of Hurricane Katrina, the financial losses caused by
the storm are practically incalculable.
Our coasts are vulnerable. People are flocking to live
near the ocean. Over half of the U.S. population resides
within 75 kilometers (45 miles) of a coast, placing millions at risk. Moreover, the potential costs of property
damage are incredible. As sea level continues to rise in
coming decades, low-lying, densely populated coastal
areas will become even more vulnerable to the destructive effects of major storms.
_TT75


90
80

Total number of
hurricanes and
tropical storms

70
60
50
40

Total number
of hurricanes

30
20
10
0
May 1 June 1 July 1 Aug 1 Sept 1 Oct 1 Nov 1 Dec 1

When do Atlantic hurricanes occur? Frequency
of tropical storms and
hurricanes from May 1
through December 31 in
the Atlantic basin. The
graph shows the number of
storms to be expected over
a span of 100 years. The
period from late August
through October is clearly
the most active. (Data from
National Hurricane Center/NOAA)

614

CHAPTER 20

Shorelines

Figure 20.24
Sea-surface temperatures Among the necessary ingredients for a
hurricane is warm ocean
temperatures above 27°C
(80°F). This color-coded
satellite image from June 1,
2010, shows sea-surface
temperatures at the beginning of hurricane season.
(NASA)

Sea Surface Temperature (°C)
–2

16.5

27.8

35

the center of the storm, air pressure gets lower and
lower. Such storms are said to have a very steep pressure gradient. Pressure gradient refers to how rapidly
the pressure changes per unit distance and is shown on
a map with isobars, lines of equal pressure. Just as the
spacing of contour lines on a topographic map indicates
how steep or gentle a slope is, the spacing of isobars on
a weather chart shows how rapidly air pressure is changing. Closely spaced isobars indicate a steep pressure
gradient and stronger winds. A steep pressure gradient
generates the rapid, inward-spiraling winds of a hurricane. As the air rushes toward the center of the storm,
its velocity increases. This is similar to skaters with their
arms extended spinning faster as they pull their arms in
close to their bodies.

Storm Structure As the inward rush of warm, moist
surface air approaches the core of the storm, it turns
upward and ascends in a ring of cumulonimbus cloud
towers (Figure 20.26). This doughnut-shaped wall of
intense convective activity surrounding the center of the

storm is called the eye wall. It is here that the greatest
wind speeds and heaviest rainfall occur. Surrounding the
eye wall are curved bands of clouds that trail away in a
spiral fashion. Near the top of the hurricane, the airflow
is outward, carrying the rising air away from the storm
center, thereby providing room for more inward flow at
the surface.
At the very center of the storm is the eye of the hurricane (see Figure 20.26). This well-known feature is a
zone about 20 kilometers (12.5 miles) in diameter where
precipitation ceases and winds subside. It offers a brief but
deceptive break from the extreme weather in the enormous
curving wall clouds that surround it. The air within the eye
gradually descends and heats by compression, making it the
warmest part of the storm. Although many people believe
that the eye is characterized by clear blue skies, this is usually not the case because the subsidence in the eye is seldom
strong enough to produce cloudless conditions. Although the
sky appears much brighter in this region, scattered clouds at
various levels are common.

Hurricane Destruction
Although hurricanes are tropical or subtropical in origin,
their destructive effects can be experienced far from
where they originate. For example, in 2012 Hurricane
Sandy (also called Superstorm Sandy) originated in the
Caribbean Sea and affected the entire eastern seaboard
from Florida to Maine. Destruction was especially great in
New Jersey and New York, even though Sandy may have
been downgraded from hurricane status by that time.
The amount of damage caused by a hurricane
depends on several factors, including the size and population density of the area affected and the shape of the
ocean bottom near the shore. The most significant factor, of course, is the strength of the storm. By studying
past storms, a scale called the Saffir–Simpson hurricane
scale was established to rank the relative intensities of

SmartFigure 20.25
Hurricane source regions and paths
The map shows the regions where most
hurricanes form as well as their principal
months of occurrence and the tracks they
most commonly follow. Hurricanes do not
develop within about 5 degrees of the equator because the Coriolis effect (a force related
to Earth’s rotation that gives storms their
“spin”) there is too weak. Because warm
ocean-surface temperatures are necessary
for hurricane formation, hurricanes seldom
form poleward of 20 degrees latitude or over
the cool waters of the south Atlantic and the
eastern south Pacific. (https://goo.gl/M6aCWh)

60°

Asia
North
America

June-December

Europe

August-October

Pacific
Ocean

30°

Africa
0°

Equator

June-November

June-October
30°

Indian
Ocean

Australia

January-March
January-March

South
America

Atlantic
Ocean

615

20.6 Hurricanes: The Ultimate Coastal Hazard

990

Pressure (millibars)

Wind speed (knots)

hurricanes. As Table 20.1 indicates, a category 5 storm
Outflow of air at the top of the hurricane is
is the worst possible, and a category 1 hurricane is least
important because it prevents the convergent
flow at lower levels from “filling in” the storm.
severe.
During hurricane season, it is common to hear scientists and reporters alike
use the numbers from the Saffir–Simpson
scale. When Hurricane Katrina made
Eye
landfall, sustained winds were 225
Sinking air in the eye
kilometers (140 miles) per hour, makwarms by compression.
ing it a strong category 4 storm. Storms
that fall into category 5 are rare. HurEye wall, the zone
where winds and rain
ricane Camille, a 1969 storm
are most intense.
that caused catastrophic
Tropical moisture
spiraling inward
damage along the coast
creates rain bands
of Mississippi, is one wellthat pinwheel around
known example.
the storm center.
Once a hurricane makes
landfall, it loses energy
because it is cut off from
Cross section of a hurricane. Note that the vertical
dimension is greatly exaggerated. (After NOAA)
its energy source—warm
ocean water—and is usually
downgraded to a lower category. However, these
1010
90
storms are so large and violent that their effects
1005
80
are felt far inland. Damage caused by hurricanes
Pressure
1000
70
can be divided into three categories: storm
995
surge, wind damage, and inland flooding.
60
50
985
Without
Mean speed
Measurements of
980
question, the most devastat- surface pressure
40
and wind speed
ing damage in the coastal
975
30
during the passage
zone is caused by storm
970
of Cyclone Monty
20
surge. It not only accounts
at Mardie Station,
965
Minimum
Western Australia,
for a large share of coastal
pressure 964
10
960
between February
on 2 March
property losses but is also
29 and March 2,
955
0
responsible for a high per2004. (Hurricanes
6
6
6
6
6
12
12
12
12
12
are called
centage of all hurricanePM
AM
PM
AM
PM
“cyclones” in this
caused deaths. A storm
2/29
3/1
3/2
part of the world.)
surge is a dome of water
65 to 80 kilometers (40 to
50 miles) wide that sweeps across the coast near the
the continental shelf is very shallow and gently sloping.
point where the eye makes landfall. If all wave activIn addition, local features such as bays and rivers can
ity were smoothed out, the storm surge would be the
cause the surge to double in height and increase in
height of the water above normal tide level. In addispeed.
tion, tremendous wave activity is superimposed on the
As a hurricane advances toward the coast in the Northsurge. This surge of water can inflict immense damage
ern Hemisphere, storm surge is always most intense on the
on low-lying coastal areas (Figure 20.27). The worst
right side of the eye, where winds are blowing toward the
surges occur in places like the Gulf of Mexico, where
shore. On this side of the storm, the forward movement of

Storm Surge

TABLE 20.1
Scale Number
(category)

Saffir–Simpson Hurricane Scale
Central Pressure
(millibars)

Wind Speed (kph)
119–153

Wind Speed (mph)
74–95

Storm Surge
(meters)
1.2–1.5

Storm Surge (feet)
4–5

Damage

1

≥980

Minimal

2

965–979

154–177

96–110

1.6–2.4

6–8

Moderate

3

945– 964

178–209

111–130

2.5–3.6

9–12

Extensive

4

920–944

210–250

131–155

3.7–5.4

13–18

Extreme

5

<920

>250

>155

>5.4

>18

Catastrophic

SmartFigure 20.26
Cross section of a
hurricane
(Data for graph from World
Meteorological Organization)
(http://goo.gl/yT2d1q)

616

CHAPTER 20

Shorelines

Figure 20.27
Storm surge destruction
This is Crystal Beach,
Texas, on September
16, 2008, 3 days after
Hurricane Ike came ashore.
At landfall the storm had
sustained winds of 165
kilometers (105 miles) per
hour. The extraordinary
storm surge caused most
of the damage shown
here. (Photo by Smiley N. Pool/
Newscom)

the hurricane also contributes to the storm surge. In
Figure 20.28, assume that a hurricane with peak winds of
175 kilometers (109 miles) per hour is moving toward the
shore at 50 kilometers (31 miles) per hour. In this case, the
net wind speed on the right side of the advancing storm is
225 kilometers (140 miles) per hour. On the left side, the
hurricane’s winds are blowing opposite the direction of
storm movement, so the net winds are away from the coast
at 125 kilometers (78 miles) per hour. Along the shore facing the left side of the oncoming hurricane, the water level
may actually decrease as the storm makes landfall.

usually not as catastrophic as storm-surge
damage. However, hurricane-force winds
affect a much larger area than storm surge
and can cause huge economic losses. For
example, in 1992 it was largely the winds
associated with Hurricane Andrew that produced more than $25 billion of damage in
southern Florida and Louisiana.
Hurricanes sometimes produce tornadoes that contribute to the storm’s destructive power. Studies have shown that more
than half of the hurricanes that make
landfall produce at least one tornado. In
2004 the number of tornadoes associated
with tropical storms and hurricanes was
extraordinary. Tropical Storm Bonnie and
five landfalling hurricanes—Charley, Frances, Gaston, Ivan, and Jeanne—produced nearly 300 tornadoes that affected the southeastern and mid-Atlantic
states.

Heavy Rains and Inland Flooding

The torrential
rains that accompany most hurricanes bring a third significant threat: flooding. Whereas the effects of storm
surge and strong winds are concentrated in coastal areas,
heavy rains may affect places hundreds of kilometers
from the coast for up to several days after the storm has
lost its hurricane-force winds.
In September 1999, Hurricane Floyd brought flooding rains, high winds, and rough seas to a large portion
Wind Damage Destruction caused by wind is perhaps
of the Atlantic seaboard. More than 2.5 million people
the most obvious of the classes of hurricane damage.
Debris such as signs, roofing materials, and small items left evacuated their homes from Florida north to the Carolinas and beyond. It was the largest peacetime evacuation
outside become dangerous flying missiles in hurricanes.
in U.S. history up to that time. Torrential rains falling
For some structures, the force of the wind is sufficient to
cause total ruin. Mobile homes are particularly vulnerable. on already saturated ground created devastating inland
flooding. Altogether Floyd dumped more than 48 centiHigh-rise buildings are also susceptible to hurricane-force
meters (19 inches) of rain on Wilmington, North Carowinds. Upper floors are most vulnerable because wind
lina, with 33.98 centimeters (13.38 inches) falling in a
speeds usually increase with height. Recent research
single 24-hour span.
suggests that people should stay below the 10th floor of
Another well-known example is Hurricane Camille
a building but remain above any floors at risk for flood(1969). Although this storm is best known for its exceping. In regions with good building codes, wind damage is
tional storm surge and the devastation it
Figure 20.28
North Carolina
brought to coastal areas, the greatest numAn approaching hurricane This hypothetical
ber of deaths associated with this storm
Northern Hemisphere hurricane, with peak
e
South
n
a
occurred in the Blue Ridge Mountains of
winds of 175 kilometers (109 miles) per hour,
Carolina
rric ent
nd
Hu vem ph
d a n of
e
o
Virginia 2 days after Camille’s landfall.
e
is moving toward the coast at 50 kilometers
m 0k
Sp ectio ane
5
n
dir urric ent
(31 miles) per hour. On the right side of the
Many places received more than 25 centio
d
d e
in
h vem
t w h = Win t sid h
mo kph
advancing storm, the 175-kilometer-per-hour
Ne 5 kp he
h
meters (10 inches) of rain.
p
g
0
22 t t ri 5 k
winds blow in the same direction as the movement of the storm (50 kilometers per hour).
Therefore the net wind speed on the right side
of the storm is 225 kilometers (140 miles) per
hour toward the coast. On the left side, the
hurricane’s winds are blowing opposite the
direction of storm movement, so the net winds
of 125 kilometers (78 miles) per hour are away
from the coast. Storm surge will be greatest
along the part of the coast hit by the right side
of the advancing hurricane.

5

Georgia

d
win
et kph
e
n
N
a
e
5
12 th t
rric ent
Hu vem ph = from hwes
t
o
m 0k
nor
5
on
d
e
n
Wi ft sid h
le 5 kp
7
1
Florida

s
m
fro thwe
sou

17

Detecting and Tracking
Hurricanes
A location only a few hundred kilometers
from a hurricane—just a day’s striking
distance away—may experience clear skies
and virtually no wind. Before the age of
weather satellites, such a situation made

617
it difficult to warn people of impending
storms. The worst natural disaster in U.S.
history came as a result of a hurricane that
struck an unprepared Galveston, Texas, on
September 8, 1900. The strength of the
storm, together with the lack of adequate
warning, caught the population by surprise and took the lives of 8000 people
(Figure 20.29).
In the United States, early warning
systems have greatly reduced the number
of deaths caused by hurricanes. At the
same time, however, an astronomical rise
has occurred in the amount of property damage, primarily due to the rapid population growth and accompanying
development in coastal areas.

Figure 20.29
Aftermath of the historic
Galveston hurricane The
storm struck an unsuspecting and unprepared city on
September 8, 1900. It was
the worst natural disaster in U.S. history. Entire
blocks were swept clean,
and mountains of debris
accumulated around the
few remaining buildings.
(AP Photo)

local forecast centers are able to track the storm and provide short-term warnings for floods, tornadoes, and high
winds for specific areas.

Satellites The greatest single advancement in tools

20.6

used for observing hurricanes has been the development of meteorological satellites. Vast areas of open
ocean must be observed in order to detect a hurricane.
Before satellites, this was an impossible task. Today
instruments aboard satellites can detect a potential
storm even before it develops its characteristic circular
cloud pattern.
In recent years two methods of using satelliteacquired data to monitor hurricane intensity have been
developed. One technique uses instruments aboard a satellite to estimate wind speeds within a storm. A second
method uses satellites to identify areas of extraordinary
cloud development, called hot towers, in the eye wall of
an approaching hurricane (Figure 20.30).

Concept Checks

1. What factors influence where and when hurricane
formation takes place?
2. Distinguish between the eye and eye wall of a
hurricane.
3. What are the three broad categories of hurricane
damage? Which one is responsible for the
greatest number of hurricane-related deaths?
4. Which side of an advancing hurricane in the
Northern Hemisphere has the strongest winds
and highest storm surge—right or left? Explain.
5. List three tools that provide data used to track
and analyze hurricanes.

Aircraft Reconnaissance When a hurricane is within
range, specially instrumented aircraft can fly directly
into a threatening storm and
accurately measure details of
its position and current state
of development. Data transmission can be made directly
from an aircraft in the midst
of a storm to the forecast
center. The data collected are
critical in analyzing the current characteristics needed to
forecast the future behavior
of a storm.

SmartFigure 20.30
Hot tower
Hot tower

Radar A third basic tool in
the observation and study of
hurricanes is radar. When a
hurricane nears the coast, it
is monitored by land-based
Doppler weather radar. This
tool provides detailed information on hurricane wind
fields, rainfall intensity, and
storm movement. As a result,

20

10
Rain rate (mm/hr)

0
Height (km)

0

10

20

30

40

50

Hot towers This Tropical Rainfall
Measuring Mission (TRMM) satellite image of Hurricane Katrina was
acquired early on August 28, 2005.
The cutaway view of the inner portion
of the storm shows cloud height on
one side and rainfall rates on the
other. Two hot towers (in red) are
visible: one in an outer rain band and
the other in the eye wall. The eye wall
tower rises 16 kilometers (10 miles)
above the ocean surface and is associated with an area of intense rainfall.
Towers this tall near the core often
indicate that a storm is intensifying.
Katrina grew from a category 3 to a
category 4 storm soon after this image
was received. (NASA) (http://goo.gl/Dn8nOI)

618

CHAPTER 20

Shorelines

E Y E ON E A R T H

20.2
Mozambique
Channel
Zimbabwe

T

his satellite image shows Cyclone Favio as it came ashore
along the coast of Mozambique, Africa, on February 22,
2007. This powerful storm was moving from east to west.
Since it is a Southern Hemisphere storm, the cloud pattern
shows that the winds circulate in a clockwise spiral instead of
the counterclockwise pattern typical of storms in the Northern
Hemisphere. Portions of the cyclone had sustained winds of
203 kilometers (126 miles) per hour as it made landfall.
_TT76


A
B

C

D

QUESTION 1 Identify the eye and eye wall of the storm.
QUESTION 2 Based on wind speed, classify the storm using
the Saffir–Simpson scale.

South
Africa

QUESTION 3 Which one of the lettered sites should experience
the strongest storm surge? Explain.
N

NASA

20.7

Stabilizing the Shore
Summarize the ways in which people deal with shoreline erosion problems.

Compared with natural hazards such as earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, and landslides, shoreline
erosion is often perceived to be a more continuous and predictable process that may cause relatively
modest damage to limited areas. In reality, the shoreline is a dynamic place that can change rapidly
in response to natural forces. Exceptional storms are capable of eroding beaches and cliffs at rates
that greatly exceed the long-term average. Such bursts of accelerated erosion not only significantly
affect the natural evolution of a coast but also can have a profound impact on people who reside
in the coastal zone. Erosion along our coasts causes significant property damage. Huge sums are
spent annually not only to repair damage but also to prevent or control erosion. Already a problem
at many sites, shoreline erosion is certain to become an increasingly serious problem as extensive
coastal development continues.
During the past 100 years, growing affluence and
increasing demands for recreation have brought unprecedented development to many coastal areas. As both the
number and the value of buildings have increased, so too
have efforts to protect property from storm waves by stabilizing the shore. Also, controlling the natural migration
of sand is an ongoing struggle in many coastal areas. Such
interference can result in unwanted changes that are difficult and expensive to correct.

Hard Stabilization
Structures built to protect a coast from erosion or to
prevent the movement of sand along a beach are collectively known as hard stabilization. Hard stabilization
can take many forms and often results in predictable yet

unwanted outcomes. Hard stabilization includes jetties,
groins, breakwaters, and seawalls.

Jetties Since relatively early in America’s history, a
principal goal in coastal areas has been the development and maintenance of harbors. In many cases, this
has involved the construction of jetty systems. Jetties
are usually built in pairs and extend into the ocean
at the entrances to rivers and harbors. With the flow
of water confined to a narrow zone, the ebb and flow
caused by the rise and fall of the tides keep the sand
in motion and prevent deposition in the channel. However, as illustrated in Figure 20.31, a jetty may act as a
dam against which the longshore current and beach
drift deposit sand. At the same time, wave activity
removes sand on the other side. Because the other side

619

20.7 Stabilizing the Shore

is not receiving any new sand,
there is soon no beach
at all.

Groins To maintain or

Figure 20.31

Jetties interrupt the movement
of sand causing deposition
on the upcurrent side.

Erosion by sand-starved

Jetties These structures
are built at the entrances
to rivers and harbors and
are intended to prevent
deposition in the navigation
channel. The photo is an
aerial view at Santa Cruz
Harbor, California. (Photo by

widen beaches that are loscurrents occurs downcurrent
from these structures.
ing sand, groins are sometimes constructed. A groin
(groin = ground) is a barrier
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers)
t
Jetties
n
e
built at a right angle to the beach
curr
shore
to trap sand that is moving paralLong
lel to the shore. Groins are usually
constructed of large rocks but may also
be composed of wood. These structures
often do their job so effectively that the longshore current beyond the groin becomes sand
starved. As a result, the current erodes sand from the
beach on the downstream side of the groin.
To offset this effect, property owners downstream
from the structure may erect a groin on their property.
Jetties
In this manner, the number of groins multiplies, resulting
in a groin field (Figure 20.32). The New Jersey shoreline
is a good example of groin proliferation, where hundreds
of these structures have been built. Because it has been
shown that groins often do not provide a satisfactory solu- to even greater pounding by the waves. Eventually this
battering will cause the wall to fail, and a larger, more
tion, using them is no longer the preferred method of
expensive wall must be built to take its place.
keeping beach erosion in check.
The wisdom of building temporary protective structures along shorelines is increasingly questioned. Many
Breakwaters and Seawalls Hard stabilization can
coastal scientists and engineers are of the opinion that
be built parallel to the shoreline. One such structure
halting an eroding shoreline with protective structures
is a breakwater, which protects boats from the force
benefits only a few and seriously degrades or destroys
of large breaking waves by creating a quiet water zone
the natural beach and the value it holds for the majority.
near the shoreline. However, when a breakwater is
Protective structures divert the ocean’s energy temporarconstructed, the reduced wave activity along the shore
ily from private properties but usually refocus that energy
behind the structure may allow sand to accumulate.
on the adjacent beaches. Many structures interrupt the
If this happens, the marina will eventually fill with
natural sand flow in coastal currents, robbing affected
sand while the downstream beach erodes and retreats.
beaches of vital sand replacement.
At Santa Monica, California, where the building of a
breakwater has created such a problem, the
city uses a dredge to remove sand from the
SmartFigure 20.32
protected quiet water zone and deposit it downGroins These wall-like strucstream, where longshore currents and beach
tures trap sand that is moving
drift continue to move the sand down the coast
parallel to the shore. This series
(Figure 20.33).
of groins is along the shoreAnother type of hard stabilization built
line near Chichester, Sussex,
England. (Photo by Sandy Stockwell/
parallel to the shoreline is a seawall, which is
London Aerial Photo Library/CORBIS)
designed to armor the coast and defend prop(https://goo.gl/WMBDw9)
erty from the force of breaking waves. Waves
expend much of their energy as they move
across an open beach. Seawalls cut this process
short by reflecting the force of unspent waves
seaward. As a consequence, the beach to the
seaward side of the seawall experiences significant erosion and may in some instances be eliminated entirely (Figure 20.34). Once the width of
the beach is reduced, the seawall is subjected

620

CHAPTER 20

Shorelines

Figure 20.33
Breakwater Aerial view
of a breakwater at Santa
Monica, California. The
structure appears as a line
in the water behind which
many boats are anchored.
The construction of the
breakwater disrupted longshore transport and caused
the seaward growth of
the beach. (Photo by John S.
Shelton/University of Washington
Libraries)

Boat anchorage
(quiet water)

Longshore
transport

Breakwater

Longshore
transport

Disruption of
longshore transport
causes seaward
growth of beach

Alternatives to Hard Stabilization
Armoring the coast with hard stabilization has several
potential drawbacks, including the cost of the structure and the loss of sand on the beach. Alternatives
to hard stabilization include beach nourishment and
relocation.

Beach Nourishment One approach to stabilizing
shoreline sands without hard stabilization is beach
nourishment. As the term implies, this practice
involves adding large quantities of sand to the beach
system (Figure 20.35). Extending beaches seaward makes
buildings along the shoreline less vulnerable to destruction by storm waves and enhances recreational uses.
Without sandy beaches, tourism suffers.
The process of beach nourishment is straightforward. Sand is pumped by dredges from offshore
or trucked from inland locations. The “new” beach,

however, will not be the same as the former beach.
Because replenishment sand is from somewhere else,
typically not another beach, it is new to the beach environment. The new sand is often different in size, shape,
sorting, and composition. Such differences pose problems in terms of erodibility and the kinds of life the new
sand will support.
Beach nourishment is not a permanent solution to
the problem of shrinking beaches. The same processes
that removed the sand in the first place will eventually
remove the replacement sand as well. Nevertheless, the
number of nourishment projects has increased in recent
years, and many beaches, especially along the Atlantic
coast, have had their sand replenished many times.
Virginia Beach, Virginia, has been nourished more
than 50 times.
Beach nourishment is costly. For example, a modest project might involve 38,000 cubic meters (50,000
cubic yards) of sand distributed across about 1 kilometer (0.6 mile) of shoreline. A good-sized dump truck
holds about 7.6 cubic meters (10 cubic yards) of sand.
So this small project would require about 5000 dumptruck loads. Many projects extend for many miles.
Nourishing beaches typically costs millions of dollars
per mile.

Changing Land Use Instead of building structures
such as groins and seawalls to hold the beach in place
or adding sand to replenish eroding beaches, another
option is available. Many coastal scientists and planners are calling for a policy shift from defending and
rebuilding beaches and coastal property in high-hazard
areas to relocating or abandoning storm-damaged
buildings and letting nature reclaim the beach. This
option is similar to an approach the federal government

Figure 20.34
Seawall Seabright in
northern New Jersey once
had a broad, sandy beach.
A seawall 5 to 6 meters
(16 to 18 feet) high and 8
kilometers (5 miles) long
was built to protect the
town and the railroad that
brought tourists to the
beach. After the wall was
built, the beach narrowed
dramatically. (Photo by Rafael
Macia/Science Source)

Seawall

621

20.7 Stabilizing the Shore

adopted for river floodplains
following the devastating 1993 Mississippi River
floods, in which vulnerable structures are either
abandoned or relocated on
higher, safer ground.
A recent example of
changing land use occurred
on New York’s Staten Island
following Hurricane Sandy
in 2012. The state turned
some vulnerable shoreline
areas of the island into
waterfront parks. The parks
act as buffers to protect
inland homes and businesses
from strong storms while
providing the community
with needed open space
and access to recreational
opportunities.
Land use changes can
be controversial. People with
significant nearshore investments want to rebuild and defend coastal developments
from the erosional wrath of the sea. Others, however,
argue that with sea level rising, the impact of coastal
storms will get worse in the decades to come, and vulnerable or oft-damaged structures should be abandoned
or relocated to improve personal safety and reduce
costs. Such ideas will no doubt be the focus of much
study and debate as states and communities evaluate
and revise coastal land-use policies.

E Y E ON E A R T H

Figure 20.35
Beach nourishment
If you visit a beach along
the Atlantic coast, it is more
and more likely that you will
walk into the surf zone atop
an artificial beach. (Photo by

Dredge

Michael Weber/imagebroker/Alamy
Images)

Offshore sand pouring
onto the beach

20.7

Concept Checks

1. List at least three examples of hard stabilization
and describe what each is intended to do. How
does each affect distribution of sand on a beach?
2. What are two alternatives to hard stabilization,
and what are the potential problems associated
with each?

20.3

T

his structure along the eastern shore of Lake
Michigan was built at the entrance to Port
Shelton, Michigan.

QUESTION 1 What is the purpose of the artificial
structure pictured here?
QUESTION 2 What term is applied to structures such as
this?
QUESTION 3 Explain why there is a greater accumulation
of sand on one side of the structure than the other.
Michael Collier

622

CHAPTER 20

Shorelines

20.8

Tides
Explain the cause of tides, their monthly cycles, and patterns. Describe the
horizontal flow of water that accompanies the rise and fall of tides.

Tides are daily changes in the elevation of the ocean surface caused by gravitational interactions of
Earth with the Moon and Sun. Their rhythmic rise and fall along coastlines have been known since
antiquity. Other than waves, they are the easiest ocean movements to observe (Figure 20.36).
Figure 20.36
Bay of Fundy tides High tide and
low tide at Hopewell Rocks on
the Bay of Fundy. Tidal flats are
exposed during low tide. (High tide

High tide

photo courtesy of Ray Coleman/Science
Source; low tide photo by Jeffrey Greenberg/
Science Source)

Low tide

Minas Basin
NEW
BRUNSWICK

MAINE

Tidal flat

dy

un

fF

o
ay

B

NO

VA

SC

OT

IA

AT L A N T I C
OC E A N

Although known for centuries, tides were not explained satisfactorily until Sir Isaac Newton applied the law of gravitation to them. Newton showed that there is a mutual attractive force between two bodies and that because oceans
are free to move, they are deformed by this force. Hence,
ocean tides result from the gravitational attraction exerted
upon Earth by the Moon and, to a lesser extent, by the Sun.

ocean, which is mobile, is deformed quite dramatically
by this effect, producing the two opposing tidal bulges.
Because the position of the Moon changes only moderately in a single day, the tidal bulges remain in place
while Earth rotates “through” them. For this reason, if you
stand on the seashore for 24 hours, Earth will rotate you
through alternating areas of deeper and shallower water.
As you are carried into each tidal bulge, the tide rises, and
as you are carried into the intervening troughs between the
tidal bulges, the tide falls. Therefore, most places on Earth
experience two high tides and two low tides each day.
Further, the tidal bulges migrate as the Moon
revolves around Earth about every 29 days. As a result,
the tides, like the time of moonrise, shift about 50 minutes later each day. After 29 days the cycle is complete,
and a new one begins.
In many locations, there may be an inequality
between the high tides during a given day. Depending on
the position of the Moon, the tidal bulges may be inclined
to the equator, as in Figure 20.37. This figure illustrates
Higher
high tide

Lower
high tide

N

To
Moon

n

atio

Rot

Causes of Tides
It is easy to see how the Moon’s gravitational force can
cause the water to bulge on the side of Earth nearest the
Moon. In addition, however, an equally large tidal bulge
is produced on the side of Earth directly opposite the
Moon (Figure 20.37).
Both tidal bulges are caused, as Newton discovered,
by the pull of gravity. Gravity is inversely proportional
to the square of the distance between two objects,
meaning simply that it quickly weakens with distance.
In this case, the two objects are the Moon and Earth.
Because the force of gravity decreases with distance,
the Moon’s gravitational pull on Earth is slightly greater
on the near side of Earth than on the far side. The
result of this differential pulling is to stretch (elongate)
the “solid” Earth very slightly. In contrast, the world

Tidal
bulge

Tidal
bulge
S

Figure 20.37
Idealized tidal bulges caused by the Moon If Earth were
covered to a uniform depth with water, there would be two
tidal bulges: one on the side of Earth facing the Moon (right)
and the other on the opposite side of Earth (left). Depending
on the Moon’s position, tidal bulges may be inclined relative
to Earth’s equator. In this situation, Earth’s rotation causes an
observer to experience two unequal high tides during a day.

623
Solar tide

that one high tide experienced by an observer in the
Northern Hemisphere is considerably higher than the
high tide half a day later. In contrast, a Southern Hemisphere observer would experience the opposite effect.

Monthly Tidal Cycle
The primary body that influences the tides is the Moon,
which makes one complete revolution around Earth every
29.5 days. The Sun, however, also influences the tides. It
is far larger than the Moon, but because it is much farther
away, its effect is considerably less. In fact, the Sun’s tidegenerating effect is only about 46 percent that of the Moon.
Near the times of new and full moons, the Sun and
Moon are aligned, and their forces on tides are added
together (Figure 20.38A). The combined gravity of these two
tide-producing bodies causes larger tidal bulges (higher
high tides) and deeper tidal troughs (lower low tides),
producing a large tidal range. These are called the spring
tides (springen = to rise up), which have no connection
with the spring season but occur twice a month, during
the time when the Earth–Moon–Sun system is aligned.
Conversely, at about the time of the first and third quarters of the Moon, the gravitational forces of the Moon and
Sun act on Earth at right angles, and each partially offsets
the influence of the other (Figure 20.38B). As a result, the
daily tidal range is less. These are called neap tides (nep
= scarcely or barely touching), and they also occur twice
each month. Each month, then, there are two spring tides
and two neap tides, each about 1 week apart.

Tidal Patterns
Although the basic causes and types of tides have been
explained, these theoretical considerations cannot be
used to predict either the height or the time of actual
tides at a particular place. This is because many factors—
including the shape of the coastline, the configuration
of ocean basins, and water depth—greatly influence the
tides. Consequently, tides at various locations respond
differently to tide-producing forces. This being the
case, the nature of the tide at any coastal location can
be determined most accurately by actual observation.
The predictions in tidal tables and tidal data on nautical
charts are based on such observations.
Three main tidal patterns exist worldwide (Figure
20.39). A diurnal tidal pattern (diurnal = daily) is characterized by a single high tide and a single low tide each
tidal day (24-hour period). Tides of this type occur along
the northern shore of the Gulf of Mexico, among other
locations. A semidiurnal tidal pattern exhibits two high
tides and two low tides each tidal day, with the two highs
about the same height and the two lows about the same
height. This type of tidal pattern is common along the
Atlantic coast of the United States. A mixed tidal pattern
is similar to a semidiurnal pattern except that it is characterized by a large inequality in high water heights, low

SmartFigure 20.38

Lunar tide

To Sun

Spring and neap tides
Earth–Moon–Sun positions
influence the tides.
(https://goo.gl/YLHO8T)

Full moon

New moon

A. Spring Tide When the Moon is in the full or new
position, the tidal bulges created by the Sun and
Moon are aligned and there is a large tidal range.

First quarter
moon

Solar tide
To Sun

Lunar tide
Third quarter
moon
B. Neap Tide When the Moon is in the first-or
third-quarter position, the tidal bulges produced by
the Moon are at right angles to the bulges created by
the Sun and the tidal range is smaller.

water heights, or both. In this case, there are usually two
high and two low tides each day, with high tides of different heights and low tides of different heights. Such tides
are prevalent along the Pacific coast of the United States
and in many other parts of the world.

Tidal Currents
Tidal current is the term used to describe the horizontal flow of water that accompanies the rise and fall of the
tide. These water movements induced by tidal forces can
be important in some coastal areas. Tidal currents flow
in one direction during a portion of the tidal cycle and
reverse their flow during the remainder. Tidal currents
that advance into the coastal zone as the tide rises are
called flood currents. As the tide falls, seaward-moving
water generates ebb currents. Periods of little or no
current, called slack water, separate flood and ebb. The
areas affected by these alternating tidal currents are
tidal flats (see Figure 20.36). Depending on the nature
of the coastal zone, tidal flats vary from narrow strips
seaward of the beach to extensive zones that may extend
for several kilometers.

Shorelines
Two high tides and two low tides of
approximately equal heights during
each tidal day

SmartFigure 20.39

Two high tides and two low tides of
unequal heights during each tidal
day

NORTH
AMERICA

1.5

7.0

0

2.8
2.2

–1.0
12

24
Hours

12

MIXED TIDAL PATTERN

0.7

Bay of
2.0 Fundy

0.7

1.5
2.0
ATLANTIC
OCEAN

Gulf of
Mexico
0.6

24

0.5
0.5

5.7

(https://goo.gl/NNoCGJ)

Mixed

0.9

3.7

PACIFIC OCEAN

Diurnal

0

15.0

0.7

Gulf of
California 1.2
0

0.5

5.5

0.5
–0.5

1.0

2.0

2.5

1.0
Height (m)

Tidal patterns A diurnal
tidal pattern (lower right)
shows one high tide and
one low tide each tidal
day. A semidiurnal pattern
(upper right) shows two
high tides and two low
tides of approximately
equal heights during each
tidal day. A mixed tidal
pattern (left) shows two
high tides and two low tides
of unequal heights during
each tidal day.

–0.5
0

12

24
Hours

12

Height (m)

CHAPTER 20

–1.0
24

SEMIDIURNAL TIDAL PATTERN

2.7

One high tide and one low tide each
tidal day
1.0

SOUTH
AMERICA

0.5
0

Semidiurnal

–0.5

2.7 Spring tidal range (m)
0

12

24
Hours

12

Height (m)

624

–1.0
24

DIURNAL TIDAL PATTERN

Although tidal currents are generally not important
in the open sea, they can be rapid in bays, river estuaries,
straits, and other narrow places. Off the coast of Brittany
in France, for example, tidal currents that accompany a
high tide of 12 meters (40 feet) may attain a speed of
20 kilometers (12 miles) per hour. While tidal currents
are not generally major agents of erosion and sediment
transport, notable exceptions occur where tides move
Figure 20.40
Tidal deltas As a rapidly
moving tidal current (flood
current) moves through a
barrier island’s inlet into the
quiet waters of the lagoon,
the current slows and
deposits sediment, creating
a tidal delta. Because this
tidal delta has developed
on the landward side of
the inlet, it is called a flood
delta. Such a tidal delta is
shown in Figure 20.15A.

Tidal
flats

Because this tidal delta has
developed on the landward
side of the inlet, it is called
a flood delta.

Barrier
island

through narrow inlets. Here they constantly scour the
small entrances to many good harbors that would otherwise be blocked.
Sometimes deposits called tidal deltas are created
by tidal currents (Figure 20.40). They may develop either
as flood deltas landward of an inlet or as ebb deltas on
the seaward side of an inlet. Because wave activity and
longshore currents are reduced on the sheltered landward side, flood deltas are more common and more
prominent (see Figure 20.15A). They form after the tidal
current moves rapidly through an inlet. As the current
emerges from the narrow passage into more open waters,
it slows and deposits its load of sediment.

20.8
Lagoon

Concept Checks

1. Explain why an observer can experience two
unequal high tides during a single day.
2. Distinguish between neap tides and ebb tides.
3. Contrast flood current and ebb current.

21
Global
Climate
Change

Glaciers are sensitive to changes in temperature and
precipitation and therefore provide clues about changes
in climate. Like most glaciers and ice sheets worldwide,
Margerie Glacier in Alaska’s Glacier Bay National Park, is
losing mass and retreating. (Photo by Don Paulson/AGE Fotostock)

C

limate has

a significant impact on people, and we are learning that people also
have a strong influence on climate. Today global climate change caused by humans is a
major environmental issue. Unlike changes in the geologic past, which were natural variations, modern climate change is dominated by human influences that are sufficiently
large that they exceed the bounds of natural variability. Moreover, these changes are
likely to continue for many centuries. The effects of this venture into the unknown with
climate could be very disruptive not only to humans but to many other life-forms as well.
The latter portion of this chapter examines the ways in which humans may be changing
global climate.

21.1

Climate and Geology
List the major parts of the climate system and some connections between climate
and geology.

The term weather refers to the state of the atmosphere at a given time and place. Changes in the
weather are frequent and sometimes seemingly erratic. In contrast, climate is a description of
aggregate weather conditions, based on observations over many decades. Climate is often defined
simply as “average weather,” but this definition is inadequate because variations and extremes are
also important parts of a climate description.

The Climate System
Throughout this book you have frequently been
reminded that Earth is a complex system that consists
of many interacting parts. A change in any one part
can produce changes in any or all of the other parts—
often in ways that are neither obvious nor immediately apparent. Key to understanding climate change
and its causes is the fact that climate is related to all
parts of the Earth system. We must recognize that
there is a climate system that derives its energy from
the Sun and includes the atmosphere, hydrosphere,
geosphere, biosphere, and cryosphere. The first four
were discussed in Chapter 1; the cryosphere refers to
the portion of Earth’s surface where water is in solid
form. This includes snow, glaciers, sea ice, freshwater ice, and frozen ground (termed permafrost). The
climate system involves the exchanges of energy and
moisture that occur among the five spheres. These
exchanges link the atmosphere to the other spheres
so that the whole functions as an extremely complex
interactive unit. Changes in the climate system do
not occur in isolation. Rather, when one part of the
climate system changes, the other components react.
The major components of the climate system are
shown in Figure 21.1.
The climate system provides a framework for
the study of climate. The interactions and exchanges

among the parts of the climate system create a complex network that links the five spheres. As you will
see, because the climate system involves all of Earth’s
spheres, data from many sources are used to study and
decipher climate change.

Climate–Geology Connections
Climate has a profound impact on many geologic processes. When climate changes, these processes respond.
A glance back at the rock cycle in Chapter 1 reminds us
about many of the connections. Of course, rock weathering has an obvious climate connection, as do processes
associated with arid, tropical, and glacial landscapes.
Phenomena such as debris flows and river flooding are
often triggered by atmospheric events such as periods of
extraordinary rainfall. Clearly, the atmosphere is a basic
link in the hydrologic cycle. Other climate–geology connections involve the impact of internal processes on the
atmosphere. For example, the particles and gases emitted
by volcanoes can change the composition of the atmosphere, and mountain building can have a significant
impact on regional temperature, precipitation, and wind
patterns.
The study of sediments, sedimentary rocks, and fossils clearly demonstrates that, during Earth’s long and
complex history, practically every place on our planet

633

21.2 Detecting Climate Change

SmartFigure 21.1
Changes
in amount
and type
of cloud
cover
Changes
in amount
of icecovered
land

Changes
in amount
of outgoing
radiation
Changes
in
atmospheric
composition

Changes
in solar
inputs
Changes in
atmospheric
circulation

Changes
in amount
of evaporationprecipitation

Biosphereatmosphere
interactions

(http://goo.gl/Bjd57G)

Atmosphere-ice
interactions

Human
influences
(burning,
land use)

Human
influences
(cities)

Changes
in ocean
circulation

Oceanatmosphere
interaction

Biosphereatmosphere
interactions

Changes
in amount
of sea ice

Ocean

21.1
has experienced wide swings in climate, from ice ages
to conditions associated with subtropical coal swamps or
desert dunes. Time scales for climate change vary from
decades to millions of years. Chapter 22 “Earth’s Evolution Through Geologic Time,” documents many of these
shifts in climate.

Concept Checks

1. Distinguish between weather and climate.
2. What are the five major parts of the climate
system?
3. List at least five connections between climate and
geology.

Climate Change
21.2 Detecting
Explain why unraveling past climate changes is important and discuss several ways
in which such changes are detected.

Climate not only varies from place to place but is also naturally variable over time. During the
great expanse of Earth history, and long before humans were roaming the planet, there were many
shifts—from warm to cold and from wet to dry and back again.

Climates Change
Using fossils and many other geologic clues, scientists
have reconstructed Earth’s climate going back hundreds
of millions of years. Chapter 22, which covers Earth’s
history, also discusses the geologic evidence for natural

Earth’s climate system
Schematic view showing
some important components of Earth’s climate
system. Many interactions
occur among the various
components on a wide
range of space and time
scales, making the system
extremely complex.

climate variability. Over long time scales (tens to hundreds of millions of years), Earth’s climate can be broadly
characterized as being a warm “greenhouse” or a cold
“icehouse.”
During greenhouse times, there is little, if any, permanent ice at either pole, and relatively warm temperate

CHAPTER 21

Global Climate Change

Figure 21.2
60

Relative climate change
during the Cenozoic
era During the past 65
million years, Earth’s
climate shifted from being
a warm “greenhouse” to
being a cool “icehouse.”
Climate is not stable when
viewed over long time
spans. Earth has experienced several back-andforth shifts between warm
and cold.

50

40

Millions of Years Ago
30

20

10

0

Cenozoic
Paleogene
Eocene

Oligocene

Miocene

Plio.

Cooler / more ice

Global Climate

Warmer / less ice

Paleocene

Neogene

Quat.

634

“Greenhouse”

climates are found even at high latitudes. During icehouse conditions, global climate is cool enough to support ice sheets at one or both poles. Earth’s climate has
gradually transitioned between these two categories only
a few times in the past 541 million years, the span known
as the Phanerozoic (“visible life”) eon. The rocks and
deposits of the Phanerozoic eon contain abundant fossils
that document major environmental and evolutionary
trends. The most recent transition occurred during the
Cenozoic era.
The early Cenozoic was a time of greenhouse climates like those the dinosaurs experienced during the
preceding Mesozoic era. By about 34 million years ago,
permanent ice sheets were present at the South Pole,
ushering in icehouse conditions (Figure 21.2). Climate
warmed during the Miocene epoch (about 20 million
years ago) as mammal populations reached their greatest diversity. Climate then cooled. In North America,
the lush “greenhouse” forests (there were palm trees in
Wyoming and banana trees in Oregon) were replaced
by open grasslands. Grassland ecosystems are better suited for a cooler, drier “icehouse” climate. By 2
million years ago (the start of the Quaternary epoch),
Earth’s climate was cold enough to support vast ice
sheets at both poles. In the Northern Hemisphere ice
advanced nearly as far south as the present-day Ohio
River, then subsequently retreated to Greenland. For
the past 800,000 years, this cycle of ice advance and
retreat has occurred about every 100,000 years. The

“Icehouse”

last major ice sheet advance reached a maximum about
18,000 years ago.
How do we know about these changes? What are the
causes? The next sections take a look at how scientists decipher Earth’s climate history. Later we will explore some
significant natural causes of climate change.

Proxy Data
High-technology and precision instrumentation are
now available to study the composition and dynamics
of the atmosphere. But such tools are recent inventions
and therefore have been providing data for only a short
time span. To understand fully the behavior of the
atmosphere and to anticipate future climate change,
we must somehow discover how climate has changed
over broad expanses of time.
Instrumental records go back only a couple of
centuries, at best, and the further back we go, the less
complete and more unreliable the data become. To
overcome this lack of direct measurements, scientists
must decipher and reconstruct past climates by using
indirect evidence. Proxy data come from natural
recorders of climate variability, such as seafloor sediments, glacial ice, fossil pollen, and tree-growth rings,
as well as from historical documents (Figure 21.3). Scientists who analyze proxy data and reconstruct past
climates are engaged in the study of paleoclimatology.
The main goal of such work is to understand the

635
Figure 21.3
Ancient bristlecone
pines Some of these
trees in California’s White
Mountains are more than
4000 years old. The study
of tree-growth rings is one
way that scientists reconstruct past climates. (Photo
by Bill Stevenson/Alamy)

climate of the past in order to assess the current and
potential future climate in the context of natural climate variability.

Seafloor Sediment: A Storehouse
of Climate Data
We know that the parts of the Earth system are linked
so that a change in one part can produce changes in any
or all of the other parts. In this section, you will see how
changes in atmospheric and oceanic temperatures are
reflected in the nature of life in the sea.
Most seafloor sediments contain the remains of
organisms that once lived near the sea surface (the ocean–
atmosphere interface). When such near-surface organisms
die, their shells slowly settle to
the floor of the ocean, where they
become part of the sedimentary
record (Figure 21.4). These seafloor sediments are useful recorders of worldwide climate change
because the numbers and types
of organisms living near the sea
surface change with the climate.
For this reason, scientists are tapping the huge reservoir of data in
seafloor sediments. The sediment
cores gathered by drilling ships
and other research vessels have
provided invaluable data that
have significantly expanded our
knowledge and understanding of
past climates.

One notable example of how seafloor sediments add
to our understanding of climate change relates to unraveling the fluctuating atmospheric conditions of the Ice
Age. The records of temperature changes contained in
cores of sediment from the ocean floor have proven critical to our present understanding of this recent span of
Earth history. There is more about this topic in the section “Causes of Ice Ages” in Chapter 18.

Oxygen Isotope Analysis
The isotopes of oxygen in water molecules or in the
shells of marine organisms are an important source of
proxy data on past climate conditions. Oxygen isotope
analysis is based on precise measurement of the ratio
Figure 21.4
Foraminifera These single-celled
amoeba-like organisms, also called
forams, are extremely abundant
and found throughout the world’s
oceans. Although the foram record
in ocean sediment goes back
farther, the remains of these organisms are most commonly used
to study climate change during
the Cenozoic era. The chemical
composition of their hard parts
depends on water temperature and
the presence or absence of large
ice sheets. Because of this relationship, scientists analyze foram shells
to estimate ocean temperatures
and the existence of ice sheets.
(Biophoto Associates/Science Source)

636

CHAPTER 21

Global Climate Change

SmartFigure 21.5
Ice cores: Important
sources of climate data
A. The National Ice Core
Laboratory is a physical plant for storing and
studying cores of ice taken
from glaciers around the
world. These cores represent a long-term record
of material deposited
from the atmosphere. The
lab enables scientists to
conduct examinations of
ice cores, and it preserves
the integrity of these
samples in a repository
for the study of global
climate change and past
environmental conditions.

in shells of certain microorganisms buried in deep-sea
sediments. A higher ratio of 18O to 16O in shells indicates
a time when ice sheets were growing larger.
The 18O/16O ratio also varies with temperature.
More 18O is evaporated from the oceans when temperatures are high, and less is evaporated when temperatures
are low. Therefore, the heavy isotope is more abundant
in the precipitation of warm eras and less abundant during colder periods. Using this principle, scientists studying the layers of ice and snow in glaciers have been able
to determine past temperature changes.

A.
–32
–34
Temperature (°C)

(Photo by USGS/National Ice Core
Laboratory) B. This graph,
showing temperature variations over the past 40,000
years, is derived from
oxygen isotope analysis of
ice cores recovered from
the Greenland ice sheet.

Climate Change Recorded in
Glacial Ice

–36
–38
–40
–42

(Based on U.S. Geological Survey)
(https://goo.gl/Hx5Ggu)

–44

0

5

15
20
25
30
10
Thousands of years before present

35

40

B.

between two isotopes of oxygen: 16O, which is the most
common, and the heavier 18O. A molecule of H2O can
form from either 16O or 18O, but the lighter isotope, 16O,
evaporates more readily from the oceans. Because of this,
precipitation (and hence the glacial ice that it may form)
is enriched in 16O. This leaves a greater concentration of
the heavier isotope, 18O, in the ocean water. Thus, during
periods when glaciers are extensive, more of the lighter
16O is tied up in ice, so the concentration of 18O in seawater increases. Conversely, during warmer interglacial
periods, when the amount of glacial ice decreases dramatically, more 16O is returned to the sea, so the proportion of 18O relative to 16O in ocean water also drops. Now,
if we had some ancient recording of the changes of the
18O/16O ratio, we could determine when there were glacial periods and, therefore, when the climate grew cooler.
Fortunately, we do have such a recording. Certain
marine microorganisms secrete their shells of calcium
carbonate (CaCO3), and the prevailing oceanic 18O/16O
ratio is reflected in the composition of these hard parts.
When these organisms die, their hard parts settle to the
ocean floor, becoming part of the sediment layers there.
Consequently, periods of glacial activity can be determined from variations in the oxygen isotope ratio found

Ice cores are an indispensable source of data for reconstructing past climates. Research based on vertical cores
taken from the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets has
changed our basic understanding of how the climate
system works.
Scientists collect samples by using a drilling rig,
like a small version of an oil drill. A hollow shaft follows
the drill head into the ice, and an ice core is extracted.
In this way, cores that sometimes exceed 2000 meters
(6500 feet) in length and may represent more than
200,000 years of climate history are acquired for study
(Figure 21.5A).
Scientists are able to produce a record of changing
air temperatures and snowfall by means of the oxygen
isotope analysis described above. A portion of such a
record is shown in Figure 21.5B.
Air bubbles trapped in the ice also record variations
in atmospheric composition. Changes in carbon dioxide
and methane are linked to fluctuating temperatures. The
cores also include atmospheric fallout such as wind-blown
dust, volcanic ash, pollen, and modern-day pollution.
_TT77


Tree Rings: Archives of
Environmental History
If you look at the end of a log, you will see that it is composed of a series of concentric rings (Figure 21.6A). Tree
rings can be a very useful source of proxy data on past
climates. Every year, in temperate regions, trees add a
layer of new wood under the bark. Characteristics of
each tree ring, such as thickness and density, reflect the
environmental conditions (especially climate) that prevailed during the year when the ring formed. Favorable
growth conditions produce a wide ring; unfavorable ones
produce a narrow ring. Trees growing at the same time in
the same region show similar tree-ring patterns.
Because a single growth ring is usually added each
year, the age of the tree when it was cut can be determined by counting the rings. If the year of cutting is
known, the age of the tree and the year in which each
ring formed can be determined by counting back from

637

21.2 Detecting Climate Change

the outside ring. Scientists are not limited to working with trees that have been
cut down. Small, nondestructive core
samples can be taken from living trees
(Figure 21.6B).
To make the most effective use of
tree rings, extended patterns known as
ring chronologies are established. They
are produced by comparing the patterns
of rings among trees in an area. If the
same pattern can be identified in two
samples, one of which has been dated,
the second sample can be dated from
the first by matching the ring patterns
common to both. Tree-ring chronologies
extending back thousands of years have
been established for some regions. To
date a timber sample of unknown age, its
ring pattern is matched against the reference chronology.
Tree-ring chronologies are unique
archives of environmental history and
A.
have important applications in such
disciplines as climate, geology, ecology,
and archaeology. For example, tree rings are used to
reconstruct climate variations within a region for spans
of thousands of years prior to human historical records.
Knowing such long-term variations is of great value when
interpreting the recent record of climate change.

Other Types of Proxy Data
In addition to the sources already discussed, other sources
of proxy data that are used to gain insight into past climates
include fossil pollen, corals, and historical documents.

Fossil Pollen Climate is a major factor influencing
the distribution of vegetation, so the nature of the plant
community occupying an area is a reflection
of the climate. Pollen and spores are parts of
the life cycles of many plants, and because
they have very resistant walls, they are often
the most abundant, easily identifiable, and
best-preserved plant remains in sediments
(Figure 21.7). By analyzing pollen from accurately dated sediments, scientists can obtain
high-resolution records of vegetation changes
in an area. Past climates can be reconstructed from such information.

Corals Coral reefs consist of colonies of
corals, invertebrates that live in warm, shallow waters and form atop the hard material
left behind by past corals (see GEOgraphics 13.1, page 398). Corals build their hard
skeletons from calcium carbonate (CaCO3)
extracted from seawater. The carbonate

Figure 21.6
Tree rings A. Each year a growing tree produces a layer of new
cells beneath the bark. If the
tree is cut down and the trunk
is examined, each year’s growth
can be seen as a ring. These
rings are useful records of past
climate because the amount
of growth (the thickness of a
ring) depends on precipitation
and temperature. (Photo by Victor
Zastolskiy/Fotolia) B. Scientists are
not limited to working with trees
that have been cut down. Small,
nondestructive core samples can
be taken from living trees. (Photo
by Gregory K. Scott/Science Source)

B.

contains isotopes of oxygen that can be used to determine
the temperature of the water in which the coral grew. The
portion of the skeleton that forms in winter has a different
density than the portion that forms in summer because of
variations in growth rates related to temperature and other
environmental factors. Thus, corals exhibit seasonal growth
bands very much like those observed in trees. The accuracy and reliability of the climate data extracted from corals has been established by comparing recent instrumental
records to coral records for the same period. Oxygen
Figure 21.7
Pollen This false-color
image from an electron
microscope shows an
assortment of pollen grains.
Note how the size, shape,
and surface characteristics
differ from one species to
another. Analysis of the
types and abundance of
pollen in lake sediments
and peat deposits provides
information about how
climate has changed over
time. (Photo by David AMI
Images/Science Source)

638

CHAPTER 21

Global Climate Change

Corals record sea-surface
temperatures Coral colonies thrive in warm, shallow tropical waters. The
tiny invertebrates extract
calcium carbonate from
seawater to build hard
parts. They live atop the
solid foundation left by past
coral. Chemical analysis
of the changing composition of coral reefs with
depth can provide useful
data on past near-surface
temperatures. This graph
shows a 350-year record of
sea-surface temperatures
obtained through oxygen
isotope analysis of coral
from the Galapagos Islands.

Sea surface temperature (°C)

Figure 21.8

25

24

23

1600

1650

1700

1750

1800

1850

1900

1950

isotope analysis of coral-growth rings can also serve as a
proxy measurement for precipitation, particularly in areas
where large variations in annual rainfall occur.
Think of coral as a paleothermometer that enables us
to answer important questions about climate variability in
the world’s oceans. The graph in Figure 21.8 is a 350-year
sea-surface temperature record based on oxygen isotope
analysis of a core extracted from a reef in the Galapagos
Islands.

Historical Documents Historical documents sometimes contain helpful information. Although it may
seem that such records should readily lend themselves
to climate analysis, that is not the case. Most manuscripts were written for purposes other than climate
description. Furthermore, writers understandably
neglected periods of relatively stable atmospheric
conditions and mention only droughts, severe storms,
memorable blizzards, and other extremes. Nevertheless, records of crops, floods, and human migration have
furnished useful evidence of the possible influences of
changing climate (Figure 21.9).

Figure 21.9
Harvest dates as climate clues Historical records can sometimes be helpful in the analysis of past climates. The date for
the beginning of the grape harvest in the fall is an integrated
measure of temperature and precipitation during the growing season. These dates have been recorded for centuries
in Europe and provide a useful record of year-to-year climate
variations. (Photo by SGM/AGE Fotostock)

21.2

Concept Checks

1. What are proxy data, and why are they necessary
in the study of climate change?
2. Why are seafloor sediments useful in the study of
past climates? Aside from seafloor sediments, list
four sources of proxy climate data.
3. Explain how past temperatures are determined
using oxygen isotope analysis.

Atmospheric Basics
21.3 Some
Describe the composition of the atmosphere and the atmosphere’s vertical
changes in pressure and temperature.

To better understand climate change, it is helpful to possess some basic knowledge about the composition and structure of the atmosphere.

Composition of the Atmosphere
Air is not a unique element or compound. Rather, air is a
mixture of many discrete gases, each with its own physical properties, in which varying quantities of tiny solid
and liquid particles are suspended.

Clean, Dry Air As you can see in Figure 21.10, clean, dry
air is composed almost entirely of two gases—78 percent
nitrogen and 21 percent oxygen. Although these gases are

the most plentiful components of air and are of great significance to life on Earth, they are of little or no importance in affecting weather phenomena. The remaining
1 percent of dry air is mostly the inert gas argon (0.93
percent) plus tiny quantities of a number of other gases.
Carbon dioxide, although present in only minute amounts
(0.0400 percent, or 400 parts per million), is nevertheless
an important constituent of air because it has the ability
to absorb heat energy radiated by Earth and thus influences the heating of the atmosphere.

639

21.3 Some Atmospheric Basics

Air includes many gases and particles that vary
significantly from time to time and from place to place.
Important examples of these variable gases include water
vapor, ozone, and tiny solid and liquid particles.

Argon (Ar) 0.934%
Carbon dioxide (CO2)
0.0400% or 400 ppm

Water Vapor The amount of water vapor in the air
varies considerably, from practically none at all up to
about 4 percent by volume. Why is such a small fraction
of the atmosphere so significant? Certainly the fact that
water vapor is the source of all clouds and precipitation is
enough to explain its importance. However, water vapor
has other roles. Like carbon dioxide, it has the ability to
absorb heat energy given off by Earth as well as some
solar energy. It is, therefore, important when we examine
the heating of the atmosphere.

Ozone Another important component of the atmosphere is ozone. It is a form of oxygen that combines
three oxygen atoms into each molecule (O3). Ozone is
not the same as the oxygen we breathe, which has two
atoms per molecule (O2). There is very little ozone in the
atmosphere, and its distribution is not uniform. It is concentrated well above Earth’s surface in a layer called the
stratosphere, at an altitude of between 10 and 50 kilometers (6 and 31 miles). The presence of the ozone layer in
our atmosphere is crucial to those who dwell on Earth.
The reason is that ozone absorbs the potentially harmful
ultraviolet (UV) radiation from the Sun. If ozone did not
filter a great deal of the ultraviolet radiation, and if the
Sun’s UV rays reached the surface of Earth undiminished, our planet would be uninhabitable for most life
as we know it.
Aerosols The movements of the atmosphere are
sufficient to keep a large quantity of solid and liquid
particles suspended within it. Although visible dust
sometimes clouds the sky, these relatively large particles are too heavy to stay in the air for very long. Still,
many particles are microscopic and remain suspended
for considerable periods of time. They may originate
from many sources, both natural and human made,
and include sea salts from breaking waves, fine soil
blown into the air, smoke and soot from fires, pollen
and microorganisms lifted by the wind, ash and dust
from volcanic eruptions, and more. Collectively, these
tiny solid and liquid particles are called aerosols.
From a meteorological standpoint, these tiny,
often invisible particles can be significant. First, many
act as surfaces on which water vapor can condense,
an important function in the formation of clouds and
fog. Second, aerosols can absorb or reflect incoming
solar radiation. Thus, when an air pollution episode is
occurring, or when ash fills the sky following a volcanic eruption, the amount of sunlight reaching Earth’s
surface can be measurably reduced (Figure 21.11).

Concentration
in parts per
million (ppm)

All
others

Neon (Ne)
18.2
Helium (He) 5.24
Methane (CH4) 1.5
Krypton (Kr)
1.14
Hydrogen (H2) 0.5

SmartFigure 21.10
Composition of the atmosphere Proportional volume
of gases composing dry air.
Nitrogen and oxygen obviously dominate.
(https://goo.gl/LIOYJI)

Oxygen (O2)
20.946%

Nitrogen (N2)
78.084%

Extent and Structure of the
Atmosphere
To say that the atmosphere begins at Earth’s surface and
extends upward is obvious. But where does the atmosphere end, and where does outer space begin? There is
no sharp boundary; the atmosphere rapidly thins as you
travel away from Earth, until there are too few gas molecules to detect.
SmartFigure 21.11
Aerosols This satellite
image shows two examples
of aerosols. First, a dust
storm is blowing across
northeastern China toward
the Korean Peninsula.
Second, a dense haze
toward the south (bottom
center) is humangenerated air pollution.

Dust
storm

(NASA) (http://goo.gl/P4peqp)

Air
pollution

640

CHAPTER 21

Global Climate Change

Figure 21.12
Vertical changes in
air pressure Pressure
decreases rapidly near
Earth’s surface and more
gradually at greater heights.

36

22
20

32
Capt. Kittinger, USAF
1961 31.3 km
(102,800 ft)
Air pressure = 9.6 mb

28

18
16

Altitude (km)

14
20

12
Air pressure at
top of Mt. Everest
(29,035 ft) is
314 mb

16

10
8

50% of
atmosphere
lies below
this altitude

12
8

Altitude (miles)

24

6
4

4

0

2
200

400
600
Pressure (mb)

800

1000

Pressure Changes with Height To understand the
vertical extent of the atmosphere, let us examine changes
in atmospheric pressure with height. Atmospheric pressure is simply the weight of the air above. At sea level,
the average pressure is slightly more than 1000 millibars.
Figure 21.13

90

140
130

80

120

THERMOSPHERE
110

70

100
60
Temperature

Mesopause

50

MESOSPHERE

40

Stratopause

30

80
70
60
50
40
30

STRATOSPHERE
Maximum ozone

20

20
10
Tropopause

10

TROPOSPHERE
–100 –90 –80 –70 –60 –50 –40 –30 –20 –10
–140 –120 –100 –80 –60 –40 –20

0

Temperature

20

0
40
32

10 20 30 40 50˚C
60

80 100 120˚F

Height (miles)

90

Height (km)

Thermal structure of the
atmosphere

This corresponds to a weight of slightly more than 1
kilogram per square centimeter (14.7 pounds per square
inch). Obviously, the pressure at higher altitudes is less
(Figure 21.12).
One-half of the atmosphere lies below an altitude
of 5.6 kilometers (3.5 miles). At about 16 kilometers (10
miles), 90 percent of the atmosphere has been traversed,
and above 100 kilometers (62 miles), only 0.00003 percent
of all the gases making up the atmosphere remains. Even
so, traces of our atmosphere extend far beyond this altitude, gradually merging with the emptiness of space.

Temperature Changes In addition to vertical changes
in air pressure, there are also changes in air temperature
as we ascend through the atmosphere. Earth’s atmosphere is divided vertically into four layers, on the basis
of temperature (Figure 21.13):
r Troposphere. We live in the bottom layer, which
is characterized by a decrease in temperature with
increasing altitude and is called the troposphere.
The term literally means the region where air “turns
over,” a reference to the appreciable vertical mixing of air in this lowermost zone. The troposphere
is the chief focus of meteorologists because it is
in this layer that essentially all important weather
phenomena occur. The temperature decrease in the
troposphere is called the environmental lapse rate.
Its average value is 6.5°C per kilometer (3.5°F per
1000 feet), a figure known as the normal lapse rate.
It should be emphasized, however, that the environmental lapse rate is not a constant but rather can be
highly variable and must be regularly measured. To
determine the actual environmental lapse rate as
well as to gather information about vertical changes
in pressure, wind, and humidity, radiosondes are
used. A radiosonde is an instrument package that
is attached to a weather balloon and transmits data
by radio as it ascends through the atmosphere (Figure
21.14). The thickness of the troposphere is not the
same everywhere; it varies with latitude and season.
On the average, the temperature drop continues to a
height of about 12 kilometers (7.4 miles). The outer
boundary of the troposphere is the tropopause.
r Stratosphere. Beyond the tropopause is the stratosphere. In the stratosphere, the temperature remains
constant to a height of about 20 kilometers (12 miles)
and then begins a gradual increase that continues
until the stratopause, at a height of nearly 50 kilometers (30 miles) above Earth’s surface. Below the tropopause, atmospheric properties such as temperature
and humidity are readily transferred by large-scale
turbulence and mixing. Above the tropopause, in the
stratosphere, they are not. Temperatures increase in
the stratosphere because it is in this layer that the
atmosphere’s ozone is concentrated. Recall that ozone
absorbs ultraviolet radiation from the Sun. As a consequence, the stratosphere is heated.

21.3 Some Atmospheric Basics
Radar unit for tracking
radiosonde

r

r
Weather balloon

Radiosonde
(instrument
package)

Mesosphere. In the third layer, the mesosphere,
temperatures again decrease with height until at
the mesopause, more than 80 kilometers (50 miles)
above Earth’s surface, the temperature approaches
–90°C (–130°F). The coldest temperatures anywhere
in the atmosphere occur at the mesopause.
Thermosphere. The fourth layer extends outward
from the mesopause and has no well-defined upper
limit. This is the thermosphere, a layer that contains only a tiny fraction of the atmosphere’s mass.
In the extremely rarefied air of this outermost layer,
temperatures again increase, due to the absorption
of very short-wave, high-energy solar radiation by
atoms of oxygen and nitrogen. Temperatures rise to
extremely high values of more than 1000°C (1800°F)
in the thermosphere. But such temperatures are not
comparable to those experienced near Earth’s surface. Temperature is defined in terms of the average
speed at which molecules move. Because the gases
of the thermosphere are moving at very high speeds,
the temperature is very high. But the gases are so
sparse that, collectively, they process only an insignificant amount of heat.

21.3

Concept Checks

1. What are the major components of clean, dry air?
List two significant variable components.

Figure 21.14
Radiosonde A radiosonde is a lightweight package of instruments that is carried aloft by a small weather balloon. It
transmits data on vertical changes in temperature, pressure,
and humidity in the troposphere. The troposphere is where
practically all weather phenomena occur; therefore, it is very
important to have frequent measurements. (Photo by David R.
Frazier/Newscom)

E Y E ON E A R T H

21.1

W

hen this weather balloon was launched, the
surface temperature was 17°C. The balloon is
now at an altitude of 1 kilometer. (Photo by David R. Frazier/
Science Source)

QUESTION 1 What term is applied to the instrument
package being carried aloft by the balloon?
QUESTION 2 In what layer of the atmosphere is the
balloon?
QUESTION 3 If average conditions prevail, what is the air
temperature at this altitude? How did you figure this out?
QUESTION 4 How will the size of the balloon change, if
at all, as it rises through the atmosphere? Explain.

2. Describe how air pressure changes with an
increase in altitude. Does it change at a constant
rate?
3. The atmosphere is divided vertically into four
layers, on the basis of temperature. Name the
layers from bottom to top and indicate how
temperatures change in each.

641

642

CHAPTER 21

Global Climate Change

the Atmosphere
21.4 Heating
Outline the basic processes involved in heating the atmosphere.
Nearly all the energy that drives Earth’s variable weather and climate comes from the Sun.
Before we can adequately describe how Earth’s atmosphere is heated, it is helpful to know
something about solar energy and what happens to this energy once it is intercepted by
Earth.

(Photo courtesy of Dennis Tasa)
(http://goo.gl/QBJdNJ)

0.4
Violet

Blue

0.5
Green

Yellow

0.6
Orange

0.7
Red

Visible
light

Gamma rays

X rays

0.001 micrometer
Short-wave radiation

Infrared

1 micrometer

Microwaves

1 millimeter

1 meter
Long-wave radiation

Standard AM radio

The electromagnetic
spectrum This diagram
illustrates the wavelengths
and names of various
types of radiation. Visible
light consists of an array of
colors we commonly call
the “colors of the rainbow.”

Ultraviolet

SmartFigure 21.15

r All objects, at whatever temperature, emit radiant energy. Not only hot objects like the Sun but
also Earth, including its polar ice caps, continually
emit energy.

Short-wave radio

From our everyday experience, we know that the Sun
emits light and heat as well as the ultraviolet rays that
cause suntan. Although these forms of energy comprise
a major portion of the total energy that radiates from the
Sun, they are only part of a large array of energy called
radiation, or electromagnetic radiation. This array, or
spectrum, of electromagnetic energy is shown in Figure
21.15. All radiation—whether x-rays, microwaves, or radio
waves—transmits energy through the vacuum of space
at 300,000 kilometers (186,000 miles) per second and

only slightly slower through our atmosphere. When an
object absorbs any form of radiant energy, the result is
an increase in molecular motion, which causes a corresponding increase in temperature.
To better understand how the atmosphere is heated,
it is useful to have a general understanding of the basic
laws governing radiation:

Television, FM radio

Energy from the Sun

Long radio waves

1000 meters

643

21.4 Heating the Atmosphere

r Hotter objects radiate more total energy per
unit area than do colder objects.
r The hotter the radiating body, the shorter the
wavelength of maximum radiation. The Sun,
with a surface temperature of about 5700°C, radiates maximum energy at 0.5 micrometer, which is
in the visible range. The maximum radiation for
Earth occurs at a wavelength of 10 micrometers,
well within the infrared (heat) range. Because
the wavelength for maximum Earth radiation is
roughly 20 times longer than the maximum solar
radiation, Earth radiation is often called longwave radiation, and solar radiation is called shortwave radiation.
r Objects that are good absorbers of radiation
are good emitters as well. Earth’s surface and
the Sun approach being perfect radiators because
they absorb and radiate with nearly 100 percent efficiency for their respective temperatures. On the
other hand, gases are selective absorbers and emitters of radiation. For some wavelengths, the atmosphere is nearly transparent (that is, little radiation
is absorbed). For other wavelengths, however, the
atmosphere is nearly opaque (that is, it is a good
absorber). Experience tells us that the atmosphere
is transparent to visible light; hence, these wavelengths readily reach Earth’s surface. This is not
the case for the longer-wavelength radiation emitted by Earth.

The Paths of Incoming Solar Energy
Figure 21.16 shows the paths taken by incoming solar
radiation averaged for the entire globe. Notice that
the atmosphere is quite transparent to incoming solar
radiation. On average, about 50 percent of the solar
energy reaching the top of the atmosphere passes
through the atmosphere and is absorbed at Earth’s surface. Another 20 percent is absorbed directly by clouds
and certain atmospheric gases (including oxygen and
ozone) before reaching the surface. The remaining 30
percent is reflected back to space by the atmosphere,
clouds, and reflective surfaces such as snow and ice.
The fraction of the total radiation that is reflected by
a surface is called its albedo (Figure 21.17). Thus, the
albedo for Earth as a whole (the planetary albedo) is
30 percent.
What determines whether solar radiation will be
transmitted to the surface, scattered, or reflected outward? It depends greatly on the wavelength of the energy
being transmitted, as well as on the nature of the intervening material.
The numbers shown in Figure 21.16 represent global
averages. The actual percentages can vary greatly, primarily due to changes in the percentage of light reflected
and scattered back to space. For example, if the sky is
overcast, a higher percentage of light is reflected back to
space than when the sky is clear.

Solar radiation
100%

5% backscattered
to space by the
atmosphere

30% lost to space
by reflection and
scattering

20%
reflected
from
clouds

SmartFigure 21.16
Paths taken by solar radiation This diagram shows
the average distribution of
incoming solar radiation
by percentage. More solar
radiation is absorbed by
Earth’s surface than by the
atmosphere.
(https://goo.gl/REGnn9)

20% of radiation
absorbed by
atmosphere
and clouds

50% of direct and diffused
radiation absorbed by
land and sea

5% reflected from
land-sea surface

Heating the Atmosphere:
The Greenhouse Effect
If Earth had no atmosphere, it would experience an
average surface temperature far below freezing. But
the atmosphere warms the planet and makes Earth
livable. The extremely important role the atmosphere
plays in heating Earth’s surface has been named the
greenhouse effect.
As discussed earlier, cloudless air is largely transparent to incoming short-wave solar radiation and,
hence, transmits it to Earth’s surface. By contrast, a
significant fraction of the long-wave radiation emitted by Earth’s land–sea surface is absorbed by water
vapor, carbon dioxide, and other trace gases in the
atmosphere. This energy heats the air and increases
the rate at which it radiates energy, both out to space
Figure 21.17
Thick clouds
70 – 90%
Thin clouds
25 – 30%

Snow
50 – 90%
Forest
5 – 10%

Grass
5 – 25%
Light roof
35 – 50%

Asphalt
5 – 10% Dark roof
10 – 15%

Water
5 – 80%
(varies with sun angle)

Wet plowed field
15 – 25%

Sandy beach
20 – 40%

Albedo (reflectivity)
of various surfaces In
general, light-colored
surfaces tend to be more
reflective than dark-colored
surfaces and thus have
higher albedos.

644

CHAPTER 21

Global Climate Change

Airless bodies like the Moon All incoming solar
radiation reaches the surface. Some is reflected
back to space. The rest is absorbed by the surface
and radiated directly back to space. As a result the
lunar surface has a much lower average surface
temperature than Earth.

Bodies with modest amounts of greenhouse gases
like Earth The atmosphere absorbs some of the
longwave radiation emitted by the surface. A portion
of this energy is radiated back to the surface and is
responsible for keeping Earth's surface 33°C (59°F)
warmer than it would otherwise be.

All outgoing longwave
energy is reradiated directly
back to space

Incoming shortwave
solar radiation

Bodies with abundant greenhouse gases like Venus
Venus experiences extraordinary greenhouse
warming, which is estimated to raise its surface
temperature by 523°C (941°F).

Some outgoing
Greenhouse
longwave
gases reradiate
radiation
some energy
absorbed by
Earthward
greenhouse gases

Incoming shortwave
solar radiation

David Cole/Alamy

Most outgoing
Greenhouse
longwave
gases reradiate
radiation
considerable
absorbed by
energy toward
greenhouse
the Venusian
gases
surface

Incoming shortwave
solar radiation

NASA

NASA

SmartFigure 21.18
The greenhouse
effect The greenhouse
effect of Earth compared
with two of our close solar
system neighbors.
(https://goo.gl/e150CY)

and back toward Earth’s surface. Without this complicated game of “pass the hot potato,” Earth’s average
temperature would be –18°C (–0.4°F) rather than
the current average temperature of 15°C (59°F)
(Figure 21.18). These absorptive gases in our atmosphere
make Earth habitable for humans and other life-forms.
As you will see in the sections that follow, changes
in the air’s composition, both natural and human
caused, impact the greenhouse effect in ways that
can cause the atmosphere to either become warmer
or cooler.
This natural phenomenon was named the greenhouse effect because it was once thought that greenhouses were heated in a similar manner. The glass
in a greenhouse allows short-wave solar radiation to
enter and be absorbed by the objects inside. These
objects, in turn, radiate energy but at longer wavelengths, to which glass is nearly opaque. The heat,

therefore, is “trapped” in the greenhouse. It has been
shown, however, that air inside greenhouses becomes
warmer than outside air mainly because greenhouses
restrict the exchange of air between the inside and
outside. Nevertheless, the term greenhouse effect
remains.

21.4

Concept Checks

1. What are the three paths taken by incoming solar
radiation? What might cause the percentage
taking each path to vary?
2. Explain why the atmosphere is heated chiefly by
radiation from Earth’s surface.
3. Prepare a sketch with labels that explains the
greenhouse effect.
_TT78


21.5 Natural Causes of Climate Change

Causes of Climate Change
21.5 Natural
Discuss hypotheses that relate to natural causes of climate change.
A great variety of hypotheses have been proposed to explain climate change. Several have gained
wide support, only to lose it and then sometimes to regain it. Some explanations are controversial.
This is to be expected because planetary atmospheric processes are so large-scale and complex that
they cannot be reproduced physically in laboratory experiments. Rather, climate and its changes
must be simulated mathematically (modeled), using powerful computers.
In this section we examine several current hypotheses
that have earned serious consideration from the scientific
community. They describe “natural” mechanisms of climatic change, causes that are unrelated to human activities. A later section examines human-induced climate
changes, including the effect of rising carbon dioxide levels caused primarily by our burning of fossil fuels.
As you read this section, you will find that more than
one hypothesis may explain the same change in climate. In
fact, several mechanisms may interact to shift climate. Also,
no single hypothesis can explain climate change on all time
scales. A proposal that explains variations over millions of
years generally cannot explain fluctuations over hundreds
of years. If our atmosphere and its changes ever become
fully understood, we will probably see that climate change
is caused by many of the mechanisms discussed here, plus
new ones yet to be proposed.

Plate Movements and Orbital
Variations
In Chapter 18, the section “Causes of Ice Ages” describes
two natural mechanisms of climate change. Recall that the
movement of lithospheric plates gradually moves Earth’s
continents closer to or farther from the equator. Although
This satellite image shows the sulfur dioxide
(SO2) plume in shades of purple and black.
Climate may be affected when large quantities
of SO2 are injected into the atmosphere.

these shifts in plates are very slow, they can have a dramatic
impact on climate over spans of millions of years. Moving
landmasses can also lead to significant shifts in ocean circulation, which influences heat transport around the globe.*
A second natural mechanism of climate change
related to the causes of ice ages involves variations in
Earth’s orbit. Changes in the shape of the orbit (eccentricity),
variations in the angle that Earth’s axis makes with the
plane of its orbit (obliquity), and the wobbling of the axis
(precession) cause fluctuations in the seasonal and latitudinal distribution of solar radiation (see Figure 18.41,
page 563). These variations, in turn, contributed to the
alternating glacial–interglacial episodes of the Ice Age.

Volcanic Activity and Climate Change
The idea that explosive volcanic eruptions might alter
Earth’s climate was first proposed many years ago. It is
still regarded as a plausible explanation for some aspects
of climatic variability. Explosive eruptions emit huge
quantities of gases and fine-grained debris into the atmosphere (Figure 21.19). The greatest eruptions are sufficiently
*For more on this, see the section “Supercontinents, Mountain Building, and
Climate” in Chapter 22.

Figure 21.19
This image was taken from the International Space Station and
shows a plume of volcanic ash streaming southeastward from the
volcano.

Mount Etna erupting in October
2002 This volcano on the island of
Sicily is Europe’s largest and most
active volcano. (NASA images)

645

646

CHAPTER 21

Global Climate Change

powerful to inject material high into the atmosphere;
strong upper-level winds then spread it around the globe,
where it remains for many months or even years.

The Effect of Volcanic Aerosols on Climate
Suspended volcanic material filters out a portion of the
incoming solar radiation, which in turn lowers temperatures in the troposphere. More than 200 years ago,
Benjamin Franklin used this idea to argue that material from the eruption of a large Icelandic volcano could
have reflected sunlight back to space and therefore might
have been responsible for the unusually cold winter of
1783–1784.
Perhaps the most notable cool period linked to a volcanic event is the “year without a summer” that followed
the 1815 eruption of Mount Tambora in Indonesia. Tambora’s is the largest eruption of modern times. During
April 7–12, 1815, this nearly 4000-meter- (13,000-foot-)
high volcano violently expelled an estimated 100 cubic
kilometers (24 cubic miles) of volcanic debris. The impact
of the volcanic aerosols on climate is believed to have
been widespread in the Northern Hemisphere. From
May through September 1816, an unprecedented series
of cold spells affected the northeastern United States
and adjacent portions of Canada. There was heavy snow
in June and frost in July and August. Abnormal cold was
also experienced in much of Western Europe. Similar,
Volcanic haze reducing sunlight at Earth’s
surface The reflective haze
produced by some volcanic
eruptions is not volcanic
ash but tiny sulfuric acid
aerosols. (NASA)

A plume of white haze from
Anatahan Volcano blankets a
portion of the Philippine Sea in
April 2005. The haze consisted of
tiny droplets of sulfuric acid formed
when sulfur dioxide from the
volcano combined with water in the
atmosphere. The plume is bright
and reflects sunlight back to space.
1

0

–1

–2

–3

–4

–5

A.

Volcanic Ash and Dust When Mount St. Helens
erupted, there was immediate speculation about the possible effects on climate. Could such an eruption cause our
climate to change? There is no doubt that the large quantity of volcanic ash emitted by the explosive eruption had
significant local and regional effects for a short period.
Still, studies indicated that any longer-term lowering of
hemispheric temperatures was negligible. The cooling
was so slight—probably less than 0.1°C (0.2°F)—that it
could not be distinguished from other natural temperature fluctuations.

Sulfuric Acid Droplets Two years of monitoring and

Net Solar Radiation Percent Change

Figure 21.20

although apparently less dramatic, effects have been
associated with other great explosive volcanoes, including
Indonesia’s Krakatoa in 1883.
Three more recent volcanic events have provided
considerable data and insight regarding the impact of
volcanoes on global temperatures. The eruptions of
Washington State’s Mount St. Helens in 1980, the Mexican volcano El Chichón in 1982, and Mount Pinatubo in
the Philippines in 1991 have given scientists opportunities to study the atmospheric effects of volcanic eruptions
with the aid of more sophisticated technology than was
previously available. Satellite images and remote-sensing
instruments allowed scientists to closely monitor the
effects of the clouds of gases and ash that these volcanoes
emitted.

B.

studies following the 1982 El Chichón eruption indicated
that it had a greater cooling effect
Net solar radiation at Hawaii's Mauna Loa
on global mean temperature than
Observatory relative to 1970 (zero on the
graph). The eruptions of El Chichón and Mt. Mount St. Helens—on the order
Pinatubo clearly caused temporary drops in of 0.3° to 0.5°C (0.5° to 0.9°F). El
solar radiation reaching the surface.
Chichón’s eruption was less
explosive than the Mount
St. Helens blast, so why did
it have a greater impact on
global temperatures? The
reason is that the material
emitted by Mount St. Helens was largely fine ash that
settled out in a relatively
short time. El Chichón, on
the other hand, emitted far
greater quantities of sulfur
dioxide gas (an estimated
40 times more) than Mount
St. Helens. This gas comEl Chichón
Pinatubo
bines with water vapor in
the stratosphere to produce
a dense cloud of tiny sulfuric acid particles (Figure
21.20A). These particles
1973 1978 1983 1988 1993 1998
take several years to settle
Year
out completely. They lower
the troposphere’s mean

21.5 Natural Causes of Climate Change

temperature because they reflect solar radiation back to
space (Figure 21.20B).
We now understand that volcanic clouds that remain
in the stratosphere for a year or more are composed
largely of sulfuric-acid droplets and not of dust, as was
once thought. Thus, the volume of fine debris emitted
during an explosive event is not an accurate criterion for
predicting the global atmospheric effects of an eruption.
Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines erupted explosively in June 1991, injecting 25 to 30 million tons of sulfur dioxide into the stratosphere. The event provided scientists with an opportunity to study the climatic impact
of a major explosive volcanic eruption using NASA’s
spaceborne Earth Radiation Budget Experiment. During
the next year, the haze of tiny aerosols increased reflectivity and lowered global temperatures by 0.5°C (0.9°F).
The impact on global temperature of eruptions like
El Chichón and Mount Pinatubo is relatively minor, but
many scientists agree that the cooling produced could
alter the general pattern of atmospheric circulation for a
limited period. Such a change, in turn, could influence
the weather in some regions. Predicting, or even identifying, specific regional effects still presents a considerable
challenge to atmospheric scientists.
The impact on climate of any single volcanic eruption, no matter how great, is relatively small and shortlived. The graph in Figure 21.20B reinforces this point.
Therefore, many great eruptions, closely spaced in
time, need to occur if volcanic processes are to have a
pronounced impact on climate for an extended period.
Because no extensive episode of explosive volcanism is
known to have occurred in historic times, such an occurrence is most often mentioned as a possible contributor to
prehistoric climatic shifts.

Volcanism and Global Warming The Cretaceous
period is the last period of the Mesozoic era, the era of
middle life that is often called the “age of dinosaurs.” It
began about 145.5 million years ago and ended about
65.5 million years ago, with the extinction of the dinosaurs (and many other life-forms as well).*
The Cretaceous climate was among the warmest
in Earth’s long history. Dinosaurs, which are associated with mild temperatures, ranged north of the Arctic
Circle. Tropical forests existed in Greenland and Antarctica, and coral reefs grew as much as 15 degrees latitude
closer to the poles than at present. Deposits of peat that
would eventually form widespread coal beds accumulated at high latitudes. Sea level was as much as 200
meters (650 feet) higher than it is today, consistent with a
lack of polar ice sheets.
What caused the unusually warm climates of the
Cretaceous period? Among the significant factors that
may have contributed was an enhanced greenhouse
effect due to an increase in the amount of carbon dioxide
in the atmosphere. But where did the additional CO2
come from?
Many geologists suggest that the probable source
was volcanic activity. Carbon dioxide is one of the gases
emitted during volcanism, and there is now considerable geologic evidence that the Middle Cretaceous was
a time when there was an unusually high rate of volcanic
activity. Several huge oceanic lava plateaus were produced on the floor of the western Pacific during this
span. These vast features were associated with hot spots
that may have been produced by large mantle plumes.
Massive outpourings of lava over millions of years would
have been accompanied by the release of huge quantities of CO2, which in turn would have enhanced the
*For more about the end of the Cretaceous, see Chapter 22.

E Y E ON E A R T H

21.2

T

his satellite image shows an extensive plume of ash from
an explosive volcanic eruption of Indonesia’s Sinabung
volcano on January 16, 2014. (NASA)

QUESTION 1 How might the volcanic ash from this eruption
influence air temperatures?
Ash plume

QUESTION 2 Would this effect likely be long-lasting—perhaps
for years? Explain.
QUESTION 3 What “invisible” volcanic emission might have a
greater effect than the volcanic ash?
Sinabung

647

648

CHAPTER 21

Global Climate Change

SmartFigure 21.21
Sunspots Both images
show sunspot activity at the
same location on the solar
disk at the same time on
March 5, 2012, using two
different instruments from
NASA’s Solar Dynamics
Observatory. (NASA)

This view shows an approximation of the
Sun’s surface. The black spots surrounded
by deep orange is a sunspot region where
magnetic activity is extremely intense.

The instrument that produced this image
used ultraviolet, radio, and other parts of the
electromagnetic spectrum. Looping lines
show solar plasma following magnetic field
lines.

(https://goo.gl/FzHyyi)

atmospheric greenhouse effect. Thus, the warmth that
characterized the Cretaceous may have had its origins
deep in Earth’s mantle.
This example illustrates the interrelationships among
parts of the Earth system. Seemingly unrelated materials
and processes turn out to be linked. Here you have seen
how processes originating deep in Earth’s interior are
connected directly or indirectly to the atmosphere, the
oceans, and the biosphere.
_TT79


Solar Variability and Climate
Among the most persistent hypotheses of climate change
have been those based on the idea that the Sun is a variable star and that its output of energy varies through
time. The effect of such changes would seem direct and
easily understood: Increases in solar output would cause
the atmosphere to warm, and reductions would result
in cooling. This notion is appealing because it can be
used to explain climate change of any length or intensity.

However, no major longterm variations in the total
intensity of solar radiation
have yet been measured
outside the atmosphere.
Such measurements were not
even possible until satellite
technology became available.
We can now measure solar
output but still need many
decades of records before we
will begin to sense how variable (or invariable) energy
from the Sun really is.
Some hypotheses for
climate change have related
to sunspot cycles. The most
conspicuous and best-known
features on the surface of
the Sun are the dark blemishes called sunspots (Figure
21.21). Sunspots are huge
magnetic storms that extend
from the Sun’s surface deep
into the interior. Moreover,
these spots are associated
with the Sun’s ejection of huge masses of particles that,
on reaching Earth’s upper atmosphere, interact with
gases to produce displays known as the aurora borealis,
or Northern Lights, in the Northern Hemisphere.
Sunspots occur in cycles, with the number of sunspots reaching a maximum about every 11 years (Figure
21.22). During periods of maximum sunspot activity,
the Sun emits slightly more energy than during sunspot minimums. Based on measurements from space
that began in 1978, the variation during an 11-year
cycle is about 0.1 percent. Although sunspots are dark,
they are surrounded by brighter areas, which apparently offset the effect of the dark spots. It appears that
this change in solar output is too small and the cycles
are too short to have any appreciable effect on global
temperatures. However, there is a possibility that longer-term variations in solar output may affect climates
on Earth.
For example, the span between 1645 and 1715 is a
period known as the Maunder minimum, during which

Figure 21.22
150

150
100
50
1700
1720
1740
1760
1780
1800
1820
1840
1860
1880
1900
1920
1940
1960
1980
2000
2020

0

Sunspot number

200
Annual number
of sunspots

Mean annual sunspot
numbers The number of
sunspots reaches a maximum about every 11 years.

100
50
0
2003

2005

2007
2009
Time (years)

2011

2013

2015

21.6 Human Impact on Global Climate

sunspots were largely absent. This period of missing
sunspots closely corresponds with a period in climate
history known as the Little Ice Age, an especially cold
period in Europe. For some scientists, this correlation
suggests that a reduction in the Sun’s output was likely
responsible at least in part for this cold episode. Other
scientists seriously question this notion. Their hesitation stems in part from subsequent investigations using
different climate records from around the world that
failed to find a significant correlation between sunspot
activity and climate.

21.5

649

Concept Checks

1. Describe and briefly explain the effect of the El
Chichón and Mount Pinatubo eruptions on global
temperatures.
2. How might volcanism lead to global warming?
3. What are sunspots? How does solar output
change as sunspot numbers change? Is there a
solid connection between sunspot numbers and
climate change on Earth?

Impact on Global Climate
21.6 Human
Summarize the nature and cause of the atmosphere’s changing composition since
about 1750. Describe the climate’s response.

So far we have examined potential causes of climate change that are natural. In this section, we
examine how humans contribute to global climate change. One impact largely results from the
addition of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases to the atmosphere. A second impact stems
from the addition of human-generated aerosols to the atmosphere.
Human influence on regional and global climate did not
just begin with the onset of the modern industrial period.
There is good evidence that people have been modifying the environment over extensive areas for thousands
of years. The use of fire and the overgrazing of marginal
lands by domesticated animals have both reduced the
abundance and distribution of vegetation. By altering
ground cover, humans have modified such important
climate factors as surface albedo, evaporation rates, and
surface winds.

Rising CO2 Levels

Figure 21.23

Quadrillion Btu

Earlier you learned that carbon dioxide (CO2) represents
only about 0.0400 percent (400 parts per million) of the
gases that make up clean, dry air. Nevertheless, it is a
very significant component meteorologically. Carbon
dioxide is influential because it is transparent to incoming short-wavelength solar radiation, but it is not transparent to some of the longer-wavelength, outgoing Earth
radiation. A portion of the energy leaving Earth’s surface
is absorbed by atmospheric CO2. This heat energy is subsequently re-emitted, part of it back toward the
40
surface, thereby keeping the air near the ground
warmer than it would be without CO2. Thus,
30
along with water vapor, carbon dioxide is largely
20
responsible for the atmosphere’s greenhouse
effect.
10
The tremendous industrialization of the
0
past two centuries has been fueled—and still
is fueled—by burning fossil fuels: coal, natural
gas, and petroleum (Figure 21.23). Combustion

of these fuels has added great quantities of carbon
dioxide to the atmosphere. Figure 21.24 shows changes
in CO2 concentrations at Hawaii’s Mauna Loa Observatory, where measurements have been made since
1958. The graph shows an annual seasonal cycle and a
steady upward trend over the years. The up-and-down
of the seasonal cycle is due to the vast land area of the
Northern Hemisphere, which contains the majority
of land-based vegetation. During spring and summer
in the Northern Hemisphere, when plants are absorbing CO2 as part of photosynthesis, concentrations
decrease. The annual increase in atmospheric CO2
during the cold months occurs as vegetation dies and
leaves fall and decompose, releasing CO2 back into the
air.
The use of coal and other fuels is the most prominent
means by which humans add CO2 to the atmosphere,
but it is not the only way. The clearing of forests also
contributes substantially because CO2 is released as vegetation is burned or decays (Figure 21.25). Deforestation is
particularly pronounced in the tropics, where vast tracts

Petroleum

Natural
Gas

Coal

Renewable Nuclear
Energy
Electric
Power

U.S. energy consumption The
graph shows energy consumption
in 2014. The total was 98.3
quadrillion Btu. A quadrillion is
10 raised to the 12th power, or a
million million. The burning of fossil
fuels represents about 81 percent
of the total. (Based on data from U.S.
Energy Information Administration)

650

CHAPTER 21

Global Climate Change

SmartFigure 21.24

(Based on NOAA)
(https://goo.gl/5HSuIS)

400

380
Parts per million

Monthly CO2 concentrations Atmospheric CO2
has been measured at
Mauna Loa Observatory,
Hawaii, since 1958. There
has been a consistent
increase since monitoring began. This graphic
portrayal is known as the
Keeling Curve, in honor
of the scientist who originated the measurements.

have varied from about 180
to 300 ppm. As a result of
human activities, the present
CO2 level is about 30 percent
higher than its highest level
over at least the past 600,000
years. The rapid increase in
CO2 concentrations since
the onset of industrialization
is obvious. The annual rate
at which atmospheric CO2
concentration is growing has
been increasing over the past
several decades.

The up-and-down of the red line shows a
seasonal pattern. Concentrations go down
during Northern Hemisphere spring and
summer when plants are absorbing CO2.
In fall and winter, photosynthesis is
greatly reduced and decomposing
vegetation continues to add CO2 to the
atmosphere.

360

Seasonally corrected data
340

Monthly CO2

320

1960

1970

1980

1969
Year

2000

are cleared for ranching and agriculture or subjected
to inefficient commercial logging operations. All major
tropical forests—including those in South America,
Africa, Southeast Asia, and Indonesia—are disappearing.
According to United Nations estimates, more than 10
million hectares (25 million acres) of tropical forest were
permanently destroyed each year during the decades of
the 1990s and 2000s; this rate has slowed in recent years.
Some of the excess CO2 is taken up by plants or
is dissolved in the ocean, but an estimated 45 percent
remains in the atmosphere. Figure 21.26 is a graphic record
of changes in atmospheric CO2 extending back more than
400,000 years. Over this long span, natural fluctuations
Figure 21.25
Tropical deforestation
Clearing the tropical rain
forest is a serious environmental issue. In addition
to causing a loss of biodiversity, deforestation is a
significant source of carbon
dioxide. Fires are frequently
used to clear the land. This
scene is in Brazil’s Amazon
basin. (Photo by Nigel Dickinson/
Alamy)

2010

2020

The Atmosphere’s
Response

Given the increase in the
atmosphere’s CO2 content,
have global temperatures
actually increased? The answer is yes. According to a
2013 report by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), “Warming of the climate system
is unequivocal, as is now evident from observations of
increases in global average air and ocean temperatures,
widespread melting of snow and ice, and rising global
sea level.”* Most of the observed increase in global average temperatures since the mid-twentieth century is
* IPCC, “Summary for Policymakers,” in Climate Change 2013: The Physical
Science Basis. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change is an authoritative group of scientists that provides advice to the world community through
periodic reports that assess the state of knowledge of the causes and effects of
climate change.

651

21.6 Human Impact on Global Climate

The Role of Trace Gases
Carbon dioxide is not the only gas contributing to a possible global increase in temperature. In recent years
atmospheric scientists have come to realize that human
industrial and agricultural activities are causing a buildup
of several trace gases that also play significant roles. The
substances are called trace gases because their concentrations are much lower than the concentration of carbon
dioxide. The most important trace gases are methane

Temperature difference (°C)
compared to 1951-80 mean

CO2 parts per million

extremely likely due to the
460
observed increase in human440
generated greenhouse gas
420
concentrations. As used by
2015
400
the IPCC, extremely likely
380
indicates a probability of
360
95–100 percent. Global
340
warming since the mid-1970s
320
For 650,000 years, atmospheric CO2 was never higher than this level
is now about 0.6°C (1°F), and
300
1950
280
total warming in the past cen260
tury is about 0.8°C (1.4°F).
240
The upward trend in surface
220
temperatures is shown in Fig200
ure 21.27. With the exception
180
of 1998, the 10 warmest years
160
400,000 350,000 300,000 250,000 200,000 150,000 100,000 50,000
0
in the 135-year record have
Years
before
today
all occurred since 2000, with
2014 ranking as the warmest
year on record.
(CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), and chlorofluorocarbons
Weather patterns and other natural cycles cause
(CFCs).
These gases absorb wavelengths of outgoing
fluctuations in average temperatures from year to year.
radiation
from Earth that would otherwise escape into
This is especially true on regional and local levels. For
space.
Although
individually their impact is modest,
example, while the globe experienced notably warm temtaken
together
these
trace gases play a significant role in
peratures in 2014, parts of the continental United States
warming
the
troposphere.
were cooler than normal. By contrast, 2014 was the
warmest year on record for much of Europe and parts of
Methane Although methane is present in much smaller
Russia, and ocean temperatures were at a record high.
amounts than CO2, its significance is greater than its relRegardless of regional differences in any year, increases
atively
small concentration would indicate (Figure 21.30).
in greenhouse gas levels are causing a long-term rise in
This
is
because methane is about 20 times more effecglobal temperatures. Each calendar year will not nective
than
CO2 at absorbing infrared radiation emitted by
essarily be warmer than the one before, but scientists
Earth.
expect each decade to be warmer than the previous one.
Methane is produced by anaerobic bacteria in wet
An examination of the decade-by-decade temperature
places
where oxygen is scarce. (Anaerobic means “withtrend in Figure 21.28 bears this out.
out
air,”
specifically oxygen.) Such places include swamps,
What about the future? Projections for the years
bogs,
wetlands,
and the guts of termites and grazing
ahead depend in part on the quantities of greenhouse
animals
such
as
cattle and sheep. Methane is also genergases that are emitted. Figure 21.29 shows the best estiated
in
flooded
paddy
fields (“artificial swamps”) used for
mates of global warming for several different scenarios.
growing
rice.
Mining
of
coal and drilling for oil and natuThe 2013 IPCC report states that if there is a doubling
ral
gas
are
other
sources,
because methane is a product
of the pre-industrial level of carbon dioxide (280 ppm) to
of
their
formation.
560 ppm, the likely temperature increase will be in the
range of 2° to 4.5°C (3.5° to 8.1°F). The increase is very
unlikely (1 to 10 percent probability) to be less than 1.5°C
.6
(2.7°F), and values higher than 4.5°C (8.1°F) are possible.

CO2 concentrations
over the past 400,000
years Most of these data
come from the analysis of
air bubbles trapped in ice
cores. The record since
1958 comes from direct
measurements at Mauna
Loa Observatory, Hawaii.
The rapid increase in CO2
concentrations since the
onset of the Industrial
Revolution is obvious.
(Based on NOAA)

SmartFigure 21.27
Global temperatures,
1880–2014 With the
exception of 1998, 10 of
the warmest years in this
135-year temperature
record have occurred since
2000. (https://goo.gl/V60gFp)

.4
.2
0
–.2
–.4
1880

Figure 21.26

1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

2020

652

CHAPTER 21

Global Climate Change

1950–2014 Temperature Trend
Global Temperature Change: Decade Averages
0.7

Change from average (°C)

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
–0.1
1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 2020
Decade

Temperature Trend (°C/decade)
–0.5

–0.25

0

+0.25

+0.5

Figure 21.28
Decade-by-decade temperature trend Continued increases in the atmosphere’s greenhouse gas levels are driving a long-term
increase in global temperatures. Each calendar year is not necessarily warmer than the year before, but, since 1950, each decade has
been warmer than the previous one. The graph clearly shows this. The world map shows the regional differences in the rate of global
warming.

The increase in the concentration of methane in the
atmosphere has been in step with the growth in human
population. This relationship reflects the close link
between methane formation and agriculture. As population
increases, so do the numbers of cattle and rice paddies.

6.0

CFCs Unlike methane and nitrous oxide, chloros

5.0
4.0

g d loba
iff l a
e r ve
en ra
t s ge
ce
na
rio

Temperature projections
to 2100 The right half of
the graph shows projected
global warming based on
different emissions scenarios. The shaded zone adjacent to each colored line
shows the uncertainty range
for each scenario. The basis
for comparison (0.0 on the
vertical axis) is the global
average for the period 1980
to 1999. The orange line
represents the scenario
in which CO2 concentrations were held constant at
values for the year 2000.

Global surface warming (°C)

SmartFigure 21.29

Nitrous Oxide Sometimes called “laughing gas,”
nitrous oxide is also building in the atmosphere,

3.0
2.0

Global temperature
changes during the
20th century

1.0

g
ted sin
c
oje u
Pr ures
rat
pe
m
te

0.0

(http://goo.gl/B3UbWC)

–1.0
1900

although not as rapidly as methane (see Figure 21.30).
The increase results primarily from agricultural activity. When farmers use nitrogen fertilizers to boost crop
yield, some of the nitrogen enters the air as nitrous
oxide. This gas is also produced by high-temperature
combustion of fossil fuels. Although the annual release
into the atmosphere is small, the lifetime of a nitrous
oxide molecule is about 150 years! If nitrogen fertilizer and fossil fuel use grow at projected rates, nitrous
oxide’s contribution to greenhouse warming may
approach half that of methane.

1950

2000
Year

2050

2100

fluorocarbons (CFCs) are not naturally present in the
atmosphere. CFCs are manufactured chemicals with
many uses that have gained notoriety because they are
responsible for ozone depletion in the stratosphere. The
role of CFCs in global warming is less well known. CFCs
are very effective greenhouse gases. They were not developed until the 1920s and were not used in great quantities until the 1950s. Although corrective action has been
taken, CFC levels will not drop rapidly. CFCs remain in
the atmosphere for decades, so even if all CFC emissions
were to stop immediately, the atmosphere would not be
free of them for many years.

A Combined Effect Carbon dioxide is clearly the most
important single cause of the projected global greenhouse warming. However, it is not the only contributor.

653

21.6 Human Impact on Global Climate

2000

400

1800

1400
1200
300

1000

500

1000
Year

1500

2000

1800
1750

315
1700
310
1650

305

800

300

600

295

Methane and nitrous
oxide Although CO2 is
most important, these trace
gases also contribute to
global warming. Over the
2000-year span shown
here, there were relatively
minor fluctuations until the
industrial era. The graph
on the right shows recent
trends.

1600

1980

1990

2000

2010

1550

Year

When the effects of all human-generated greenhouse
gases other than CO2 are added together and projected
into the future, their collective impact significantly
increases the impact of CO2 alone.
Sophisticated computer models show that the
warming of the lower atmosphere caused by CO2 and
trace gases will not be the same everywhere. Rather,
the temperature response in polar regions could be two
to three times greater than the global average. Because
the polar troposphere is very stable, vertical mixing is
suppressed, which limits the amount of surface heat
that is transferred upward. In addition, an expected
reduction in sea ice would contribute to the greater
temperature increase. This topic will be explored more
fully in the next section.

How Aerosols Influence Climate
Increasing the levels of
carbon dioxide and other
greenhouse gases in the
atmosphere is the most
direct human influence
on global climate. But it
is not the only impact.
Global climate is also
affected by human activities that contribute to
the atmosphere’s aerosol
content. Recall that aerosols are the tiny, often
microscopic, liquid and
solid particles that are
suspended in the air.
Unlike cloud droplets,
aerosols are present
even in relatively dry air.
Atmospheric aerosols are

Methane (CH4)
Nitrous Oxide (N2O)

320
N2O (parts per billion)

1600
350

0

325

CH4 (parts per billion)

N2O (parts per billion)

Methane (CH4)
Nitrous Oxide (N2O)

250

Figure 21.30

Recent Trends

CH4 (parts per billion)

Long Term Changes

composed of many different materials, including soil,
smoke, sea salt, and sulfuric acid. Natural sources are
numerous and include such phenomena as dust storms
and volcanoes.
Most human-generated aerosols come from the sulfur dioxide emitted during the combustion of fossil fuels
and result from burning vegetation to clear agricultural
land. Chemical reactions in the atmosphere convert the
sulfur dioxide into sulfate aerosols, the same material
that produces acid precipitation. The satellite images in
Figure 21.31 provide an example.
How do aerosols affect climate? Aerosols act
directly by reflecting sunlight back to space and indirectly by making clouds “brighter” reflectors. The second effect relates to the fact that many aerosols (such
as those composed of salt or sulfuric acid) attract water
and thus are especially effective as cloud condensation nuclei. The large quantity of aerosols produced
by human activities (especially industrial emissions)

Beijing

Figure 21.31
The source of these pollutants
was coal-burning power
plants, agricultural burning,
and industrial processes.

Beijing

Zhengzhou
N 100 km

Aerosol Index
0.0

1.75

3.5

This satellite image
shows the extremely high
levels of aerosols
N
associated with this air
200 km
pollution episode. At an
index value of 4, aerosols
are so dense that you
would have difficulty
seeing the midday sun.

Zhengzhou

Human-generated aerosols
These satellite images
show a serious air pollution episode in China on
October 8, 2010. (NASA)

CHAPTER 21

Global Climate Change

trigger an increase in the number of cloud droplets
that form within a cloud. A greater number of small
droplets increases the cloud’s brightness, causing more
sunlight to be reflected back to space.
One category of aerosols, called black carbon,
is soot generated by combustion processes and fires.
Unlike most other aerosols, black carbon warms the
atmosphere because it is an effective absorber of
incoming solar radiation. In addition, when deposited
on snow and ice, black carbon reduces surface albedo,
thus increasing the amount of radiation absorbed.
Nevertheless, despite the warming effect of black
carbon, the overall effect of atmospheric aerosols is to
cool Earth.
Studies indicate that the cooling effect of humangenerated aerosols offsets a portion of the global warming caused by the growing quantities of greenhouse gases
in the atmosphere. The magnitude and extent of the cooling effect of aerosols is uncertain. This uncertainty is a
significant hurdle in advancing our understanding of how
humans alter Earth’s climate.
It is important to point out some significant differences between global warming by greenhouse gases and
aerosol cooling. After being emitted, carbon dioxide and
trace gases remain in the atmosphere for many decades.
By contrast, aerosols released into the troposphere
remain there for only a few days or, at most, a few weeks
before they are “washed out” by precipitation, limiting
_TT80


E Y E ON E A R T H

their effects. Because of their short lifetime in the troposphere, aerosols are distributed unevenly over the globe.
As expected, human-generated aerosols are concentrated
near the areas that produce them—namely industrialized
regions that burn fossil fuels and places where vegetation
is burned.
The lifetime of aerosols in the atmosphere is short.
Therefore, the effect of aerosols on today’s climate is
determined by the amount emitted during the preceding
couple weeks. By contrast, the carbon dioxide and trace
gases released into the atmosphere remain for much longer spans and thus influence climate for many decades.

21.6

Concept Checks

1. Why has the CO2 level of the atmosphere been
increasing over the past 200 years?
2. How has the atmosphere responded to the
growing CO2 levels? How are temperatures in the
lower atmosphere likely to change as CO2 levels
continue to increase?
3. Aside from CO2, what trace gases are
contributing to global temperature change?
4. List the main sources of human-generated
aerosols and describe their net effect on
atmospheric temperatures.

21.3

T

he Amundsen–Scott South Pole Station is a
U.S. research facility. Among the phenomena
monitored here are variations in atmospheric
composition. The accompanying graph shows changes
in the air’s CO2 content at South Pole Station (90
degrees south latitude) and at a similar facility at Barrow,
Alaska (71 degrees north latitude). (Photo by Scot Jackson,
National Science Foundation/ZUMA/Newscom)

QUESTION 1 Describe how the two lines on the graph
differ.

400
390

QUESTION 2 Which line on the graph represents the
South Pole, and which represents Barrow, Alaska?
QUESTION 3 Explain how you were able to determine
which line is which.

380
CO2 (ppm)

654

370
360
350
340
330
320

1980

1988

1996
Year

2004

2012

655

21.7 Climate-Feedback Mechanisms

21.7

Climate-Feedback Mechanisms
Contrast positive- and negative-feedback mechanisms and provide examples of each.

Climate is a very complex interactive physical system. Thus, when any component of the climate
system is altered, scientists must consider many possible outcomes. These possible outcomes are
called climate-feedback mechanisms. They complicate climate-modeling efforts and add greater
uncertainty to climate predictions.

Types of Feedback Mechanisms
What climate-feedback mechanisms are related to carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases? One important
mechanism is that warmer surface temperatures increase
evaporation rates. This, in turn, increases the water
vapor in the atmosphere. Remember that water vapor is
an even more powerful absorber of radiation emitted by
Earth than is carbon dioxide. Therefore, with more water
vapor in the air, the temperature increase caused by carbon dioxide and trace gases is reinforced.
Scientists who model global climate change indicate that the temperature increase at high latitudes may
be two to three times greater than the global average.
This assumption is based in part on the likelihood that
the area covered by sea ice will decrease as surface
temperatures rise. Because ice reflects a much larger
percentage of incoming solar radiation than does open
water, the melting of sea ice replaces a highly reflective surface with a relatively dark surface (Figure 21.32).
The result is a substantial increase in the solar energy
absorbed at the surface. This in turn feeds back to
the atmosphere and magnifies the initial temperature
increase created by higher levels of greenhouse gases.
The climate-feedback mechanisms discussed thus
far magnify the temperature rise caused by the buildup
of greenhouse gases. Because these effects reinforce
the initial change, they are called positive-feedback
mechanisms. On the other hand, negative-feedback
mechanisms are those that produce results that are
just the opposite of the initial change and tend to
offset it.
One probable result of a global temperature rise would
be an accompanying increase in cloud cover due to the
higher moisture content of the atmosphere. Most clouds are
good reflectors of solar radiation. At the same time, however, they are also good absorbers and emitters of radiation emitted by Earth. Consequently, clouds produce two
opposite effects. They are a negative-feedback mechanism
because they increase Earth’s albedo and thus reflect some
of the solar energy available to heat the atmosphere. On the
other hand, clouds act as a positive-feedback mechanism by
absorbing and emitting radiation that would otherwise be
lost from the troposphere. Which effect, if either, is stronger? Scientists still are not sure whether clouds will produce a net positive or negative feedback. Although recent
studies have not settled the question, they seem to lean

SmartFigure 21.32

Decline in the
perennial ice
cover
Longer
melt period

Warmer
ocean

Reduced
reflectivity

Increased
absorption of
solar radiation

Sea ice as a feedback
mechanism The image
shows the springtime
breakup of sea ice near
Antarctica. The diagram
shows a likely feedback
loop. A reduction in sea ice
acts as a positive-feedback
mechanism because
surface albedo decreases,
and the amount of energy
absorbed at the surface
increases. (Radius Images/
Alamy) (https://goo.gl/FrSgZK)

toward the idea that clouds do not dampen global warming
but rather produce a small positive feedback overall.*
The problem of global warming caused by humaninduced changes in atmospheric composition continues
to be one of the most studied aspects of climate change.
Although no models yet incorporate the full range of
potential factors and feedbacks, the scientific consensus
is that the increasing levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide and trace gases will lead to a warmer planet with a
different distribution of climate regimes.

Computer Models of Climate:
Important yet Imperfect Tools
Earth’s climate system is amazingly complex. Comprehensive state-of-the-science climate simulation models are among the basic tools used to develop possible
climate-change scenarios. Called general circulation
models (GCMs), they are based on fundamental laws of
physics and chemistry and incorporate human and biological interactions. GCMs are used to simulate many
variables, including temperature, rainfall, snow cover, soil
moisture, winds, clouds, sea ice, and ocean circulation
*A. E. Dessler, “A Determination of the Cloud Feedback from Climate Variations
over the Past Decade,” Science 330 (December 10, 2010), 1523–1526.

656

CHAPTER 21

Global Climate Change

Figure 21.33

2.0
Global Temperature Change (°F)

Separating human and
natural influences on
climate The blue band
shows how global average
temperatures would have
changed due to natural
forces only, as simulated
by climate models. The
pink band shows model
projections of the effects of
human and natural forces
combined. The black line
shows actual observed
global average temperatures. As the blue band
indicates, without human
influences, temperatures
over the past century would
actually have first warmed
and then cooled slightly
over recent decades.
Bands of color are used
to express the range of
uncertainty.

Observations
Natural and Human Factors
Natural Factors Only

1.5
1.0
0.5
0
–0.5
–1.0

1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

Year

over the entire globe through the seasons and over spans
of decades.
In many other fields of study, hypotheses can be
tested by direct experimentation in a laboratory or by
field observations and measurements. However, this
is often not possible in the study of climate. Rather,
scientists must construct computer models of how our
planet’s climate system works. If we understand the climate system correctly and construct the model appropriately, then the behavior of the model climate system
should mimic the behavior of Earth’s climate system
(Figure 21.33).

E Y E ON E A R T H

21.4

T

his satellite image from August 2007 shows the
effects of tropical deforestation in a portion of the
Amazon basin in western Brazil. Intact forest is
dark green, whereas cleared areas are tan (bare ground)
or light green (crops and pasture). Notice the relatively
dense smoke in the left center of the image. (NASA)

QUESTION 1 How does the destruction of tropical
forests change the composition of the atmosphere?
QUESTION 2 Describe the effect that tropical
deforestation has on global warming.

What factors influence the accuracy of climate models? Clearly, mathematical models
are simplified versions of the real Earth and
cannot capture its full complexity, especially at
smaller geographic scales. Moreover, computer
models used to simulate future climate change
must make many assumptions that significantly
influence predictions. They must consider a
wide range of possible changes in population,
economic growth, fossil fuel consumption,
technological development, improvements in
energy efficiency, and more.
Despite many obstacles, our ability to use
2000
supercomputers to simulate climate is very
good and continues to improve. Although
today’s models are far from infallible, they are
powerful tools for understanding what Earth’s future climate might be like.

21.7

Concept Checks

1. Distinguish between positive- and negativefeedback mechanisms.
2. Provide at least one example of each type of
feedback mechanism.
3. What factors influence the accuracy of computer
models of climate?

21.8 Some Consequences of Global Warming

Consequences of Global Warming
21.8 Some
Discuss several likely consequences of global warming.
What consequences can be expected as the carbon dioxide content of the atmosphere reaches a
level that is twice what it was early in the twentieth century? Because the climate system is complex, predicting the occurrence of specific effects in particular places is speculative. It is not yet
possible to pinpoint such changes. Nevertheless, there are plausible scenarios for larger scales of
space and time.
As noted, the magnitude of the temperature increase will
not be the same everywhere. The temperature rise will
probably be smallest in the tropics and increase toward
the poles. As for precipitation, the models indicate that
some regions will experience significantly more precipitation and runoff. However, others will experience a
decrease in runoff due to reduced precipitation or greater
evaporation caused by higher temperatures.
Table 21.1 lists possible effects of global warming
based on the IPCC’s projections for the late twenty-first
century, ranked in decreasing order of certainty. Probabilities are based on the quality, volume, and consistency
of the evidence and the extent of agreement among scientists. The risk associated with any of the projections in
Table 21.1 is a combination of the probability of occurrence and the severity of the damage if it were to occur.
This means that even projections labeled “unlikely” should

not be ignored, because if any of those events were to happen, the consequences would be extremely serious.

Sea-Level Rise
A significant impact of human-induced global warming is
a rise in sea level. As this occurs, coastal cities, wetlands,
and low-lying islands could be threatened with more frequent flooding, increased shoreline erosion, and saltwater
encroachment into coastal rivers and aquifers.
How is a warmer atmosphere related to a rise in sea
level? One significant factor is thermal expansion. Higher
air temperatures warm the adjacent upper layers of the
ocean, which in turn causes the water to expand and sea
level to rise.
A second factor contributing to global sea-level rise
is melting glaciers. With few exceptions, glaciers around

TABLE 21.1 IPCC Projections for the Late 21st Century
7
7
7
7
7
7

+(!!5/*!*&$%0/3&(("3.)".*!("//#."-1"*0+2".)+/0(*!."/
+0!5/*!*&$%0/3&(("3.)".*!)+."#."-1"*0+2".)+/0(*!."/
%""40"*0+#,".)#.+/03&((!" (&*"
 "* &!&: 0&+*3&((&* ."/"/0%"0)+/,%"." 1)1(0"/2
+.0%".*")&/,%"."$( &0&+*3&((*+0&*&0&0""#+."0%"5". 
(+()"*/"("2"(3&((.&/"*! +*0&*1"0+!+/+#+.)*5 "*01.&"/

Virtually certain (99–100%)

7

7
7

7
7
7
7
7
7

. 0& /"& " +2".3&(( +*0&*1"0+/%.&*'*!0%&**!+.0%".*")&/,%"."/,.&*$/*+3
+2".3&((!" ."/"
%"!&//+(2"!+45$"* +*0"*0+#0%"+ "*3&((!" ."/"5#"3,". "*0

%".0"+#&* ."/"&*0)+/,%".& 2)"0%*"*!*&0.+1/+4&!"3&((." %("2"(/
1*,." "!"*0"!&*0%"(/0 5"./
%"#."-1"* 5+#3.)/,"((/*!%"032"/3&((&* ."/"
%"#."-1"* 5+#%"25,." &,&00&+*"2"*0/3&((&* ."/"
." &,&00&+*)+1*0/3&((&* ."/"&*%&$%(0&01!"/
%"+ "*/ +*2"5+."(0 &. 1(0&+*3&((3"'"*
%".0"+#/"("2"(.&/"3&(("4 ""!0%0+#0%"(0" 0% "*01.5
40.")"%&$%/"("2"("2"*0/3&((&* ."/"/3&((+ "*32"%"&$%0/+#)&!(0&01!"/0+.)/

Very likely (90–100%)

7

7
7
7

#0%"0)+/,%".& 2("2"(/0&(&6"/0!+1("0%",."/"*0("2"($(+(0"),".01."/3&((
.&/"5"03""*  9 9*!  9 9
."/##" 0"!5!.+1$%03&((&* ."/"
." &,&00&+*)+1*0/3&((!" (&*"&*0%"/10.+,& /
%"(+//+#$( &"./3&(( "(".0"&*0%"*"40#"3!" !"/

Likely (66–100%)

7 *0"*/"0.+,& ( 5 (+*" 0&2&053&((&* ."/"
7 %""/0*0. 0& & "/%""03&((,//0%")"(0&*$,+&*0&#$(+(3.)&*$"4 ""!/ 9
 980%&/&/."(0&2"*+0/+(10"

About as likely
as not (33–66%)



7 *0. 0& *!.""*(*!& "/%""0/3&(( +((,/"!1"0+/1.# "3.)&*$
(Michael E. Mann and Lee R. Kump, Dire Predictions: Understanding Climate Change, 2nd edition,
© 2015, p. 71.)

Not likely (0–33%)








     
Probability (%)

657

Changing sea level This
graph shows changes in
sea level between 1900
and 2012 and projections
to 2100 using four different scenarios. Currently
the highest and lowest
projections are considered
to be extremely unlikely.
The greatest uncertainty
surrounding estimates is
the rate and magnitude
of ice sheet loss from
Greenland and Antarctica.
Zero on the graph represents mean sea level in
1992. (https://goo.gl/IgyxOb)

SmartFigure 21.35
Slope of the shoreline The
slope of the shoreline is
critical to determining the
degree to which sea-level
changes will affect it. As
sea level gradually rises,
the shoreline retreats, and
structures that were once
thought to be safe from wave
attack become vulnerable.

estimates of future sea-level
rise are uncertain. The four
2.0
scenarios depicted on the
graph represent estimates
based on different degrees
1.6
of ocean warming and ice
sheet loss and range from 0.2
1.2
meter (8 inches) to 2 meters
m
2
1.
(6.6 feet). The lowest scegh
Hi
nario is an extrapolation of
–
e
0.8
iat
d
the annual rate of sea-level
e
erm
t
n
m
rise that occurred between
I
0.5
Low
0.4
–
e
1870 and 2000 (1.7 millit
edia
Observed sea-level
Interm
m
2
.
0
t
s
meters per year). However,
e
Low
changes 1900–2012
when the rate of sea-level
0
rise for the period 1993 to
2012 is examined, the annual
change is 3.17 millimeters
–0.4
1900
1950
2000
2050
2100
per year. Such data show
Year
that there is a reasonable
chance that sea level will rise
considerably more than the lowest scenario indicates.
the world have been retreating at unprecedented rates
Scientists realize that even modest rises in sea level
over the past century. Some mountain glaciers have disapalong a gently sloping shoreline, such as the Atlantic and
peared altogether (see Figure 18.14, page 545). A satelGulf coasts of the United States, will lead to significant
lite study spanning 20 years showed that the mass of the
Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets dropped an average of erosion and severe permanent inland flooding (Figure
21.35). If this happens, many beaches and wetlands will
475 gigatons per year. (A gigaton is 1 billion metric tons.)
disappear, and coastal civilization will be severely disThat is enough water to raise sea level 1.5 millimeters
(0.05 inch) per year. The loss of ice was not steady but was rupted. Low-lying and densely populated places such as
Bangladesh and the small island nation of the Maldives
occurring at an accelerating rate during the study period.
During the same span, mountain glaciers and ice caps lost are especially vulnerable. The average elevation in the
Maldives is 1.5 meters (less than 5 feet), and its highest
an average of slightly more than 400 gigatons per year.
point is just 2.4 meters (less than 8 feet) above sea level.
Research indicates that sea level has risen about
Because rising sea level is a gradual phenomenon,
25 centimeters (9.75 inches) since 1870, with the rate of
coastal residents may overlook it as an important contribsea-level rise accelerating in recent years. What about
utor to shoreline flooding and erosion problems. Rather,
future changes in sea level? As Figure 21.34 indicates, the
the blame may be assigned to other forces, especially
Where the slope is gentle
storm activity. Although a given storm
a small rise in sea level
may be the immediate cause, the magcauses a substantial shift
nitude of its destruction may result from
Original
shoreline
the relatively small sea-level rise that
allowed the storm’s power to cross a much
Shoreline shift
greater
land area.
Sea level
Future Sea-level Changes Using Four Different Scenarios

2.0
m

SmartFigure 21.34

Global Climate Change

Hig
he
st

CHAPTER 21

Global Mean Sea Level Rise (meters above 1992)

658

rise

The Changing Arctic

(https://goo.gl/ww4WSi)

Original
shoreline

Shoreline shift

The effects of global warming
are most pronounced in the
Where the slope is steep
high latitudes of the Norththe same sea level rise
ern Hemisphere. For more
causes a small shift
than 30 years, the extent and
thickness of sea ice have been
rapidly declining. In addiSea level
tion, permafrost temperatures
rise
have been rapidly rising, and
the area affected by permafrost
has been decreasing. Meanwhile,

21.8 Some Consequences of Global Warming

alpine glaciers and the Greenland ice sheet have been
shrinking. Another sign that the Arctic is rapidly warming is related to plant growth (Figure 21.36). A 2013 study
showed that vegetation growth at northern latitudes
now resembles that which characterized areas 4 to 6
degrees of latitude farther south as recently as 1982.
That is a distance of 400 to 700 kilometers (250 to
430 miles). One researcher characterized the finding this way: “It’s like Winnipeg, Manitoba, moving to Minneapolis-St. Paul in only 30 years.”

Arctic Sea Ice Climate models are in general agreement that one of the strongest signals
of global warming should be a loss of sea ice in
the Arctic. This is indeed occurring. The map
in Figure 21.37A compares the average sea ice
extent for September 2014 to the long-term average for the period 1981–2010. On that date the
extent was about 5 million square kilometers (1.94
square miles)—the sixth lowest extent of the satellite
era which began in 1979. (September represents the end
of the melt period, when the area covered by sea ice is
at a minimum.) Figure 21.37B, which shows year-to-year
changes, clearly depicts the trend. Not only is the area
covered by sea ice declining, but the remaining sea ice
has become thinner, making it more vulnerable to further melting.
Models that best match historical trends project that
Arctic waters may be virtually ice-free in the late summer by the 2030s. As was noted earlier in this chapter,
a reduction in sea ice is a positive-feedback mechanism
that reinforces global warming.

659

SmartFigure 21.36
Climate change spurs plant
growth beyond 45 degrees
north latitude Of the 26 million
square kilometers (10 million
square miles) of northern vegetated lands, about 40 percent
showed increases in plant
growth during the 30-year period
ending in 2012 (green and blue
on the satellite image). The
Mobile Field Trip explores several
aspects of climate change in the
Arctic. (Data from National Snow and
Ice Data Center) (https://goo.gl/wL2oAg)

Plant Growth Change
–5

Permafrost Chapter 15 included a brief discussion of
permafrost landscapes. The map in Figure 15.23 (page
461) shows that permafrost occurs in large portions of
the high latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere. Mounting evidence indicates that the extent of permafrost in
the Northern Hemisphere has decreased over the past

0
5
Percent per decade

10

decade, as would be expected under long-term warming conditions. Figure 21.38 presents an example of this
decline. In the Arctic, short summers thaw only the top
layer of frozen ground. The permafrost beneath this
active layer is like the cement bottom of a swimming
pool. In summer, water cannot percolate downward, so
it saturates the soil above the permafrost and collects
on the surface in thousands of lakes. However, as Arctic
temperatures climb, the bottom of the “pool” seems to
be “cracking.” Satellite imagery shows that a significant

1981-2010 median minimum
Asia

SmartFigure 21.37
Tracking sea ice changes Sea ice is frozen seawater.
In winter the Arctic Ocean is completely ice covered. In
summer, a portion of the ice melts. A.This map shows the
extent of sea ice in early September 2015 compared to
the average extent for the period 1981 to 2010. The sea
ice that does not melt in summer is getting thinner. B. The
graph clearly depicts the trend in the area covered by sea
ice at the end of the summer melt period. (Data from National

Alaska

2015 minimum

NP

Extent (million sq. km)

8
Year to year
changes

7
6
5

Snow and Ice Data Center) (https://goo.gl/Cxmt5k)

4
3
1978

Greenland

A.

B.

1988

1998
Year

2008

2018

660

CHAPTER 21

Global Climate Change

Figure 21.38
Siberian lakes This falsecolor image pair shows
lakes dotting the tundra
in 1973 and 2002. The
tundra vegetation is colored
a faded red, whereas
lakes appear blue or
blue-green. Many lakes
disappeared or shrunk
considerably between 1973
and 2002. After studying
satellite imagery of about
10,000 large lakes in a
500,000-square-kilometer
(195,000- square-mile)
area in northern Siberia,
scientists documented an
11 percent decline in the
number of lakes. (Based on
NASA)

A. June 27, 1973

B. July 2, 2002

number of lakes have shrunk or disappeared altogether.
As the permafrost thaws, lake water drains deeper into
the ground.
Studies in Alaska show that thawing is occurring in
interior and southern parts of the state where permafrost
temperatures are near the thaw point. As Arctic temperatures continue to rise, some models project that nearsurface permafrost may be lost entirely from large parts
of Alaska by the end of the century.
Thawing permafrost represents a potentially significant positive-feedback mechanism that may reinforce
global warming. When vegetation dies in the Arctic,
cold temperatures inhibit its decomposition. As a consequence, over thousands of years, a great deal of organic
matter has become stored in the permafrost. When the
permafrost thaws, organic matter that may have been
frozen for millennia comes out of “cold storage” and
decomposes. The result is the release of carbon dioxide and methane—greenhouse gases that contribute to
global warming. Thus, like decreasing sea ice, thawing
permafrost is a positive-feedback mechanism.

Increasing Ocean Acidity
The human-induced increase in the amount of carbon
dioxide in the atmosphere has some serious implications
for ocean chemistry and for marine life. Recent studies show that about one-third of human-generated CO2
currently ends up in the oceans. The additional carbon
Figure 21.39
The pH scale This is the common measure of the degree of acidity or
alkalinity of a solution. The scale ranges from 0 to 14, with a value of
7 indicating a solution that is neutral. Values below 7 indicate greater
acidity, whereas numbers above 7 indicate greater alkalinity. It is
important to note that the pH scale is logarithmic; that is, each whole
number increment indicates a tenfold difference. Thus, pH 4 is 10
times more acidic than pH 5 and 100 times (10 × 10) more acidic
than pH 6.

dioxide lowers the ocean’s pH, making seawater more
acidic. The pH scale is shown and briefly described in
Figure 21.39.
When atmospheric CO2 dissolves in seawater (H2O),
it forms carbonic acid (H2CO3). This lowers the ocean’s
pH and changes the balance of certain chemicals found
naturally in seawater. In fact, the oceans have already
absorbed enough carbon dioxide for surface waters to
have experienced a decrease of 0.1 pH units since preindustrial times, with an additional pH decrease likely in
the future (Figure 21.40). Moreover, if the current trend in
carbon dioxide emissions continues, the ocean will experience a pH decrease of at least 0.2 pH units by 2100,
which represents a change in ocean chemistry that has
not occurred for millions of years. This shift toward acidity and the resulting changes in ocean chemistry make
it more difficult for certain marine creatures to build
hard parts out of calcium carbonate. The decline in pH
thus threatens a variety of calcite-secreting organisms as
diverse as microbes and corals, which concerns marine
scientists because of the potential consequences for other
sea life that depend on the health and availability of
these organisms.

The Potential for “Surprises”
You have seen that climate in the twenty-first century,
unlike during the preceding thousand years, is not
expected to be stable. Rather, change is occurring. The

Carbonated
soft
drink
Lemon
Tomatoes
juice

Stomach
acid

0

1

2

3

4

5

More strongly acidic

Distilled
water
(neutral)

6

7

Baking
soda
Ammonia
Lye

8

9

10

11

12

More strongly alkaline

13

14

21.8 Some Consequences of Global Warming

Mauna Loa Atmospheric CO2
400

CO2 (ppm)

375

350

325

1992

2000
Year

2006

Figure 21.40
Oceans becoming more acidic
The graphs show the correlation
between rising levels of CO2 in
the atmosphere as measured at
Mauna Loa Observatory (A) and
falling pH in the nearby ocean (B).
As CO2 accumulates in the
ocean, the water becomes more
acidic (pH declines).

2012

A.

Aloha Ocean pH
8.20

8.15

pH

amount and rate of future climate shifts depends primarily on current and future human-caused emissions of
heat-trapping gases and airborne particles. Many of the
changes will probably be gradual, nearly imperceptible
from year to year. Nevertheless the effects, accumulated
over decades, will have powerful economic, social, and
political consequences.
Despite our best efforts to understand future climate shifts, there is also the potential for “surprises.”
This simply means that due to the complexity of Earth’s
climate system, we might experience relatively sudden,
unexpected changes or see some aspects of climate shift
in unanticipated ways. Many future climate scenarios
predict steadily changing conditions, giving the impression that humanity will have time to adapt. However,
the scientific community has indicated that at least some
changes will be abrupt, perhaps crossing a threshold, or
“tipping point,” so quickly that there will be little time
to react. This is a reasonable concern because abrupt
changes occurring over periods as short as decades
or even years have been a natural part of the climate
system throughout Earth history. The paleoclimate
record described earlier in the chapter contains ample
evidence of such abrupt changes. One such abrupt
change occurred at the end of a time span known as the
Younger Dryas, a time of abnormal cold and drought in
the Northern Hemisphere that occurred about 12,000
years ago. Following this 1000-year-long cold period, the
Younger Dryas abruptly ended in a few decades or less
and is associated with the extinction of more than 70 percent of large-bodied mammals in North America.
There are many examples of potential surprises, each
of which would have large consequences. We simply do
not know how far the climate system or other systems it
affects can be pushed before they respond in unexpected
ways. Even if the chance of any particular surprise happening is small, the chance that at least one such surprise
will occur is much greater. In other words, although we
may not know which of these events will occur, it is likely
that one or more will eventually occur.
The impact on climate of an increase in atmospheric
CO2 and trace gases is obscured by some uncertainties.
Yet climate scientists continue to improve our understanding of the climate system and the potential impacts
and effects of global climate change. Policymakers are
confronted with responding to the risks posed by greenhouse gas emissions, knowing that our understanding

8.10

8.05

8.00
1992

2000
Year

2006

2012

B.

is imperfect. They must also face the fact that climateinduced environmental changes cannot be reversed
quickly, if at all, due to the lengthy time scales associated
with the climate system.

21.8

Concept Checks

1. Describe the factors that are causing sea level
to rise.
2. Is global warming greater near the equator or
near the poles? Explain.
3. Based on Table 21.1, what projected changes
relate to something other than temperature?

661

22
Earth’s
Evolution
Through
Geologic
Time

Grand Prismatic Pool in Yellowstone National Park.
This hot-water pool gets its blue color from several
species of heat-tolerant cyanobacteria. Microscopic
fossils of organisms similar to modern cyanobacteria
are among Earth’s oldest fossils. (Photo by Don Johnston/
Glow Images)

E

arth has a long and complex history.

Time and again, the splitting and colliding of continents has led to the formation of new ocean basins and the
creation of great mountain ranges. Furthermore, the nature of life on our planet has
undergone dramatic changes through time.

Earth Unique?
22.1 Is
List the principle characteristics that make Earth unique among the planets.
There is only one place in the universe, as far as we know, that can support life—a modest-sized
planet called Earth that orbits an average-sized star, the Sun. Life on Earth is ubiquitous; it is
found in boiling mudpots and hot springs, in the deep abyss of the ocean, and even under the Antarctic ice sheet. Living space on our planet, however, is significantly limited when we consider the
needs of individual organisms, particularly humans. The global ocean covers 71 percent of Earth’s
surface, but only a few hundred meters below the water’s surface, pressures are so intense that
humans cannot survive without an atmospheric diving suit. In addition, many continental areas are
too steep, too high, or too cold for us to inhabit (Figure 22.1). Nevertheless, based on what we know
about other bodies in the solar system—and the hundreds of planets recently discovered orbiting
around other stars—Earth is still by far the most accommodating.

Figure 22.1
Climbers near the top of
Mount Everest Much of
Earth’s surface is uninhabitable by humans. At
this altitude, the level of
oxygen is only one-third
the amount available at sea
level. (Photo by STR/AFP/Getty
Images)

What fortuitous events produced a planet so hospitable
to life? Earth was not always as we find it today. During
its formative years, our planet became hot enough to support a magma ocean. It also survived a several-hundredmillion-year period of extreme bombardment by asteroids, to which the heavily cratered surfaces of Mars and
the Moon testify. The oxygen-rich atmosphere that makes
higher life-forms possible developed relatively recently.
Serendipitously, Earth seems to be the right planet, in
the right location, at the right time.

The Right Planet
What are some of the characteristics that make Earth
unique among the planets? Consider the following:
r If Earth were considerably larger (more massive), its
force of gravity would be proportionately greater.
Like the giant planets, Earth would have retained a
thick, hostile atmosphere consisting of ammonia and
methane, and possibly hydrogen and helium.
r If Earth were much smaller, oxygen, water vapor, and
other volatiles would escape into space and be lost
forever. Thus, like the Moon and Mercury, both of
which lack atmospheres, Earth would be devoid of life.
r If Earth did not have a rigid lithosphere overlaying
a weak asthenosphere, plate tectonics would not
operate. The continental crust (Earth’s “highlands”)
would not have formed without the recycling of

669

22.1 Is Earth Unique?

plates. Consequently, the entire planet would likely
be covered by an ocean a few kilometers deep. As
author Bill Bryson so aptly stated, “There might
be life in that lonesome ocean, but there certainly
wouldn’t be baseball.”*
r Most surprisingly, perhaps, is the fact that if our planet
did not have a molten metallic outer core, most of the
life-forms on Earth would not exist. Fundamentally,
without the flow of iron in the core, Earth could not
support a magnetic field. It is the magnetic field that
prevents lethal cosmic rays from showering Earth’s
surface and from stripping away our atmosphere.

The Right Location
One of the primary factors that determine whether a
planet is suitable for higher life-forms is its location in the
solar system. The following scenarios substantiate Earth’s
advantageous position:
r If Earth were about 10 percent closer to the Sun, our
atmosphere would be more like that of Venus and
consist mainly of the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide.
Earth’s surface temperature would then be too hot
to support higher life-forms.
r If Earth were about 10 percent farther from the
Sun, the problem would be reversed—it would be
too cold. The oceans would freeze over, and Earth’s
active water cycle would not exist. Without liquid
water, all life would perish.
r Earth is near a star of modest size. Stars like the Sun
have a life span of roughly 10 billion years and emit
radiant energy at a fairly constant level during most
of this time. Giant stars, on the other hand, consume
their nuclear fuel at very high rates and “burn out”
in a few hundred million
years. Therefore, Earth’s
proximity to a modestsized star allowed enough
time for the evolution of
humans, who first appeared on this planet only
a few million years ago.

The Right Time
The last, but certainly not
the least, fortuitous factor
for Earth is timing. The first
organisms to inhabit Earth
were extremely primitive and
came into existence roughly
3.8 billion years ago. From
*A Short History of Nearly Everything
(Broadway Books, 2003).

that point in Earth’s history, innumerable changes
occurred: Life-forms came and went, and there were
many changes in the physical environment of our
planet. Consider two of the many timely Earth-altering
events:
r Earth’s atmosphere has developed over time. Earth’s
primitive atmosphere is thought to have been composed mostly of methane, water vapor, ammonia, and
carbon dioxide—but no free oxygen. Fortunately, microorganisms evolved that released oxygen into the
atmosphere through the process of photosynthesis.
About 2.5 billion years ago, an atmosphere with free
oxygen came into existence. The result was the evolution of the ancestors of the vast array of organisms
that occupy Earth today.
r About 66 million years ago, our planet was struck by
an asteroid 10 kilometers (6 miles) in diameter. This
impact likely caused a mass extinction during which
nearly three-quarters of all plant and animal species
were obliterated—including dinosaurs. Although this
may not seem fortuitous, the extinction of dinosaurs
opened new habitats for small mammals that survived
the impact. These habitats, along with evolutionary
forces, led to the development of many large mammals
that occupy our modern world (Figure 22.2). Without
this event, mammals may not have evolved beyond
small rodent-like creatures that live in burrows.
As various observers have noted, Earth developed
under “just right” conditions to support higher life-forms.
Astronomers refer to this as the Goldilocks scenario.
Like the classic “Goldilocks and the Three Bears” fable,
Venus is too hot (Papa Bear’s porridge), Mars is too cold
(Mama Bear’s porridge), but Earth is just right (Baby
Bear’s porridge).
Figure 22.2
Paleontologists uncover the
remains of a 10-millionyear-old rhinoceros at
a dig site near Orchard,
Nebraska. (Photo by Annie
Griffiths Belt/Corbis)
_TT81


Earth’s Evolution Through Geologic Time

CHAPTER 22

Relative Time
Span

Eon

Era

Period

Phanerozoic

Cenozoic

Holocene
Pleistocene
Miocene
Oligocene

Paleogene

0.01
5.3
23.0

33.9
Eocene
56.0
Paleocene
66.0

Mesozoic

Cretaceous
Proterozoic

"Age of Mammals"

Extinction of
dinosaurs and many
other species
First flowering plants

"Age
of
Reptiles"

145.0
Jurassic
201.3

Phanerozoic

Humans develop

2.6

Pliocene

Neogene
Tertiary

Cenozoic

Paleozoic

Development of
Plants and Animals

Epoch

Quaternary

Mesozoic

First birds
Dinosaurs dominant

Triassic
252.2

Extinction of trilobites
and many other
marine animals

Carboniferous

Permian

Archean

Paleozoic

Precambrian

298.9
Pennsylvanian
323.2

"Age
of
Amphibians"

Mississippian

First reptiles
Large coal swamps
Amphibians abundant

358.9
First insect fossils
Devonian

"Age
of
Fishes"

419.2

Fishes dominant
First land plants

Silurian
443.8

First fishes
Ordovician
485.4

"Age
of
Invertebrates"

Cephalopods dominant
Trilobites dominant

Cambrian

Precambrian

541

Hadean*

670

Proterozoic
2500
Archean

The Precambrian
comprises about
88% of the geologic
time scale

First organisms
with shells
First multicelled
organisms

First one-celled
organisms

~4000
Hadean*
~4600

Origin of Earth

* Hadean is the informal name for the span that begins at Earth’s formation and ends with Earth’s earliest-known rocks.

Figure 22.3
The geologic time scale Numbers represent time in millions of years before the present. The Precambrian accounts for about 88 percent of
geologic time.

22.2 Birth of a Planet

Viewing Earth’s History
The remainder of this chapter focuses on the origin and
evolution of planet Earth—the one place in the universe we know fosters life. As you learned in Chapter 9,
researchers utilize many tools to interpret clues about
Earth’s past. Using these tools, as well as clues contained
in the rock record, scientists continue to unravel many
complex events of the geologic past. The goal of this
chapter is to provide a brief overview of the history of our
planet and its life-forms—a journey that takes us back
about 4.6 billion years, to the formation of Earth. Later,
we will consider how our physical world assumed its present state and how Earth’s inhabitants changed through
time. We suggest that you reacquaint yourself with the

22.2

geologic time scale presented in Figure 22.3 and refer to it
throughout the chapter.

22.1

Concept Checks

1. In what way is Earth unique among the planets of
our solar system?
2. Explain why Earth is just the right size.
3. Why is Earth’s molten, metallic core important to
humans living today?
4. Why is Earth’s location in the solar system ideal
for the development of higher life-forms?

Birth of a Planet
Outline the major stages in Earth’s evolution, from the Big Bang to the formation of
our planet’s layered internal structure.

The universe had been evolving for several billion years before our solar system and Earth began to
form. The universe began about 13.7 billion years ago with the Big Bang, when all matter and space
came into existence. Shortly thereafter the two simplest elements, hydrogen and helium, formed.
These basic elements were the ingredients for the first star systems. Several billion years later, our
home galaxy, the Milky Way, came into existence. It was within a band of stars and nebular debris
in an arm of this spiral galaxy that the Sun and planets took form nearly 4.6 billion years ago.

From the Big Bang to Heavy Elements

From Planetesimals to Protoplanets

According to the Big Bang theory, the formation of our
planet began about 13.7 billion years ago with a cataclysmic explosion that created all matter and space (Figure
22.4). Initially, subatomic particles (protons, neutrons,
and electrons) formed. Later, as this debris cooled, atoms
of hydrogen and helium, the two lightest elements, began
to form. Within a few hundred million years, clouds of
these gases condensed and coalesced into stars that compose the galactic systems we now observe.
As these gases contracted to become the first stars,
heating triggered the process of nuclear fusion. Within
the interiors of stars, hydrogen nuclei convert to helium
nuclei, releasing enormous amounts of radiant energy
(heat, light, cosmic rays). Astronomers have determined
that in stars more massive than our Sun, other thermonuclear reactions occur that generate all the elements on
the periodic table up to number 26, iron. The heaviest
elements (beyond number 26) are created only at extreme
temperatures during the explosive death of a star eight or
more times as massive as the Sun. During these cataclysmic supernova events, exploding stars produce all the
elements heavier than iron and spew them into interstellar space. It is from such debris that our Sun and solar
system formed. Based on the Big Bang scenario, atoms
in your body were produced billions of years ago, in the
hot interior of now-defunct stars, and the gold in your
jewelry was produced during a supernova explosion that
occurred in some distant place.

Recall that the solar system, including Earth, formed about
4.6 billion years ago from the solar nebula, a large rotating cloud of interstellar dust and gas (see Figure 22.4E). As
the solar nebula contracted, most of the matter collected in
the center to create the hot protosun. The remaining materials formed a thick, flattened, rotating disk, within which
matter gradually cooled and condensed into grains and
clumps of icy, rocky, and metallic material. Repeated collisions resulted in most of the material eventually collecting
into asteroid-sized objects called planetesimals.
The composition of planetesimals was largely determined by their proximity to the protosun. As you might
expect, temperatures were highest in the inner solar
system and decreased toward the outer edge of the disk.
Therefore, between the present orbits of Mercury and
Mars, the planetesimals were composed mainly of materials with high melting temperatures—metals and rocky
substances. The planetesimals that formed beyond the
orbit of Mars, where temperatures are low, contained
high percentages of ices—water, carbon dioxide, ammonia, and methane—as well as smaller amounts of rocky
and metallic debris.
Through repeated collisions and accretion (sticking
together), these planetesimals grew into eight protoplanets and some larger moons (see Figure 22.4G). During
this process, the same amount of matter was concentrated into fewer and fewer bodies, each having greater
and greater masses.

671

673

22.3 Origin and Evolution of the Atmosphere and Oceans

Figure 22.5

At some point in Earth’s
early evolution, a giant
impact occurred between
a Mars-sized object and a
young, semimolten Earth.
This collision ejected huge
amounts of debris into space,
some of which coalesced to
form the Moon (see Figure
22.4J,K,L).

Artistic depiction of Earth
during the Hadean The
Hadean is an unofficial
eon of geologic time
that occurred before the
Archean. Its name refers
to the “hellish” conditions
on Earth. During part of
the Hadean, Earth had a
magma ocean and experienced intense bombardment by nebular debris.

Earth’s Early
Evolution
As material continued to
accumulate, the high-velocity
impact of interplanetary
debris (planetesimals) and
the decay of radioactive elements caused the temperature of our planet to steadily
increase. This early period of
heating resulted in a magma
ocean that was perhaps several hundred kilometers deep.
Within the magma ocean, buoyant masses of molten
rock rose toward the surface and eventually solidified to
produce thin rafts of crustal rocks. Geologists call this
early period of Earth’s history the Hadean, and it began
with Earth’s formation about 4.6 billion years ago and
ended roughly 4 billion years ago (Figure 22.5). The name
Hadean is derived from the Greek word Hades, meaning
“the underworld,” referring to the “hellish” conditions on
Earth at the time.
During this period of intense heating, Earth became
hot enough that iron and nickel began to melt. Melting
produced liquid blobs of heavy metal that sank under their
own weight. This process occurred rapidly on the scale of
geologic time and produced Earth’s dense iron-rich core.
As you learned in Chapter 12, the formation of a molten
iron core was the first of many stages of chemical differentiation in which Earth converted from a homogeneous body,
with roughly the same matter at all depths, to a layered
planet with material sorted by density (see Figure 22.4I).

22.3

This period of chemical differentiation established
the three major divisions of Earth’s interior—the iron-rich
core; the thin primitive crust; and Earth’s thickest layer,
the mantle, located between the core and the crust. In
addition, the lightest materials—including water vapor,
carbon dioxide, and other gases—escaped to form a primitive atmosphere and, shortly thereafter, the oceans.

22.2

Concept Checks

1. What two elements made up most of the very
early universe?
2. What is the name of the cataclysmic event
in which an exploding star produces all the
elements heavier than iron?
3. Briefly describe the formation of the planets from
the solar nebula.
4. Describe the conditions on Earth during the
Hadean.

Origin and Evolution of the Atmosphere and Oceans
Describe how Earth’s atmosphere and oceans formed and evolved through time.

We can be thankful for our atmosphere; without it, there would be no greenhouse effect, and Earth
would be nearly 60°F colder. Earth’s water bodies would be frozen over, making the hydrologic
cycle nonexistent.
The air we breathe is a stable mixture of 78 percent
nitrogen, 21 percent oxygen, about 1 percent argon (an
inert gas), and small amounts of gases such as carbon
dioxide and water vapor. However, our planet’s original
atmosphere was substantially different.

Earth’s Primitive Atmosphere
Early in Earth’s formation, its atmosphere likely consisted
of gases most common in the early solar system: hydrogen,
helium, methane, ammonia, carbon dioxide, and water

674

CHAPTER 22

Earth’s Evolution Through Geologic Time

Figure 22.6
Outgassing produced
Earth’s first enduring
atmosphere Outgassing
continues today from
hundreds of active volcanoes worldwide. (Photo by Lee
Frost/Robert Harding)

vapor. The lightest of these—hydrogen and helium—most
likely escaped into space because Earth’s gravity was
too weak to hold them. The remaining gases—methane,
ammonia, carbon dioxide, and water vapor—contain the
basic ingredients of life: carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and
nitrogen. This early atmosphere was enhanced by a process
called outgassing, through which gases trapped in the
planet’s interior are released. Outgassing from hundreds of
active volcanoes still remains an important planetary function worldwide (Figure 22.6). However, early in Earth’s history, when massive heating and fluidlike motion occurred
in the mantle, the gas output would likely have been
immense. These early eruptions probably released mainly
water vapor, carbon dioxide, and sulfur dioxide, with minor
amounts of other gases. Most importantly, free oxygen was
not present in Earth’s primitive atmosphere.

Oxygen in the Atmosphere
As Earth cooled, water vapor condensed to form clouds,
and torrential rains began to fill low-lying areas, eventually
becoming the oceans. In those oceans, nearly 3.5 billion
years ago, photosynthesizing bacteria began to release
oxygen into the water. During photosynthesis, organisms
use the Sun’s energy to produce organic material (energetic
molecules of sugar containing hydrogen and carbon) from
carbon dioxide (CO2) and water (H2O). The first bacteria
probably used hydrogen sulfide (H2S) rather than water
as a hydrogen source. One of the earliest known bacteria,
cyanobacteria (once called blue-green algae), began to
produce oxygen as a by-product of photosynthesis.
Initially, the newly released free oxygen was readily
captured by chemical reactions with organic matter and
dissolved iron in the ocean. It seems that large quantities of iron were released into the early ocean through

submarine volcanism
and associated hydrothermal vents. Iron has
tremendous affinity for
oxygen. When these
two elements join, they
become iron oxide
(rust). These early iron
oxide accumulations
on the seafloor created
alternating layers of
iron-rich rocks and
chert, called banded
iron formations. Most
banded iron deposits
accumulated in the
Precambrian, between
3.5 and 2 billion years
ago, and represent the
world’s most important
reservoir of iron ore.
As the number of
oxygen-generating organisms increased, oxygen began to
build in the atmosphere. Chemical analysis of rock suggests that oxygen first appeared in significant amounts in
the atmosphere around 2.5 billion years ago, a phenomenon termed the Great Oxygenation Event. Thereafter,
oxygen levels in the atmosphere gradually climbed.
For the next billion years, oxygen levels in the atmosphere probably fluctuated but remained below 10 percent
of current levels. Prior to the start of the Cambrian period
541 million years ago, which coincided with the evolution
of organisms with skeletal hard parts, the level of free oxygen in the atmosphere began to increase. The availability
of abundant oxygen in the atmosphere contributed to
the proliferation of aerobic life-forms (oxygen-consuming
organisms). On the other hand, it likely wiped out huge
portions of Earth’s anaerobic organisms (organisms that
do not require oxygen), for which oxygen is poisonous. One
apparent spike in oxygen levels occurred during the Pennsylvanian period (300 million years ago), when oxygen made
up about 35 percent of the atmosphere, compared to today’s
level of 21 percent. This abundance of oxygen has been
attributed to the large size of insects and amphibians during the Pennsylvanian period.
Another positive benefit of the Great Oxygenation
Event is that, for the first time, oxygen molecules (O2)
became a major component of our atmosphere. When
struck by sunlight, oxygen molecules form a compound
called ozone (O3), a type of oxygen molecule composed
of three oxygen atoms. Ozone, which absorbs much of
the harmful ultraviolet radiation before it reaches Earth’s
surface, is concentrated between 10 and 50 kilometers
(6 to 30 miles) above Earth’s surface, in a layer called the
stratosphere. Thus, as a result of the Great Oxygenation
Event, Earth’s landmasses were protected from ultraviolet radiation, which is particularly harmful to DNA—the

675
These prominent chalk cliffs are composed largely of tiny shells of marine organisms, such as foraminifera.

Figure 22.7
White chalk cliffs, England
Similar deposits are also
found in northern France.
(Photo by Imagesources/Glow
Images)

genetic blueprints for living organisms. Marine organisms had always been shielded from harmful ultraviolet
radiation by seawater, but the development of the atmosphere’s protective ozone layer allowed the continents to
become more hospitable to plants and animals as well.

Evolution of the Oceans
When Earth cooled sufficiently to allow water vapor to
condense, rainwater fell and collected in low-lying areas.
By 4 billion years ago, scientists estimate that as much as 90
percent of the current volume of seawater was contained
in the developing ocean basins. Because volcanic eruptions released into the atmosphere large quantities of sulfur
dioxide, which readily combines with water to form hydrochloric acid, the earliest rainwater was highly acidic. The
level of acidity was even greater than in the acid rain that
damaged lakes and streams in eastern North America during the latter part of the twentieth century. Consequently,
Earth’s rocky surface weathered at an accelerated rate. The
products released by chemical weathering included atoms
and molecules of various substances—including sodium,
calcium, potassium, and silica—that were carried into the
newly formed oceans. Some of these dissolved substances
precipitated to become chemical sediment that mantled the
ocean floor. Other substances formed soluble salts, which
increased the salinity of seawater. Research suggests that
the salinity of the oceans initially increased rapidly but has
remained relatively constant over the past 2 billion years.
Earth’s oceans also serve as a repository for tremendous
volumes of carbon dioxide, a major constituent of the primitive atmosphere. This is significant because carbon dioxide is
a greenhouse gas that strongly influences the heating of the
atmosphere. Venus, once thought to be very similar to Earth,
has an atmosphere composed of 97 percent carbon dioxide

that produced an extreme greenhouse effect. As a result, its
surface temperature is 475°C (nearly 900°F).
Carbon dioxide is readily soluble in seawater, where
it often joins other atoms or molecules to produce various chemical precipitates. The most common compound
generated by precipitation is calcium carbonate (CaCO3),
which makes up limestone, the most abundant chemical
sedimentary rock. About 542 million years ago, marine
organisms began to extract calcium carbonate from seawater to make their shells and other hard parts. Included
were trillions of tiny marine organisms, such as foraminifera, whose shells were deposited on the seafloor at
the end of their life cycle. Some of these deposits can be
observed today in the chalk beds exposed along the White
Cliffs of Dover, England, shown in Figure 22.7. By “locking up” carbon dioxide, these limestone deposits store this
greenhouse gas so it cannot easily reenter the atmosphere.

22.3

Concept Checks

1. What is meant by outgassing, and what modern
phenomenon serves that role today?
2. Identify the most abundant gases that were
added to Earth’s early atmosphere through the
process of outgassing.
3. Why was the evolution of photosynthesizing
bacteria important to most modern organisms?
4. Why was rainwater highly acidic early in Earth’s
history?
5. How does the ocean remove carbon dioxide from
Earth’s atmosphere? What role do tiny marine
organisms, such as foraminifera, have in the
removal of carbon dioxide?

676

CHAPTER 22

Earth’s Evolution Through Geologic Time

22.4

Precambrian History: The Formation of Earth’s
Continents
Explain the formation of continental crust, how continental crust becomes
assembled into continents, and the role that the supercontinent cycle has played
in this process.

Earth’s first 4 billion years are encompassed in the time span called the Precambrian. Representing
nearly 90 percent of Earth’s history, the Precambrian is divided into the Archean eon (“ancient age”)
and the Proterozoic eon (“early life age”). Our knowledge of this ancient time is limited because
much of the early rock record has been obscured by the very Earth processes you have been studying, especially plate tectonics, erosion, and deposition. Most Precambrian rocks lack fossils, which
hinders correlation of rock units. In addition, rocks this old are often metamorphosed and deformed,
extensively eroded, and frequently concealed by younger strata. Indeed, Precambrian history is written in scattered, speculative episodes, like a long book with many missing chapters.

Earth’s First Continents
Geologists have discovered tiny crystals of the mineral
zircon in continental rocks that formed 4.4 billion years
ago—evidence that the continents began to form early in
Earth’s history. By contrast, the oldest rocks found in the
ocean basins are generally less than 200 million years old.
What differentiates continental crust from oceanic
crust? Recall that oceanic crust is a relatively dense
(3.0 g/cm3) homogeneous layer of basaltic rocks derived
from partial melting of the rocky upper mantle. In addition,
oceanic crust is thin, averaging only 7 kilometers (4.3 miles)
thick. Continental crust, on the other hand, is composed of
a variety of rock types, has an average thickness of nearly
40 kilometers (25 miles), and contains a large percentage of
low-density (2.7 g/cm3), silica-rich rocks such as granite.
The significance of the differences between continental crust and oceanic crust cannot be overstated in
a review of Earth’s geologic evolution. Oceanic crust,
Figure 22.8
Earth’s early crust was
continually recycled
(Photo courtesy of the USGS)

because it is relatively thin and dense, is found several
kilometers below sea level—unless of course it has been
pushed onto a landmass by tectonic forces. Continental
crust, because of its great thickness and lower density,
may extend well above sea level. Also, recall that oceanic
crust of normal thickness readily subducts, whereas thick,
buoyant blocks of continental crust resist being recycled
into the mantle.

Making Continental Crust The formation of continental crust is a continuation of the gravitational segregation
of Earth materials that began during the final stage of our
planet’s formation. Dense metallic material, mainly iron
and nickel, sank to form Earth’s core, leaving behind the
less dense rocky material that forms the mantle. It is from
Earth’s rocky mantle that low-density, silica-rich minerals were gradually distilled to form continental crust. This
process is analogous to making sour mash whiskeys. In
the production of whiskeys,
various grains such as corn
The crust covering this lava lake is continually being replaced with fresh lava
are fermented to generate
from below, much like the way Earth’s crust was recycled early in its history.
alcohol, with sour mash
being the by-product. This
mixture is then heated or
distilled, which drives off the
lighter material (alcohol) and
leaves behind the sour mash.
In a similar manner, partial
melting of mantle rocks
generates low-density, silicarich materials that buoyantly
rise to the surface to form
Earth’s crust, leaving behind
the dense mantle rocks (see
Chapter 4). However, little is
known about the details of
the mechanisms that generated these silica-rich melts
during the Archean.

677

22.4 Precambrian History: The Formation of Earth’s Continents

Earth’s first crust was probably ultramafic in composition, but
because physical evidence no longer exists, we are not certain. The
hot, turbulent mantle that most
likely existed during the Archean
eon recycled most of this material
back into the mantle. In fact, it may
have been continuously recycled,
in much the same way that the
“crust” that forms on a lava lake is
repeatedly replaced with fresh lava
from below (Figure 22.8).
The oldest preserved continental rocks occur as small, highly
These rocks at Isua, Greenland,
deformed terranes, which are
some of the world’s oldest, have
incorporated within somewhat
been dated at 3.8 billion years.
younger blocks of continental
crust (Figure 22.9). One of these is a
3.8-billion-year-old terrane located
shield volcanoes as well as oceanic plateaus. Simultanenear Isua, Greenland. Slightly older crustal rocks, called
ously, subduction of oceanic crust generated volcanic
the Acasta Gneiss, have been discovered in Canada’s
island arcs. Collectively, these relatively small crustal
Northwest Territories (see Figure 22.11).
fragments represent the first phase in creating stable,
Some geologists think that some type of plate-like
motion operated early in Earth’s history. In addition, hot- continent-size landmasses.
spot volcanism was likely active during this time. HowFrom Continental Crust to Continents The growth of
ever, because the mantle was hotter in the Archean than
larger continental masses was accomplished through colliit is today, both of these phenomena would have prosion and accretion of various types of crustal fragments, as
gressed at higher rates than their modern counterparts.
illustrated in Figure 22.10. This type of collision tectonics
Hot-spot volcanism is thought to have created immense

Figure 22.9
Earth’s oldest preserved
continental rocks are more
than 3.8 billion years old
(Photo courtesy of James L. Amos/
CORBIS)

SmartFigure 22.10

Volcanic
island arc

Volcanic
island arc

Oceanic
plateau

Volcanic
island arc

Sediments
Sediments

Sediments

The formation of
continents The growth of
large continental masses
occurs through the collision
and accretion of smaller
crustal fragments.
(https://goo.gl/uVIk9X)

Melting in lower crust
to form felsic magmas

Mantle
plume

A. Scattered crustal fragments separated by ocean basins
Former
island arc

Deformed
sediments

Former
island arc

Former
oceanic
plateau

Deformed
sediments

Melting in lower crust
to form felsic magmas

B. Collision of volcanic island arcs and oceanic plateau to form a larger crustal block

Former
island arc

678

CHAPTER 22

Earth’s Evolution Through Geologic Time

Figure 22.11

Acasta

Distribution of crustal
material remaining
from the Archean and
Proterozoic eons

Greenland
craton
European
craton

Itsaq

North
American
craton
Wyoming

Univak

Siberian
craton
Aldan
Anshae

Minnesota
Indian
craton

African
craton

China
craton

South
American
craton

Key
Rocks older than
(3500 Ma)
Archean cratons
(>2500 Ma)
Proterozoic cratons
(2500 Ma to 541 Ma)
Phanerozoic orogens
(541 Ma to present)

~ Francisco
Sao
Narryer

Australian
craton

Barberton

Enderbyland
Antarctic
craton

deformed and metamorphosed sediments caught between
converging crustal fragments, thereby shortening and
thickening the developing crust. In the deepest regions
of these collision zones, partial melting of the thickened
crust generated silica-rich magmas that ascended and
intruded the rocks above. The result was the formation of
large crustal provinces that, in turn, accreted with others
to form even larger crustal blocks called cratons.
The portion of a modern craton that is exposed at
the surface is called a shield. The assembly of a large
SmartFigure 22.12
The major geologic provinces of North America
Age of each province is in
billions of years (Ga).

North America was assembled from crustal blocks that
were joined by processes very similar to modern plate
tectonics. Ancient collisions produced mountain belts
that include remnant volcanic island arcs, trapped by
colliding continental fragments.
Ca

(https://goo.gl/RDXNEA)

led

on

ide

Slav

m
Wop

e

s

e-

Wyoming

en
og

The Making of North America
Superior

Yavapai

e

av

oj

Trans-Hudson or

Cordillera

He
a

rn

Thelon

Ra

e

ay

Baffin

craton involves the accretion of several crustal blocks
that cause major mountain-building episodes similar
to India’s collision with Asia. Figure 22.11 shows the
extent of crustal material that was produced during the
Archean and Proterozoic eons. This was accomplished
through the collision and accretion of many thin, highly
mobile terranes into nearly recognizable continental
masses.
Although the Precambrian was a time when much
of Earth’s continental crust was generated, a substantial
amount of crustal material was destroyed as well. Crust
can be lost either by weathering and erosion or by direct
reincorporation into the mantle through subduction.
Evidence suggests that during much of the Archean,
thin slabs of continental crust were eliminated, mainly
by subduction into the mantle. However, by about 3
billion years ago, cratons grew sufficiently large and
thick to resist subduction. After that time, weathering
and erosion became the primary processes of crustal
destruction. By the close of the Precambrian, an estimated 85 percent of the modern continental crust had
formed.

M

Maza

tza

os
l-Pec

le

vil

n
re

a
al

pp

A

n

ia

ch

G

Age (Ga)
<1.0
1.0–1.2
1.6–1.7
1.7–1.8
1.8–2.0
2.5–3.0
>3.5

North America provides an excellent example of the
development of continental crust and its piecemeal
assembly into a continent. Notice in Figure 22.12 that
very little continental crust older than 3.5 billion years
remains. In the late Archean, between 3 and 2.5 billion years ago, there was a period of major continental
growth. During this span, the accretion of numerous
island arcs and other fragments generated several large
crustal provinces. North America contains some of
these crustal units, including the Superior and HearneRae cratons shown in Figure 22.12. It remains unknown
where these ancient continental blocks formed.

679

22.4 Precambrian History: The Formation of Earth’s Continents

Figure 22.13

About 1.9 billion years ago, these crustal provinces
collided to produce the Trans-Hudson mountain belt (see
Figure 22.12). (Such mountain-building episodes were
not restricted to North America; ancient deformed strata
of similar age are also found on other continents.) This
event built the North American craton, around which
several large and numerous small crustal fragments
were later added. One of these late arrivals is the Piedmont province of the Appalachians. In addition, several
terranes were added to the western margin of North
America during the Mesozoic and Cenozoic eras to generate the mountainous North American Cordillera.

Australia

India

Eq

Antarctica

ua

tor

Siberia
North
America

Possible configuration
of the supercontinent
Rodinia For clarity, the
continents are drawn with
somewhat modern shapes,
not their actual shapes
from 1 billion years ago.
(After P. Hoffman, J. Rogers, and
others)

R O D I N I A
Northern
Europe

South
America

Supercontinents of the Precambrian
At different times, parts of what is now North America
have combined with other continental landmasses to
form a supercontinent. Supercontinents are large landmasses that contain all, or nearly all, the existing continents. Pangaea was the most recent, but certainly not the
only, supercontinent to exist in the geologic past. The earliest well-documented supercontinent, Rodinia, formed
during the Proterozoic eon, about 1.1 billion years ago
(Figure 22.13). Although geologists are still studying its
construction, it is clear that Rodinia’s configuration was
quite different from Pangaea’s. One obvious distinction
is that North America was located near the center of this
ancient landmass.
Between 800 and 600 million years ago, Rodinia
gradually split apart. By the end of the Precambrian,
many of the fragments reassembled, producing a large
landmass in the Southern Hemisphere called Gondwana,
comprised mainly of present-day South America, Africa,
India, Australia, and Antarctica (Figure 22.14). Other
continental fragments also developed—North America,
Siberia, and Northern Europe. We consider the fate of
these Precambrian landmasses in the next section.

Africa
South pole

Supercontinents, Mountain Building, and Climate
As continents move, the patterns of ocean currents and
global winds change, influencing the global distribution
of temperature and precipitation. One example of how a
supercontinent’s dispersal influenced climate is the formation of the Antarctic ice sheet. Although eastern Antarctica remained over the South Pole for more than 100 million years, it was not glaciated until about 25 million years
ago. Prior to this period of glaciation, South America was
connected to the Antarctic Peninsula. This arrangement of
landmasses helped maintain a circulation pattern in which
warm ocean currents reached the coast of Antarctica, as
shown in Figure 22.15A. This is similar to the way in which
the modern Gulf Stream keeps Iceland mostly ice free,
despite its name. However, as South America separated
from Antarctica, it moved northward, permitting ocean
circulation to flow from west to east around the entire
continent of Antarctica (Figure 22.15B). This cold current,
called the West Wind Drift, effectively isolated the entire
Figure 22.14

A

Supercontinent Cycle The idea that rifting and dispersal of one supercontinent is followed by a long period
during which the fragments are
gradually reassembled into a
new supercontinent with a
different configuration
Australia
is called the supercontinent cycle.
The assembly and
India
dispersal of supertor
ua
Antarctica
q
continents had a
E
profound impact
on the evolution of
Africa
Earth’s continents.
In addition, this
phenomenon greatly
South
influenced global cliAmerica
mates and contributed to
South pole
periodic episodes of rising
and falling sea level.
A. Continent of Gondwana

Siberia

North
America

Northern
Europe

G

O

N

D

W

A

N

Equator

South pole
B. Continents not a part of Gondwana
_TT82


Reconstruction of Earth
as it may have appeared
in late Precambrian
time The southern continents were joined into a
single landmass called
Gondwana. Other landmasses that were not part
of Gondwana include North
America, northwestern
Europe, and northern Asia.
(After P. Hoffman, J. Rogers, and
others)

CHAPTER 22

continents. Evidence for periods when the seas advanced
onto the continents include
thick sequences of ancient
Africa
Africa
marine
sedimentary rocks that
ator
tor
u
a
q
blanket
large areas of modern
u
E
Eq
landmasses—including much of
the eastern two-thirds of the
United States.
South
The supercontinent cycle
America
and sea-level changes are
South
America
o
directly related to rates of
Co
D
r
i
f
d
t
n
i
W
t
s
e
seafloor
spreading. When the
W
rate of spreading is rapid, as
Antarctica
Antarctica
it is along the East Pacific Rise
today, the production of warm
oceanic crust is also high. Because
warm
oceanic crust is less dense (takes
A. Not glaciated
B. Glaciated
up more space) than cold crust, fast-spreading
ridges occupy more volume in the ocean basins than do
Antarctic coast from the warm, poleward-directed curslow-spreading centers. (Think of getting into a tub filled
rents in the southern oceans. As a result, most of the Antwith water.) As a result, when rates of seafloor spreadarctic landmass became covered with glacial ice.
Local and regional climates have also been impacted ing increase, more seawater is displaced, which results in
the sea level rising. This, in turn, causes shallow seas to
by large mountain systems created by the collision of
advance onto the low-lying portions of the continents.
large cratons. Because of their high elevations, mountains exhibit markedly lower average temperatures than
surrounding lowlands. In addition, air rising over these
lofty structures promotes condensation and precipitation,
1. Briefly explain how low-density continental crust
leaving the region downwind relatively dry. A modern
was produced from Earth’s rocky mantle.
analogy is the wet, heavily forested western slopes of the
2. Describe how cratons came into being.
Sierra Nevada compared to the dry climate of the Great
Basin Desert that lies directly to the east.
3. What is the supercontinent cycle? What
Warm
cur
r en
lc
t
urr
e nt

Cool current

Warm curr

en
t

50 million years ago warm ocean currents
kept Antarctica nearly ice free.

curr
ent
Cool
current

(https://goo.gl/7nRRRF)

As South America separated from Antarctica,
the West Wind Drift developed. This newly
formed ocean current effectively cut Antarctica off from warm currents and contributed to
the formation of its vast ice sheets.

Wa
rm

Connection between
ocean circulation and
the climate in Antarctica

Cool current

SmartFigure 22.15

Warm current

680

22.4

supercontinent proceeded Pangaea?

Supercontinents and Sea-Level Changes
Significant and numerous sea-level changes have been
documented in geologic history, and many of them appear
to be related to the assembly and dispersal of supercontinents. If sea level rises, shallow seas advance onto the

E Y E ON E A R T H

Concept Checks

22.1

T

he oldest-known sample of Earth is a 4.4-billionyear-old zircon crystal found in a metaconglomerate
in the Jack Hills area of western Australia. Zircon is
a silicate mineral that commonly occurs in trace amounts
in most granitic rocks. (Photo by John W. Valley/NSF)

QUESTION 1 What is the parent rock of a
metaconglomerate?
QUESTION 2 Assuming that this zircon crystal originated as
part of a granite intrusion, briefly describe its journey from
the time of its formation until it was discovered at Jack Hill.
QUESTION 3 Is this zircon crystal younger or older than
the metaconglomerate in which it was found? Explain.

4. Give an example of how the movement of a
continent can trigger climate change.
5. Explain how seafloor spreading rates are related
to sea-level changes.

22.5 Geologic History of the Phanerozoic: The Formation of Earth’s Modern Continents

22.5

Geologic History of the Phanerozoic: The
Formation of Earth’s Modern Continents
List and discuss the major geologic events in the Paleozoic, Mesozoic,
and Cenozoic eras.

The time span since the close of the Precambrian, called the Phanerozoic eon, encompasses
541 million years and is divided into three eras: Paleozoic, Mesozoic, and Cenozoic. The beginning of the Phanerozoic is marked by the appearance of the first life-forms with hard parts such as
shells, scales, bones, or teeth—all of which greatly enhance the chances for an organism to be preserved in the fossil record. Thus, the study of Phanerozoic crustal history was aided by the availability of fossils, which improved our ability to date and correlate geologic events. Moreover, because
every organism is associated with its own particular niche, the greatly improved fossil record provided invaluable information for deciphering ancient environments.

Paleozoic History

Figure 22.16

As the Paleozoic era opened, what
is now North America hosted no
North
plants or animals large enough
Siberia
America
to be seen—just tiny microorganisms such as bacteria.
There were no Appalachian
Northern
or Rocky Mountains; the
Europe
continent was largely a barren lowland. Several times
during the early Paleozoic,
shallow seas moved inland and
G
then receded from the continenA
O
tal interior and left behind the thick
N D W A N
deposits of limestone, shale, and clean
A. Early Paleozoic (500 Ma)
sandstone that mark the shorelines of
these previously midcontinent shallow
seas.

Formation of Pangaea During the late Paleozoic, Earth’s major
landmasses joined to produce the supercontinent of Pangaea.
(After P. Hoffman, J. Rogers, and others)

Siberia

Northern
Europe
North
America

Siberia

G

A

Formation of Pangaea One
of the major events of the
Paleozoic era was the formaA
tion of the supercontinent
L A U R
Pangaea. This event began
North
America
with a series of collisions
that over millions of years
joined North America,
G
Europe, Siberia, and other
Africa
O
smaller crustal fragments to
N D W
form a large continent called
South
America
Laurasia (Figure 22.16). Located
south of Laurasia was the vast southC. 350 Ma
ern continent called Gondwana, which
encompassed five modern landmasses—
South America, Africa, Australia, Antarctica, and
India—and perhaps portions of China. Evidence of
extensive continental glaciation places this landmass
near the South Pole. By the late Paleozoic, Gondwana
had migrated northward and collided with Laurasia to
begin the final stage in Pangaea’s assembly.

S

I

Northern
Europe

A N

O

N D W A N

A

B. 425 Ma

Europe

A
North
America

P A

N

G

A

E

A

Africa

South
America

D. Late Paleozoic (300–250 Ma)

681

682

CHAPTER 22

SmartFigure 22.17
Major provinces of the
Appalachian Mountains

Earth’s Evolution Through Geologic Time

The accretion of all of Earth’s major landmasses to
form Pangaea spans more than 300 million years and
resulted in the formation of several mountain belts.
The collision of northern Europe (mainly Norway) with
Greenland produced the Caledonian Mountains, whereas
the joining of northern Asia (Siberia) and Europe created
the Ural Mountains. Northern China is also thought to
have accreted to Asia by the end of the Paleozoic, whereas
southern China may not have become part of Asia until
after Pangaea had begun to rift. (Recall that India did not
begin to accrete to Asia until about 50 million years ago.)
Pangaea reached its maximum size between 300
and 250 million years ago, as Africa collided with North
America (see Figure 22.16D). This event marked the
final and most intense period of mountain building in
the long history of the Appalachian Mountains. This
mountain-building event produced the Central Appalachians of the Atlantic states, as well as New England’s
northern Appalachians and mountainous structures that
extend into Canada (Figure 22.17).

(https://goo.gl/b2Deug)

Mesozoic History

pa
la
ch
ian
d
Pl
M R
a
o u id
on
n t a ge
t
ins
Pl
ai
n

au
te

Central
Appalachians

Spanning about 186
million years, the MesoNorthern
zoic era is divided into
Appalachians three periods: the Triassic,
Jurassic, and Cretaceous.
Major geologic events of the
Mesozoic include the breakup of
Pangaea and the evolution of our
modern ocean basins.

Changes in Sea Levels The Mesozoic
an
era began with much of the world’s contiy
lle e
nents above sea level. The exposed Triassic
Va
g
id dm
strata are primarily red sandstones and mudR
e Pie
stones that lack marine fossils, features that
l
Blu
ta
indicate a terrestrial environment. (The red color
as
o
C
in sandstone comes from the oxidation of iron.)
Ap

As the Jurassic period opened, the sea invaded
western North America. Adjacent to this shallow sea,
extensive continental sediments were deposited on what
is now the Colorado Plateau. The most prominent is the

A.

B.
Appalachian
Plateau
(Underlain by
nearly flat-lying
sedimentary
strata of
Paleozoic age.)

Valley and Ridge
(Highly folded
and thrustfaulted
sedimentary
rocks of
Paleozoic age.)

Blue Ridge
(Hilly to
mountainous
terrain consisting
of slices of
basement rock of
Precambrian age.)

Piedmont
(Crustal fragments
of metamorphosed
sedimentary and
igneous rocks that
were added to
North America.)

Navajo Sandstone, a cross-bedded, quartz-rich layer that
in some places approaches 300 meters (1000 feet) thick.
These remnants of massive dunes indicate that an enormous desert occupied much of the American Southwest
during early Jurassic times (Figure 22.18). Another wellknown Jurassic deposit is the Morrison Formation—the
world’s richest storehouse of dinosaur fossils. Included
are the fossilized bones of massive dinosaurs such as
Apatosaurus (formerly Brontosaurus), Brachiosaurus,
and Stegosaurus.

Coal Formation in Western North America As the
Jurassic period gave way to the Cretaceous, shallow seas
again encroached upon much of western North America,
as well as the Atlantic and Gulf coastal regions. This led
to the formation of “coal swamps” (see Chapter 7) similar to those of the Paleozoic era. Today, the Cretaceous
coal deposits in the western United States and Canada
are economically important. For example, on the Crow
Native American reservation in Montana, there are nearly
20 billion tons of high-quality, Cretaceous-age coal.
The Breakup of Pangaea Another major event of the
Mesozoic era was the breakup of Pangaea. About 185
million years ago, a rift developed between what is now
North America and western Africa, marking the birth of
the Atlantic Ocean. As Pangaea gradually broke apart,
the westward-moving North American plate began to
override the Pacific basin. This tectonic event triggered a
continuous wave of deformation that moved inland along
the entire western margin of North America.
Formation of the North American Cordillera By
Jurassic times, subduction of the Pacific basin under
the North American plate began to produce the chaotic
mixture of rocks that exist today in the Coast Ranges of
California (see Figure 14.5, page 424). Further inland,
igneous activity was widespread, and for more than 100
million years volcanism was rampant as huge masses of
magma rose within a few miles of Earth’s surface. The
remnants of this activity include the granitic plutons of
the Sierra Nevada, as well as the Idaho batholith and
British Columbia’s Coast Range batholith.
The subduction of the Pacific basin under the western margin of North America also resulted
in the piecemeal addition of crustal
fragments to the entire Pacific margin of the continent—from Mexico’s
Baja Peninsula to northern Alaska
(see Figure 14.9, page 428). Each
collision displaced earlier accreted
terranes further inland, adding to
Coastal Plain
the zone of deformation as well as
(Area of low relief
to the thickness and lateral extent
underlain by
of the continental margin.
gradualy sloping
Compressional forces moved
sedimentary strata
huge rock units in a shingle-like
and unlithified
sediments.)
fashion toward the east. Across

683

22.5 Geologic History of the Phanerozoic: The Formation of Earth’s Modern Continents

Figure 22.18

much of North America’s western margin, older
rocks were thrust eastward over younger strata,
for distances exceeding 150 kilometers (90 miles).
Ultimately, this activity was responsible for generating a vast portion of the North American Cordillera that extends from Wyoming to Alaska.
Toward the end of the Mesozoic, the southern portions of the Rocky Mountains developed. This mountain-building event, called the
Laramide Orogeny, occurred when large blocks
of deeply buried Precambrian rocks were lifted
nearly vertically along steeply dipping faults,
upwarping the overlying younger sedimentary
strata. The mountain ranges produced by the
Laramide Orogeny include Colorado’s Front
Range, the Sangre de Cristo of New Mexico and
Colorado, and the Bighorns of Wyoming (see
GEOgraphics 14.1, page 436).

Cenozoic History
The Cenozoic era, or “era of recent life,” encompasses
the past 66 million years of Earth history. It was during
this span that the physical landscapes and life-forms of
our modern world came into existence. The Cenozoic
era represents a considerably smaller fraction of geologic
time than either the Paleozoic or the Mesozoic, but we
know much more about this time span because the rock
formations are more widespread and less disturbed than
those of any preceding era.
Most of North America was above sea level during
the Cenozoic era. However, the eastern and western margins of the continent experienced markedly contrasting
events because of their different plate boundary relationships. The Atlantic and Gulf coastal regions, far removed
from an active plate boundary, were tectonically stable.
By contrast, western North America was the leading edge
of the North American plate, and the plate interactions
during the Cenozoic account for many events of mountain building, volcanism, and earthquakes.

Eastern North America The stable continental margin of eastern North America was the site of abundant
marine sedimentation. The most extensive deposition
surrounded the Gulf of Mexico, from the Yucatan Peninsula to Florida, where a massive buildup of sediment
caused the crust to downwarp. In many instances,
faulting created structures in which oil and natural gas
accumulated. Today, these and other petroleum traps
(see Chapter 23) are the Gulf Coast’s most economically
important resource, evidenced by numerous offshore
drilling platforms.
Early in the Cenozoic, the Appalachians had eroded
to create a low plain. Later, isostatic adjustments again
raised the region and rejuvenated its rivers. Streams
eroded with renewed vigor, gradually sculpting the surface into its present-day topography. Sediments from this
erosion were deposited along the eastern continental

Massive, cross-bedded
sandstone cliffs in Zion
National Park These
sandstone cliffs are the
remnants of ancient sand
dunes that were part of an
enormous desert during
the Jurassic period. (Photo
by Michael Collier; inset photo by
Dennis Tasa)

Close-up view of
cross bedding in the
Navajo Sandstone,
Zion National Park

margin, where they accumulated to a thickness of many
kilometers. Today, portions of the strata deposited during
the Cenozoic are exposed as the gently sloping Atlantic
and Gulf coastal plains, where a large percentage of
the eastern and southeastern United States population
resides (see Figure 22.17).

Western North America In the West, the Laramide
Orogeny responsible for building the southern Rocky
Mountains was coming to an end. As erosional forces
lowered the mountains, the basins between uplifted
ranges began to fill with sediment. East of the Rockies,
a large wedge of sediment from the eroding mountains
created the gently sloping Great Plains.
Beginning in the Miocene epoch, about 20 million
years ago, a broad region from northern Nevada into
Mexico experienced crustal extension that created more
than 100 fault-block mountain ranges. Today, they rise
abruptly above the adjacent basins, forming the Basin
and Range province (see Chapter 14).
During the development of the Basin and Range
province, the entire western interior of the continent
gradually uplifted. This event elevated the Rockies and
rejuvenated many of the West’s major rivers. As the rivers
became incised, many spectacular gorges were created,
including the Grand Canyon of the Colorado River, the
Grand Canyon of the Snake River, and the Black Canyon
of the Gunnison River.
Volcanic activity was also common in the West during much of the Cenozoic. Beginning in the Miocene
epoch, great volumes of fluid basaltic lava flowed from

684

CHAPTER 22

Earth’s Evolution Through Geologic Time

Figure 22.19
Mount Shasta,
California This volcano
is one of several large
composite cones that
comprise the Cascade
Range. (Photo by Michael
Collier)

fissures in portions of present-day Washington, Oregon,
and Idaho. These eruptions built the 3.4-million-squarekilometer (1.3-million-square–mile) Columbia Plateau.
Immediately west of the vast Columbia Plateau, volcanic
activity was different in character. Here, more viscous
magmas with higher silica content erupted explosively,
creating the Cascades, a chain of stratovolcanoes extending from northern California into Canada, some of which
are still active (Figure 22.19).
As the Cenozoic was drawing to a close, the effects
of mountain building, volcanic activity, isostatic adjustments, and extensive erosion and sedimentation created the physical landscape we know today. All that
remained of Cenozoic time was the final 2.6-millionyear episode called the Quaternary period. During
this most recent, and ongoing, phase of Earth’s history,

22.6

humans evolved and the action of glacial ice, wind, and
running water added to our planet’s long, complex geologic history.

22.5

Concept Checks

1. During which period of geologic history did the
supercontinent Pangaea come into existence?
During which period did it begin to break apart?
2. Describe the climate of the present-day American
Southwest during early Jurassic time.
3. Where is most Cretaceous age coal found today
in the United States?
4. Compare and contrast eastern and western North
America during the Cenozoic era.

Earth’s First Life
Describe some of the hypotheses on the origin of life and the characteristics of
early prokaryotes, eukaryotes, and multicelled organisms.

The oldest fossils provide evidence that life on Earth was established at least 3.5 billion years ago
(Figure 22.20). Microscopic fossils similar to modern cyanobacteria have been found in silica-rich
chert deposits worldwide. Notable examples include southern Africa, where rocks date to more than
3.1 billion years, and the Lake Superior region of western Ontario and northern Minnesota, where
the Gunflint Chert contains some fossils older than 2 billion years. Chemical traces of organic matter in even older rocks have led paleontologists to conclude that life may have existed as early as
3.8 billion years ago.

Origin of Life
How did life begin? This question sparks considerable
debate, and hypotheses abound. Requirements for life,
assuming the presence of a hospitable environment,

include the chemical raw materials that are found in
essential molecules such as proteins. Proteins are made
from organic compounds called amino acids. The first
amino acids may have been synthesized from methane

686

CHAPTER 22

Figure 22.21
Stromatolites are among
the most common
Precambrian fossils A.
Cross-section through fossil
stromatolites deposited
by cyanobacteria. (Photo by
Sinclair Stammers/Science Source)

B. Modern stromatolites
exposed at low tide in western Australia. (Photo by Bill
Bachman/Science Source)

A.

B.

and ammonia, both of which were plentiful in Earth’s
primitive atmosphere. Some scientists suggest that these
gases could have been easily reorganized into useful
organic molecules by ultraviolet light. Others consider
lightning to have been the impetus, as the well-known
experiments conducted by biochemists Stanley Miller
and Harold Urey attempted to demonstrate.
Still other researchers suggest that amino acids arrived
“ready-made,” delivered by asteroids or comets that collided
with a young Earth. Evidence for this hypothesis comes
from a group of meteorites, called carbonaceous chrondrites, which contain amino acid–like organic compounds.
Yet another hypothesis proposes that the organic
material needed for life came from the methane and
hydrogen sulfide that spews from deep-sea hydrothermal
vents (black smokers) (see Figure 8.22, page 257). It is
also possible that life originated in hot springs similar to
those found in Yellowstone National Park.

Earth’s First Life: Prokaryotes
Regardless of where or how life originated, it is clear that
the journey from “then” to “now” involved change (Figure
22.20). The first known organisms were simple single-cell

E Y E ON E A R T H

bacteria called prokaryotes, which means their genetic
material (DNA) is not separated from the rest of the cell
by a nucleus. Because oxygen was largely absent from
Earth’s early atmosphere and oceans, the first organisms employed anaerobic (without oxygen) metabolism to
extract energy from “food.” Their food source was likely
organic molecules in their surroundings, but that supply was very limited. Later, bacteria evolved that used
solar energy to synthesize organic compounds (sugars).
This event was an important turning point in biological
evolution: For the first time, organisms had the ability to
produce food for themselves as well as for other life-forms.
Recall that photosynthesis by ancient cyanobacteria,
a type of prokaryote, contributed to the gradual rise in the
level of oxygen, first in the ocean and later in the atmosphere. It was these early organisms, which began to inhabit
Earth 3.5 billion years ago, that dramatically transformed
our planet. Fossil evidence for the existence of these microscopic bacteria includes distinctively layered mats, called
stromatolites, composed of slimy material secreted by these
organisms, along with trapped sediments (Figure 22.21A).
What is known about these ancient fossils comes mainly
from the study of modern stromatolites like those found in
Shark Bay, Australia (Figure 22.21B). Today’s stromatolites look
like stubby pillars built as microbes slowly move upward to

22.2

T

he rocks shown here are Cambrian-age
stromatolites of the Hoyt Limestone, exposed at
Lester Park, near Saratoga Springs, New York.

QUESTION 1 Using Figure 22.3, determine
approximately how many years ago these rocks were
deposited.
QUESTION 2 What is the name of the group of
organisms that likely produced these limestone deposits?
QUESTION 3 What was the environment like in this part
of New York when these rocks were deposited?

M. C. Rygel

687

22.7 Paleozoic Era: Life Explodes

Figure 22.22
Ediacaran fossil The
Ediacarans are a group of
sea-dwelling animals that
may have come into existence about 600 million
years ago. These soft-bodied
organisms were up to 1 meter
(3 feet) in length and are
the oldest animal fossils so
far discovered. (Photo Sinclair
Stammers/Science Source)

avoid being buried by the
sediment that is continually
deposited on them.

Evolution of Eukaryotes The oldest fossils
of more advanced organisms, called eukaryotes,
are about 2.1 billion years
old. The first eukaryotes
were microscopic, single-cell
organisms, but unlike prokaryotes,
eukaryotes contain nuclei. This distinctive cellular structure is what all multicellular organisms that now inhabit
our planet—trees, birds, fish, reptiles, and humans—have
in common.

During much of the Precambrian, life consisted
exclusively of single-celled organisms. It wasn’t until
perhaps 1.2 billion years ago that multicelled eukaryotes
evolved. Green algae, one of the first multicelled organisms, contained chloroplasts (used in photosynthesis)
and were the likely ancestors of modern plants. The first
primitive marine animals did not appear until somewhat
later, perhaps 600 million years ago (Figure 22.22).
Fossil evidence suggests that organic evolution progressed at an excruciatingly slow pace until the end of
the Precambrian. At that time, Earth’s continents were
largely barren and the oceans were populated mainly
with tiny organisms, many too small to be seen with the
naked eye. Nevertheless, the stage was set for the evolution of larger and more complex plants and animals.

22.6

Concept Checks

1. What group of organic compounds is essential
for the formation of DNA and RNA, and therefore
necessary for life as we know it?
2. What are stromatolites? What group of organisms
is thought to have produced them?
3. Compare prokaryotes with eukaryotes. To which
group do all multicelled organisms belong?

Era: Life Explodes
22.7 Paleozoic
List the major developments in the history of life during the Paleozoic era.
The Cambrian period marks the beginning of the Paleozoic era, a time span that saw the
emergence of a spectacular variety of new life-forms. All major invertebrate (animals lacking
backbones) groups made their appearance, including jellyfish, sponges, worms, mollusks (clams and
snails), and arthropods (insects and crabs). This huge expansion in biodiversity is often referred to
as the Cambrian explosion.

Early Paleozoic Life-Forms
The Cambrian period was the golden age of trilobites
(Figure 22.23). Trilobites developed a flexible exoskeleton
of a protein called chitin (similar to a lobster shell), which
enabled them to be mobile and search for food by burrowing through soft sediment. More than 600 genera of these
mud-burrowing scavengers flourished worldwide.
The Ordovician marked the appearance of abundant cephalopods—mobile, highly developed mollusks
that became the major predators of their time (Figure
22.24). Descendants of these cephalopods include the
squid, octopus, and chambered nautilus that inhabit our
modern oceans. Cephalopods were the first truly large
organisms on Earth, including one species that reached a
length of nearly 10 meters (30 feet).
The early diversification of animals was driven,
in part, by the emergence of predatory lifestyles. The
_TT83


Figure 22.23
Fossil of a trilobite
Trilobites dominated the
early Paleozoic ocean,
scavenging food from the
bottom. (Photo by Ed Reschke/
Peter Arnold, Inc.)

larger mobile cephalopods preyed on trilobites that were
typically smaller than a child’s hand. The evolution of
efficient movement was often associated with the development of greater sensory capabilities and more complex

688

CHAPTER 22

Earth’s Evolution Through Geologic Time

Figure 22.24
Artistic depiction of
a shallow Ordovician
sea During the Ordovician
period (488–444 million
years ago), the shallow
waters of an inland sea
over central North
America contained an
abundance of marine
invertebrates. Shown in
this reconstruction are
(1) corals, (2) trilobite,
(3) snails, (4) brachiopods,
and (5) straight-shelled
cephalopod. (The Field

#4
#2

Museum/Getty Images)

#1
#5

#3
nervous systems. These early animals developed sensory
devices for detecting light, odor, and touch.
Approximately 400 million years ago, green algae that
had adapted to survive at the water’s edge gave rise to
the first multicellular land plants. The primary difficulty
in sustaining plant life on land was obtaining water and
Figure 22.25
Small upright–growing,
vascular plants begin
to invade the land

Land plants of the
Paleozoic The Silurian saw
the first upright-growing
(vascular) plants. Plant
fossils became increasingly common from the
Devonian onward.

SIL UR IAN PE RIO D

T
I
M
E

staying upright, despite gravity and winds. These earliest
land plants were leafless vertical spikes about the size of
a human index finger, but the fossil record indicates that
by the beginning of the Mississippian period, there were
forests with trees tens of meters tall (Figure 22.25).
In the ocean, fish perfected an internal skeleton
as a new form of support, and they were the first creatures to have jaws. Armor-plated fish that evolved during the Ordovician continued to adapt. Their armor
plates thinned to lightweight scales that increased
their speed and mobility. Other fish evolved during the
Devonian, including primitive sharks with cartilage
skeletons and bony fish—the groups in which many
modern fish are classified. Fish, the first large vertebrates, proved to be faster swimmers than
invertebrates and possessed more acute
First tree-size
plants become senses and larger brains. They became the
common
dominant predators of the sea, which is
why the Devonian period is often referred
to as the “Age of the Fishes.”

DE VO NIA N PE RIO D

Vertebrates Move to Land

During the Devonian, a group
of fish called the lobe-finned
Extensive forests
fish began to adapt to tercover vast areas of restrial environments (Figure
the continents
22.26A). Lobe-finned fish had
internal sacks that could be
filled with air to supplement
MI SS ISS IPP IAN PE RIO D

689

22.7 Paleozoic Era: Life Explodes

their “breathing” through gills. One group of lobe-finned
fish probably occupied freshwater tidal flats or small
ponds. Some began to use their fins to move from one
pond to another in search of food or to evacuate deteriorating ponds. This favored the evolution of a group of
animals able to stay out of water longer and move on land
more efficiently. By the late Devonian, lobe-finned fish
had evolved into air-breathing amphibians with strong
legs yet retaining a fishlike head and tail (Figure 22.26B).
Modern amphibians, such as frogs, toads, and salamanders, are small and occupy limited biological niches.
However, conditions during the late Paleozoic were ideal
for these newcomers to land. Large tropical swamps
teeming with large insects and millipedes extended
across North America, Europe, and Siberia (Figure 22.27).
With virtually no predatory risks, amphibians diversified
rapidly. Some even took on lifestyles and forms similar to
modern reptiles such as crocodiles.
Despite their success, amphibians were not fully
adapted to life out of water. In fact, amphibian means
“double life” because these animals need both the
water from where they came and the land to where they
moved. Amphibians are born in water, as exemplified by
tadpoles, complete with gills and tails. These features
disappear during the maturation process, resulting in airbreathing adults with legs.

Reptiles: The First True Terrestrial
Vertebrates
Vertebrates advanced from water-dwelling lobefin fish,
to amphibians, to reptiles—the first true terrestrial vertebrates (Figure 22.28), with improved lungs for active
lifestyles and “waterproof” skin that prevented the loss of

Figure 22.26

h

r

A. Lobe-finned fish

u

h
r
u

B. Early amphibian

body fluids. Most importantly, reptiles developed shellcovered eggs laid on land. Eliminating the water-dwelling stage (like the tadpole stage in frogs) was an important evolutionary step. Of interest is the fact that the
watery fluid within the reptilian egg closely resembles
seawater in chemical composition. Because the reptile
embryo develops in this watery environment, the shelled
egg has been characterized as a “private aquarium” in
which the embryos of these land vertebrates spend their
water-dwelling stage of life. With this “sturdy egg,” the
remaining ties to the water were broken, and reptiles
moved inland.

Comparison of the
anatomical features of
the lobe-finned fish and
early amphibians A. The
fins on the lobe-finned fish
contained the same basic
elements (h, humerus, or
upper arm; r, radius; and
u, ulna, or lower arm) as
those of the amphibians. B.
This amphibian is shown
with the standard five toes,
but early amphibians had
as many as eight toes.
Eventually the amphibians
evolved to have a standard
toe count of five.

The Great Permian Extinction
By the close of the Permian period a mass extinction
occurred, in which a large number of Earth’s species
became extinct. During this mass extinction, 70 percent
Figure 22.27
Artistic depiction of a
Pennsylvanian-age coal
swamp Shown are scale
trees (left), seed ferns
(lower left), and scouring
rushes (right). Also note
the large dragonfly. (The Field
Museum/Getty Images)

690

CHAPTER 22

Devonian

Earth’s Evolution Through Geologic Time

Mississippian /
Pennsylvanian

Permian

Triassic

Jurassic

Cretaceous

Cenozoic

Modern Forms

Early
mammals

Mammals
Birds

Mammal-like
reptiles

Birds

Dinosaurs

Early
reptiles

Reptiles

Early
amphibians
Lobefinned
fishes

Amphibians
Coelacanth

SmartFigure 22.28
Relationships of vertebrate of all land-dwelling vertebrate species and perhaps 90
groups and their divergence percent of all marine organisms were obliterated; it
from lobefin fish
was the most significant of five mass extinctions that
(https://goo.gl/Ly53xz)

occurred over the past 500 million years. Each extinction
wreaked havoc with the existing biosphere, wiping out
large numbers of species. In each case, however, survivors entered new biological communities that were ultimately more diverse. Therefore, mass extinctions actually
invigorated life on Earth, as the few hardy survivors
eventually filled more environmental niches than those
left behind by the victims.
Several mechanisms have been proposed to
explain these ancient mass extinctions. Initially, paleontologists believed they were gradual events caused
by a combination of climate change and biological
forces, such as predation and competition. Other
research groups have attempted to link certain mass
extinctions to the explosive impact of a large asteroid
striking Earth’s surface.
The most widely held view is that the Permian
mass extinction was driven mainly by volcanic activity
because it coincided with a period of voluminous eruptions of flood basalts that blanketed about 1.6 million
square kilometers (624,000 square miles), an area nearly

the size of Alaska. This series of eruptions, which lasted
roughly 1 million years, occurred in northern Russia,
in an area called the Siberian Traps. It was the largest
volcanic eruption in the past 500 million years. The
release of huge amounts of carbon dioxide likely generated a period of accelerated greenhouse warming, while
the emission of sulfur dioxide is credited with producing
copious amounts of acid rain. These drastic environmental changes likely put excessive stress on many of
Earth’s life-forms.

22.7

Concept Checks

1. What is the Cambrian explosion?
2. Describe the obstacles plants had to overcome in
order to inhabit the continents.
3. What group of animals is thought to have left the
ocean to become the first amphibians?
4. Why are amphibians not considered “true” land
animals?
5. What major development allowed reptiles to move
inland?

691

22.8 Mesozoic Era: Age of the Dinosaurs

22.8

Mesozoic Era: Age of the Dinosaurs
Briefly explain the major developments in the history of life during the Mesozoic era.

As the Mesozoic era dawned, its life-forms were the survivors of the great Permian extinction.
These organisms diversified in many ways to fill the biological voids created at the close of the
Paleozoic. While life on land underwent a radical transformation with the rise of the dinosaurs,
life in the sea also entered a dramatic phase of transformation that produced many of the animal
groups that prevail in the oceans today, including modern groups of predatory fish, crustaceans,
mollusks, and sand dollars.
Figure 22.29

Gymnosperms: The Dominant
Mesozoic Trees

Cycads, a type of
gymnosperm that was
very common in the
Mesozoic These plants
have palm-like leaves and
large cones. (Photo by Jiri

On land, conditions favored organisms that could adapt
to drier climates. One such group of plants, gymnosperms, produced “naked” seeds that are exposed on
modified leaves that usually form cones. The seeds are
not enclosed in fruits, as are apple seeds, for example.
Unlike the first plants to invade the land, seed-bearing
gymnosperms did not depend on free-standing water
for fertilization. Consequently, these plants were not
restricted to a life near the water’s edge.
The gymnosperms quickly became the dominant
trees of the Mesozoic. Examples of this group include
cycads that resembled large pineapple plants (Figure
22.29); ginkgo plants having fan-shaped leaves, much
like their modern relatives; and the largest plants, the
conifers, whose modern descendants include the pines,
firs, and junipers. The best-known fossil occurrence of
these ancient trees is in northern Arizona’s Petrified Forest National Park. Here, huge petrified logs lie exposed
at the surface, having been weathered from rocks of the
Triassic Chinle Formation (Figure 22.30).

Reptiles Take Over the Land, Sea,
and Sky
Among the animals, reptiles readily adapted to the drier
Mesozoic environment, thereby relegating amphibians
to the swamps and wetlands, where most remain
today. The first reptiles were small, but larger
forms evolved rapidly, particularly the dinosaurs.
One of the largest was Ultrasaurus, which weighed
more than 80 tons and measured over 30 meters
(100 feet) from head to tail. Some of the largest
dinosaurs were carnivorous (for example, Tyrannosaurus), whereas others were herbivorous (like
ponderous Apatosaurus).
Some reptiles evolved specialized characteristics that allowed them to occupy drastically different environments. One group, the pterosaurs,
became airborne. These “dragons of the sky” possessed huge membranous wings that allowed them
rudimentary flight. How the largest pterosaurs
(some had wing spans of 8 meters [26 feet] and
weighed 90 kilograms [200 pounds]) took flight is

Loun/Science Source)

still unknown. Another group, exemplified by the fossil Archaeopteryx, led to more successful flyers—birds
(Figure 22.31). This ancestor of modern birds had feathered wings but retained reptilian characteristics, such
Figure 22.30
Petrified logs of Triassic
age, Arizona’s Petrified
Forest National Park
(Photo by Bernd Siering/AGE
Fotostock)

692

CHAPTER 22

Earth’s Evolution Through Geologic Time

Figure 22.31
Archaeopteryx, ancestors of modern birds Fossil
evidence indicates that Archaeopteryx had feathers
like modern birds but retained many characteristics
of reptiles. The sketch shows an artist’s reconstruction of Archaeopteryx. (Photo by Michael Collier)

Toothed beak
(reptilian feature)

Wing claws
(reptilian
feature)

birds took to the air from the
ground up or from the trees
down is a question scientists
continue to debate.
Other reptiles returned
to the sea, including fish-eating plesiosaurs and ichthyosaurs (Figure 22.32). These
reptiles became proficient
swimmers but retained their
reptilian teeth and breathed
by means of lungs rather than
gills.
For nearly 160 million
years, dinosaurs reigned
supreme. However, by the
Archaeopteryx
close of the Mesozoic, like many other reptiles, dinosaurs became extinct. Select reptile groups have survived
to recent times, including turtles, snakes, crocodiles, and
lizards. The huge, land-dwelling dinosaurs, the
Tail feathers marine plesiosaurs, and the flying pterosaurs
(bird feature) are known only through the fossil record.
What caused this great extinction?

Demise of the Dinosaurs
Airfoil wings
with feathers
(bird feature)

Long tail with vertebrae
(reptilian feature)

as sharp teeth, clawed digits in its wings, and a long tail
with many vertebrae. A recent study concluded that
Archaeopteryx were unable to use flapping flight. Rather,
by running and leaping into the air, these bird-like reptiles escaped predators with glides and downstrokes.
Other researchers disagree and see them as climbing animals that glided down to the ground, following the idea
that birds evolved from tree-dwelling gliders. Whether
Figure 22.32
Reptiles returned to the
sea Reptiles, including
Ichthyosaur, became the
dominant marine animals
during the Mesozoic. (Photo
by Chip Clark)

The boundaries between divisions on the geologic time scale represent times of significant
geological and/or biological change. Of special
interest is the boundary between the Mesozoic era
(“middle life”) and the Cenozoic era (“recent life”), about
66 million years ago. During this transition, roughly
three-quarters of all plant and animal species died out in
another mass extinction. This boundary marks the end of
the era in which dinosaurs and other large reptiles dominated the landscape (Figure 22.33) and the beginning of
the era when mammals assumed that role.

693

22.8 Mesozoic Era: Age of the Dinosaurs

Figure 22.33
Artist’s rendering of
Allosaurus Allosaurus was
a large carnivorous dinosaur that lived in the late
Jurassic period (155 to 145
million years ago). (Image by
Roger Harris/Science Source)

What could have triggered the extinction of one
of the most successful groups of land animals? An
increasing number of researchers support the view that
the dinosaurs fell victim to a “one–two punch.” The
first blow occurred during the last few million years
of the Mesozoic era when climate data indicates that
average temperature over the land increased by more
than 20°C (40°F) over a few tens of thousand years—a
blink of the eye in geologic time. This period of global
warming coincided with massive basaltic eruptions
that produced the Deccan Plateau, a volcanic area in
present-day India. The Deccan eruptions presumably released massive amounts of carbon dioxide,
which caused a period of greenhouse warming
that resulted in a dramatic rise in temperatures. This period of global warming is
thought to have snuffed out some species
and hobbled others.
The final blow came about 66
million years ago, when our planet
was struck by a stony meteorite, a
relic from the formation of the
solar system. The errant mass
of rock was approximately
10 kilometers (6 miles) in
diameter and was traveling at about 90,000 kilometers per hour at the time of

impact. It collided with the southern portion of North
America in a shallow tropical sea—now Mexico’s
Yucatan Peninsula (Figure 22.34).
Following the impact, suspended dust greatly
reduced the amount of sunlight reaching Earth’s
Figure 22.34

UNITED STATES

Gulf of Mexico

CHICXULUB
CRATER
MEXICO

Yucatán

Chicxulub crater The
Chicxulub crater is a giant
impact crater that formed
about 65.5 million years
ago and has since filled
with sediment. It is 180
kilometers (110 miles) in
diameter and is the likely
impact site that resulted
in the demise of the
dinosaurs.

694

CHAPTER 22

Earth’s Evolution Through Geologic Time

Figure 22.35
Iridium layer: Evidence for
a catastrophic impact 66
million years ago A thin
layer of sediment has been
discovered worldwide at
Earth’s physical boundary
separating the Mesozoic
and Cenozoic eras. This
sediment contains a high
level of iridium, an element
that is rare in Earth’s crust
but found in much higher
concentrations in stony
meteorites. (National Parks)

This layer is presumably the
scattered remains of the
meteorite responsible for the
environmental changes that
provided the second and final
blow that led to the demise of
many reptile groups.
Regardless of what
caused this massive extinction, its outcome provides a
valuable lesson in understanding the role that catastrophic
events play in shaping our
planet’s physical landscape
and sustainability of lifeforms. The extinction of the
dinosaurs opened habitats
for the small mammals that
survived. These new habitats,
along with evolutionary forces,
led to the development of the
large mammals that occupy
our modern world.

Mesozoic rocks

IRIDIUM LAYER

Cenozoic rocks

surface, which resulted in global cooling (“impact
winter”) and inhibited photosynthesis, disrupting food
production. Long after the dust settled, the sulfur
oxides that were added to the atmosphere by the blast
remained. Sulfate aerosols, because of their high reflectivity, perpetuated the unusually cold temperatures.
One piece of evidence that points to a catastrophic
collision 66 million years ago is a thin layer of sediment,
less than 1 centimeter thick, discovered in several places
around the globe. This sediment contains a high level
of the element iridium, rare in Earth’s crust but found
in high proportions in stony meteorites (Figure 22.35).

22.8

Concept Checks

1. What group of plants became the dominant
trees during the Mesozoic era? Name a modern
descendant of this group.
2. What group of reptiles led to the evolution of
modern birds?
3. What was the dominant reptile group on land
during the Mesozoic?
4. Identify two reptiles that returned to life in the sea.

Era: Age of Mammals
22.9 Cenozoic
Discuss the major developments in the history of life during the Cenozoic era.
During the Cenozoic, mammals replaced reptiles as the dominant land animals. At nearly the same
time, angiosperms (flowering plants with covered seeds) replaced gymnosperms as the dominant
plants. The Cenozoic is often called the “Age of Mammals” but can also be considered the “Age of
Flowering Plants” because, in the plant world, angiosperms enjoy a status similar to that of mammals in the animal world.
The development of flowering plants strongly influenced the evolution of both birds and mammals that
feed on seeds and fruits, as well as many insect groups.
During the middle of the Cenozoic, another type of
angiosperm, grasses, developed and spread rapidly over
the plains (Figure 22.36). This fostered the emergence
of herbivorous (plant-eating) mammals, which, in turn,
provided the evolutionary foundation for large predatory mammals.

During the Cenozoic, the ocean teemed with modern fish such as tuna, swordfish, and barracuda. In addition, some mammals, including seals, whales, and walruses, took up life in the sea.

From Reptiles to Mammals
The earliest mammals coexisted with dinosaurs for
nearly 100 million years but were small rodent-like

695

22.9 Cenozoic Era: Age of Mammals

Figure 22.36

B.

Angiosperms became the
dominant plants during the
Cenozoic Angiosperms,
commonly known as flowering plants, consist of a
group of seed-plants that
have reproductive structures
called flowers and fruits. A.
The most diverse and widespread of modern plants,
many angiosperms display
easily recognizable flowers. B. Some angiosperms,
including grasses, have very
tiny flowers. The expansion
of the grasslands during
the Cenozoic era greatly
increased the diversity of
grazing mammals and the
predators that feed on them.

A.

(Photo A by WDG Photo/Shutterstock;
Photo B by Cusp/SuperStock)

creatures that gathered food at night, when dinosaurs
were probably less active. Then, about 66 million years
ago, fate intervened when the large meteorite collided
with Earth and dealt the final crashing blow to the
reign of the dinosaurs. This transition from one dominant group to another is clearly visible in the fossil
record.
Mammals are distinct from reptiles in that they are
warm blooded and give birth to live young that suckle
on milk. Being warm blooded allowed mammals to lead
more active lives and to occupy more diverse habitats
than reptiles because they could survive in cold regions.
(Modern reptiles are cold blooded and dormant during cold weather. However, recent studies suggest that
dinosaurs may have been warm blooded.) Other mammalian adaptations included the development of insulating body hair and more efficient hearts, lungs, and other
organs.
With the demise of the large Mesozoic reptiles,
Cenozoic mammals diversified rapidly. The many forms
that exist today evolved from small primitive mammals
that were characterized by short legs; flat, five-toed feet;
and small brains. Their development and specialization
took four principal directions: increase in size, increase
in brain capacity, specialization of teeth to better accommodate their diet, and specialization of limbs to be better
equipped for a particular lifestyle or environment.

Marsupial and Placental Mammals
Two groups of mammals, the marsupials and the placentals, evolved and diversified during the Cenozoic.
The groups differ principally in their modes of reproduction. Young marsupials are born live at a very early

stage of development. At birth, the tiny and immature
young enter the mother’s pouch to suckle and complete
their development. Today, marsupials are found primarily in Australia, where they took a separate evolutionary
path largely isolated from placental mammals. Modern
marsupials include kangaroos, opossums, and koalas
(Figure 22.37).
Figure 22.37
Kangaroos, examples of
marsupial mammals After
the breakup of Pangaea,
the Australian marsupials evolved differently
than their relatives in the
Americas. (Photo by Martin
Harvey/Peter Arnold Inc.)

696

CHAPTER 22

Earth’s Evolution Through Geologic Time

Humans: Mammals with Large Brains
and Bipedal Locomotion

Figure 22.38
Footprints of
Australopithecus, humanlike apes in ash deposits
at Laetoli, Tanzania (Photo
by John Reader/Science Source)

Placental mammals (eutherians), conversely, develop
within the mother’s body for a much longer period, so
birth occurs when the young are comparatively mature.
Members of this group include wolves, elephants, bats,
manatees, and monkeys. Most modern mammals, including humans, are placental.
Figure 22.39
Cave painting of animals
by early humans (Photo courtesy of Sisse Brimberg/National
Geographic Society)

Both fossil and genetic evidence suggest that around
7 or 8 million years ago in Africa, several populations of
anthropoids (informally called apes) diverged. One line
would eventually produce modern apes such as gorillas,
orangutans, and chimpanzees, while the other would
produce several varieties of human ancestors. We have
a good record of this evolution in fossils found in several
sedimentary basins in Africa, in particular the rift valley
system in East Africa.
The genus Australopithecus, which came into existence about 4.2 million years ago, showed skeletal characteristics that were intermediate between our apelike
ancestors and modern humans. Over time, these human
ancestors evolved features that suggest an upright posture and therefore a habit of walking around on two legs
rather than four. Evidence for this bipedal stride includes
footprints preserved in 3.2-million-year-old ash deposits
at Laetoli, Tanzania (Figure 22.38). This new way of moving around is correlated with our human ancestors leaving forest habitat in Africa and moving to open grasslands
for hunting and gathering food.
The earliest fossils of our genus, Homo, include
Homo habilis, nicknamed “handy man” because their
remains were often found with sharp stone tools in
sedimentary deposits from 2.4 to 1.5 million years ago.
Homo habilis had a shorter jaw and a larger brain than
its ancestors. The development of a larger brain size is
thought to be correlated with an increase in tool use.
During the next 1.3 million years, our ancestors
developed substantially larger brains and long slender
legs with hip joints adapted for long-distance walking.
These species (including Homo erectus) ultimately gave

697

22.9 Cenozoic Era: Age of Mammals

Figure 22.40
Mammoths These relatives
of modern elephants were
among the large mammals
that became extinct at the
close of the Ice Age. (Image
courtesy of INTERFOTO/Alamy)

rise to our species, Homo sapiens, as well as to some
extinct related species, including the Neanderthals
(Homo neanderthalis). Despite having the same-sized
brain as present-day humans and being able to fashion
hunting tools from wood and stone, Neanderthals
became extinct about 28,000 years ago. At one time,
Neanderthals were considered a stage in the evolution of
Homo sapiens, but that view has largely been abandoned.
Based on our current understanding, Homo sapiens
originated in Africa about 200,000 years ago and began
to spread around the globe. The oldest-known Homo
sapiens fossils outside of Africa were found in the Middle
East and date back to 115,000 years ago. Humans are
known to have coexisted with Neanderthals and other
prehistoric populations, with remains found in Siberia,
China, and Indonesia. Further, there is mounting genetic
evidence that our ancestors may have interbred with
members of some of these groups.
By 36,000 years ago, humans were producing spectacular cave paintings in Europe (Figure 22.39). About 11,500
years ago, all prehistoric human populations except for
Homo sapiens died out.

Large Mammals and Extinction
During the rapid mammal diversification of the Cenozoic
era, some species became very large. For example, by
the Oligocene epoch, a hornless rhinoceros evolved that
stood nearly 5 meters (16 feet) high. It is the largest land
mammal known to have existed. As time passed, many
other mammals evolved to larger forms—more, in fact,
than now exist. Many of these large forms were common

as recently as 11,000 years ago. However, a wave of late
Pleistocene extinctions rapidly eliminated these animals
from the landscape.
North America experienced the extinction of mastodons and mammoths, both huge relatives of the modern
elephant (Figure 22.40). In addition, saber-toothed cats,
giant beavers, large ground sloths, horses, giant bison, and
others died out. In Europe, late Pleistocene extinctions
included woolly rhinos, large cave bears, and Irish elk.
Scientists remain puzzled about the reasons for this recent
wave of extinctions of large animals. Because these large
animals survived several major glacial advances and interglacial periods, it is difficult to ascribe extinctions of these
animals to climate change. Some scientists hypothesize
that early humans hastened the decline of these mammals
by selectively hunting large forms.

22.9

Concept Checks

1. What animal group became the dominant land
animals of the Cenozoic era?
2. Explain how the demise of the large Mesozoic
reptiles impacted the development of mammals.
3. Where has most of the evidence for the early
evolution of our ancestors been discovered?
4. What two characteristics best separate humans
from other mammals?
5. Describe one hypothesis that explains the
extinction of large mammals in the late
Pleistocene.

23
Energy and
Mineral
Resources

In 2014, renewable energy consumption represented about
10 percent of the U.S. total—a record high. Wind energy is a
fast-growing part of this category. These wind turbines are in
California’s Mojave Desert. (Photo by John W. Warden)

M

aterials that

we extract from Earth are the basis of modern civilization. A high
percentage of the products and substances we use every day were mined from Earth’s
crust and/or manufactured using energy extracted from the crust. We humans consume
huge quantities of energy and mineral resources, and demand continues to grow. In
1960, the world population was 3 billion. In 2015, Earth was home to nearly 7.4 billion
people. By 2025, the planet’s population is expected to approach 8 billion. Improving
living standards in many parts of the world add to resource demand as well.
How long can our remaining resources sustain the rising standard of living in today’s
industrialized countries and still provide for the growing needs of developing regions?
How much environmental deterioration are we willing to accept in pursuit of resources?
Can alternatives be found? If we are to satisfy an increasing per capita demand and a
growing world population, we must understand our resources and their limits.

Renewable and Nonrenewable Resources

23.1

Distinguish between renewable and nonrenewable resources.
_TT84


Resources are commonly divided into two broad categories: renewable and nonrenewable.
Renewable resources can be replenished over relatively short time spans such as months, years, or
decades. Common examples are plants and animals for food, natural fibers for clothing, and trees for
lumber and paper. Energy from flowing water, wind, and the Sun are also considered renewable.
By contrast, nonrenewable resources continue to be
formed in Earth, but the processes that create them are
so slow that significant deposits take millions of years to
accumulate. For human purposes, Earth contains fixed
Figure 23.1
How much do each of us
use? The annual per capita
consumption of nonmetallic
and metallic resources for
the United States is about
11,000 kilograms (12 tons).
About 97 percent of the
materials used are nonmetallic. The per capita use
of oil, coal, and natural gas
exceeds 11,000 kilograms.

Metallic Resources
35 kg (77 lbs)
Aluminum

6 kg (14 lbs)
Lead

11 kg (25 lbs)
Copper

249 kg (553 lbs)
Iron

6 kg (13 lbs)
Manganese

5 kg (11 lbs)
Zinc

9 kg (20 lbs)
Other metals

Nonmetallic Resources

(U.S. Geological Survey)

360 kg (790 lbs)
Cement
5713 kg (12695 lbs)
Stone

4025 kg (8945 lbs)
Sand and gravel

137 kg (304 lbs) 178 kg (395 lbs) 162 kg (361 lbs) 302 kg (672 lbs)
Clays
Salt
Phosphate rock Other nonmetals

quantities of these substances. When the present supplies are mined or pumped from the ground, there will
be no more. Examples are fossil fuels (for example, coal,
oil, natural gas) and many important metals (for example, iron, copper, uranium, gold). Some of these nonrenewable resources, such as aluminum, can be used over
and over again; others, such as oil, cannot be recycled.
Occasionally some resources can be placed in either
category, depending on how they are used. Groundwater is one such example. Where it is pumped from the
ground at a rate that can be replenished, groundwater
can be classified as a renewable resource. However, in
places where groundwater is withdrawn faster than it is
replenished, the water table drops steadily. In this case,
the groundwater is being “mined” just like other nonrenewable resources. The problem of declining water-table
levels is discussed in Chapter 17.
Most of the energy and mineral resources we use
are nonrenewable. How much of these does the average
Energy Resources

3500 kg (7700 lbs)
Petroleum

3700 kg (8140 lbs) 3850 kg (8470 lbs)
Coal
Natural gas

705

23.2 Energy Resources: Fossil Fuels

person in the United States use each year? Figure 23.1
shows the estimated annual per capita consumption of
several important mineral and energy resources. This is
each person’s prorated share of the materials required
by industry to provide the vast array of homes, cars,
electronics, cosmetics, packaging, and so on that modern
society requires. Figures for other highly industrialized
countries, such as Canada, Australia, and several nations
in Western Europe are comparable.

23.2

23.1

Concept Checks

1. Distinguish between renewable and
nonrenewable resources.
2. Are resources such as aluminum, that can be
recycled, considered renewable?
3. Do we use a greater quantity of metallic or
nonmetallic resources?

Energy Resources: Fossil Fuels
Compare and contrast fossil fuel types and describe how each satisfies U.S.
energy consumption.

Earth’s tremendous industrialization over the past two centuries has been fueled—and is still
fueled—by burning coal, petroleum, and natural gas. About 81 percent of the energy consumed in
the United States today comes from these basic sources. Figure 23.2 shows where our energy comes
from and what it is used for. Our reliance on fossil fuels is obvious.
SOURCES OF ENERGY

This number is
the amount of
energy produced
(quadrillion Btu)

USERS OF ENERGY

Petroleum
34.8
(35%)

71
23
4
1

This is the
percentage of
the total for
this category.

92
3
5

38
44
7 11

Natural gas
27.5
(28%)

3

Coal
17.9
(18%)

8<1
91

Renewable energy
9.6 (10%)
Nuclear electric power
8.3 (8%)

34
32
30

13 24
11
52

Transportation
27
(27%)

Industrial
21.4
(25%)

13
77
<1
9

Residential and
commercial
11.3 (12%)

22 1
42
13
22

Electric power
38.5
(39 %)

100

Reading this double graph:
The left side indicates what energy sources we use. The right side shows where we use the energy.
The lines with numbers that connect the graphs provide more details. Use the top line as an example. It shows
that 71% of the petroleum is used by the transportation sector. It also indicates that 92% of the energy used by
the transportation sector is petroleum.

SmartFigure 23.2
U.S. energy consumption,
2014 The total was 98.3
quadrillion Btu (British
thermal units). A quadrillion is 10 raised to the
12th power, or a million
million. A quadrillion Btu is
a convenient unit for referring to U.S. energy use as
a whole. (U.S. Department of
Energy/Energy Information Agency)
(https://goo.gl/6gUJ3J)

706

CHAPTER 23

Energy and Mineral Resources

Coal
Along with oil and natural gas, coal is commonly called
a fossil fuel. This designation is appropriate because
each time we burn coal, we are using energy from the
Sun that was stored by plants many millions of years
ago—so we are indeed burning a “fossil.” A discussion
of coal formation can be found in Chapter 7, pages
225–226.
Coal has been an important fuel for centuries. In
the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, cheap and
plentiful coal powered the Industrial Revolution. By 1900
coal was providing 90 percent of the energy used in the
United States. Although still important, coal currently
accounts for a much smaller proportion of the nation’s
energy needs: about 18 percent.
Until the 1950s, coal was an important domestic
heating fuel as well as a power source for industry. However, its direct use in the home has been largely replaced
by oil, natural gas, and electricity. These fuels are preferred because they are more readily available (delivered
via pipes, tanks, or wiring) and cleaner to use.
Nevertheless, coal remains the major fuel used in
power plants to generate electricity and is therefore indirectly an important source of energy for our homes. An
examination of Figure 23.2 shows that in 2014, 91 percent of the coal use in the United States was for generating electricity. It also shows that coal was the fuel used to
generate 42 percent of U.S. electrical power.
In the decades to come, the percentage of our electricity generated from coal is expected to decrease because
of greater use of natural gas and renewable technologies.
Figure 23.3
Surface coal mine About
65 percent of U.S. coal
production is from surface
mines. Wyoming is by
far the largest producer,
accounting for nearly
40 percent of the coal
mined in the United
States in 2013. This mine
is in Campbell County,
Wyoming. (Photo by David R.
Frazier photography, Inc./Alamy
Images)

However, this does not mean that we will use less coal.
Because overall demand for electricity will increase, the
actual amount of coal used may increase as well. Expanded
coal production is possible because the world has enormous
reserves and the technology to mine coal efficiently. In the
United States, coal fields are widespread and contain supplies that should last for hundreds of years. GEOgraphics
23.1 focuses on coal production in the United States.
Coal is plentiful, but its recovery and use present a
number of challenges. Surface mining can turn the countryside into a scarred wasteland if careful (and costly)
reclamation is not carried out to restore the land. Today
all U.S. surface mines are required to reclaim the land.
Although underground mining does not scar the landscape
to the same degree, it has been costly in terms of human
life and health. Strong federal safety regulations have
made U.S. mining quite safe. However, collapsing roofs,
gas explosions, and the required heavy equipment remain
hazards. Over the years, the share of coal produced from
surface mines has increased significantly, from 51 percent
in 1949 to about 65 percent in 2014 (Figure 23.3).
Burning coal produces emissions that adversely
influence the environment and human health. Principal
emissions resulting from coal combustion include the
following:
r Sulfur dioxide (SO2), which contributes to acid rain
and respiratory illnesses
r Nitrogen oxides (NOx), which contribute to smog and
respiratory illnesses
r Particulate matter, which contributes to smog, haze,
respiratory illnesses, and lung disease
r Carbon dioxide (CO2),
the primary greenhouse
gas produced from the
burning of fossil fuels,
which plays a significant
role in the heating of our
atmosphere (Chapter 21,
“Global Climate Change,”
examines this issue in some
detail.)
The coal industry has found
several ways to reduce sulfur, nitrogen oxides, and
other impurities from coal,
and it has developed more
effective ways of cleaning
coal after it is mined. Coal
consumers have shifted
toward greater use of lesspolluting low-sulfur coal.
Yet significant challenges
remain.

Coal

GEO GRAPHICS 23.1

A Major Energy Source

In 2014 the United States produced nearly 1 billion tons of coal.
It will likely remain a major energy source for many years to come.

Where is coal mined in
the United States?

MT

ND

Glow Images

The top 10 coal-producing states in 2014
(thousands of tons/percentage of total)

WY
PA

WYOMING

IL

Wyoming is far and away the
largest producer of coal in the
United States. With more than
39% of U. S. production,
Wyoming is home to the eight
largest mines in the country.

OH

IN

WV
KY

Wyoming

387,924

39.4%

West Virginia

112,786

11.5%

Kentucky

80,380

8.2%

Pennsylvania

54,009

5.5%

Illinois

52,147

5.3%

Texas

42,851

4.4%

Montana

42,231

4.3%

Indiana

39,102

4.0%

North Dakota

27,639

2.8%

Ohio

25,113

2.5%

TX

Coal fields of the United States
Production by region in millions of tons
(percentage of total)

47%

0.2%
Anthracite coal
has the highest carbon content—86
to 97%. It is relatively rare in the
United States and is more difficult to
mine. All of the mines are in
northeastern Pennsylvania.

alac

Inte

rior

hian

183

270
(

(19
%

27%

)

)

54%
984
(
tern
Wes

Bituminous coal
Coal classified as bituminous has the
widest range of carbon content—45
to 86%. West Virginia leads
production, followed by Kentucky and
Pennsylvania.

Subbituminous coal
is 35 to 45% carbon. Large quantities
occur in thick beds near the surface,
resulting in low mining costs.
Wyoming is the major
source of this type.

)

What type of coal is mined?

7%

App

45%

Average Heat Value
Lignite coal
has a low carbon content of 25 to
35% and therefore the lowest energy
content of the four types. Texas and
North Dakota are the leading
producers.

Anthracite
12,500 Btu/lb

Subbituminous coal
9000 Btu/lb

Bituminous coal
12,000 Btu/lb

Lignite
7000 Btu/lb

Questions:
1. In what state is the most coal mined?
2. What is the primary type of coal mined in that state?

708

CHAPTER 23

Energy and Mineral Resources

Oil and Natural Gas
Together, oil and natural gas provided more than 60
percent of the energy consumed in the United States in
2014. By examining Figure 23.2, you can see that the
transportation sector of the U.S. economy relies almost
totally on petroleum as an energy source. In 2011, natural gas surpassed coal for the first time in more than
30 years as a source of energy in the United States. An
important reason for this is the use of new technologies
that have increased production from shale formations.
Users of natural gas are almost evenly divided among the
three categories other than transportation in Figure 23.2.

Petroleum Formation Petroleum and natural gas
are found in similar environments and frequently occur
together. Both consist of various hydrocarbon compounds
(compounds consisting of hydrogen and carbon mixed
together). They may also contain relatively small quantities of other elements, such as sulfur, nitrogen, and oxygen. Like coal, petroleum and natural gas are biological
products derived from the remains of organisms. However, the environments in which they form are very different, as are the organisms. Coal is formed mostly from
plant material that accumulated in a swampy environment above sea level (see Figure 7.20, page 225), while
oil and gas are derived from the remains of both plants
and animals having a marine origin.
The formation of oil and natural gas begins with the
accumulation of sediment in ocean areas that are rich
in plant and animal remains. These accumulations must
occur where biological activity is high, such as nearshore
areas. However, most marine environments are oxygen
rich, which leads to the decay of organic remains before
Figure 23.4
Drilling for oil Oil accumulates in oil traps that
consist of porous, permeable reservoir rock overlain
by an impermeable cap
rock. (North Sea photo by Peter
Bowater/Photo Researchers, Inc.;
historic photo by Hulton Archive/
Getty Images)

Modern offshore oil production platform
in the North Sea.

they can be buried by other sediments. Therefore, accumulations of oil and gas are not as widespread as are the
marine environments that support abundant biological
activity. This limiting factor notwithstanding, large quantities of organic matter are buried and protected from
oxidation in many offshore sedimentary basins. With
ever-deeper burial over millions of years, chemical reactions gradually transform some of the original organic
matter into the liquid and gaseous hydrocarbons we call
petroleum and natural gas.
Unlike the organic matter from which they formed,
the newly created petroleum and natural gas are mobile.
These fluids are gradually squeezed from the compacting,
mud-rich layers where they originate into adjacent permeable beds such as sandstone, where openings between
sediment grains are larger. Because this occurs underwater, the rock layers containing the oil and gas are saturated
with water. Because oil and gas are less dense than water,
they migrate upward through the water-filled pore spaces
of the enclosing rocks. Unless something halts this upward
migration, the fluids will eventually reach the surface, at
which point the volatile components will evaporate.

Traps for Oil and Gas Sometimes the upward migration of oil and natural gas is halted. A geologic environment that allows for economically significant amounts of
oil and gas to accumulate underground is termed an oil
trap. Several geologic structures may act as oil traps, but
all have two basic conditions in common: a porous, permeable reservoir rock that will yield petroleum and natural
gas in sufficient quantities to make drilling worthwhile,
and a cap rock, such as shale, that is virtually impermeable to oil and gas. The cap rock halts the upwardly
The first successful oil
well was completed by
Edwin Drake (right) on
August 27, 1859, near
Titusville, PA. The oilbearing reservoir rock
was encountered at a
Depth of 21 meters
(69 feet).

709

23.2 Energy Resources: Fossil Fuels

SmartFigure 23.5
Common oil traps

Gas

Cap

Oil

(https://goo.gl/39yDY8)

Well

Well

Reservoir
rock

roc
k

Gas

Water

Cap rock
Oil
Water Reservoir
rock

A. Anticline

B. Fault trap

Well
Well
Oil
Water

Well

Well

Gas
Oil
Salt

Water

C. Salt dome

mobile oil and gas and keeps both from escaping at the
surface (Figure 23.4). Figure 23.5 illustrates some common
oil and natural gas traps, described in the following list:
r Anticline. One of the simplest traps is an anticline,
an uparched series of sedimentary strata (Figure
23.5A). As the strata are bent, the rising oil and gas
collect at the apex (top) of the fold. Because of its
lower density, the natural gas collects above the oil.
Both rest upon the denser water that saturates the
reservoir rock. One of the world’s largest oil fields,
El Nala in Saudi Arabia, is the result of an anticlinal
trap, as is the famous Teapot Dome in Wyoming.
r Fault trap. When strata are displaced in such a
manner as to bring a dipping reservoir rock into
position opposite an impermeable bed, a fault trap
forms, as shown in Figure 23.5B. In this case, the
upward migration of the oil and gas is halted where it
encounters the fault.
r Salt dome. In the Gulf coastal plain region of the
United States, important accumulations of oil occur
in association with salt domes. Such areas have thick
accumulations of sedimentary strata, including layers
of rock salt. Salt occurring at great depths was forced
to rise in columns by the pressure of overlying beds.
These rising salt columns gradually deform the overlying strata. Because oil and gas migrate to the highest
level possible, they accumulate in the upturned sandstone beds adjacent to the salt column (Figure 23.5C).
r Stratigraphic (pinchout) trap. Yet another important geologic circumstance that may lead to
significant accumulations of oil and gas is termed

Cap rock
Reservoir rock

Gas
Oil

Water

D. Stratigraphic (pinchout) trap

a stratigraphic trap. These oil-bearing structures
result primarily from the original pattern of sedimentation rather than structural deformation. The
stratigraphic trap illustrated in Figure 23.5D exists
because a sloping bed of sandstone thins to the point
of disappearance.
How do geologists locate oil traps? Recall from Chapter 12 that changes in the composition or structure of rock
cause seismic waves to reflect off boundaries between layers. This characteristic of waves is especially useful in the
exploration for oil and natural gas, as artificially generated
seismic waves can be used to probe the crust (Figure 23.6).
Oil and natural gas would be much more difficult and
expensive to find without seismic imaging because a huge
number of wells would have to be randomly drilled to locate
oil traps.
The seismic data collected
is used to map oil bearing
geologic structures

Explosive charge used
to generate artificial
seismic waves

Oil
wells
Seismographs

Limestone
Shale acts
as a caprock

Seismic waves reflect
off boundaries between
different layers

Natural gas
Oil
Porous sandstone
(resevoir for oil and gas)

Salt
water

Figure 23.6
Seismic search for oil and
natural gas Reflected
seismic waves are used to
search for underground
reservoirs of oil and natural
gas. The seismic waves
from explosions reflect off
the boundaries between
layers of different composition. Using computer
programs, the data show
the geometry of the strata,
including folds and faults.
Using this information,
geologists map potential
petroleum reservoirs in
Earth’s crust.

710

CHAPTER 23

Energy and Mineral Resources

Figure 23.7

older Paleozoic strata. There is virtually no oil
produced from the most ancient rocks, those of
Precambrian age.

A close-up of oil
sand Notice how solid the
material is. Sometimes the
term tar sand is used to
describe bitumen deposits, but this is inaccurate
because tar is a humanmade substance produced
by distilling organic matter.
Bitumen looks like tar but
is a naturally occurring
substance. (Petter Essick/
Aurora Photos/Alamy Images)

When the lid created by the cap rock is punctured
by drilling, the oil and natural gas, which are under pressure, migrate from the pore spaces of the reservoir rock
to the drill hole. On rare occasions, when fluid pressure
is great, it may force oil up the drill hole to the surface,
causing a “gusher” or oil fountain at the surface. Usually,
however, a pump is required to lift out the oil.
A drill hole is not the only means by which oil and
gas can escape from a trap. Traps can be broken by natural forces. For example, Earth movements may create
fractures that allow the hydrocarbon fluids to escape.
Surface erosion may breach a trap with similar results.
The older the rock strata, the greater the chance that
deformation or erosion has affected a trap. Indeed, not all
ages of rock yield oil and gas in the same proportions. The
greatest production comes from the youngest rocks, those
of Cenozoic age. Older Mesozoic rocks produce considerably less, followed by even smaller yields from the still

ALBERTA
Canada
United
States

SmartFigure 23.8
Alberta’s oil sands Huge oil
reserves occur across more
than 140,000 square kilometers (54,000 square miles)
of northern Alberta. Some
bitumen-rich material can be
mined at the surface, as in the
photo, but most will be pumped
to the surface after injecting the
material with steam. The Mobile
Field Trip explores this unconventional source of oil. (Photo by
Michael Collier) (https://goo.gl/55ZRJX)

Fort McMurray
Edmonton

Calgary

Oil Sands Oil sands are a somewhat unconventional yet significant source of oil that is
likely to become increasingly important in the
decades to come. Unlike the oil that accumulates
in traps, this oil is obtained in a different manner. Oil sands are usually mixtures of clay and
sand combined with water and varying amounts
of a black, highly viscous tar-like material known
as bitumen. The use of the term sand can be
misleading because not all deposits are associated with sands and sandstones. Some occur in
other materials, including shales and limestones.
The oil in these deposits is very similar to heavy crude
oils pumped from wells. The major difference between
conventional oil reservoirs and oil sand deposits is in the
viscosity (resistance to flow) of the oil they contain. In oil
sands, the oil is much more viscous and cannot simply be
pumped out (Figure 23.7).
Substantial oil sand deposits occur in several locations around the world. By far the largest are in the
Canadian province of Alberta (Figure 23.8). Some oil
sands are mined at the surface in a manner similar to
the strip mining of coal. The excavated material is then
heated with pressurized steam until the bitumen softens
and rises. Once collected, the oily material is treated to
remove impurities, and then hydrogen is added. This last
step upgrades the material to a synthetic crude, which
can then be refined. Extracting and refining oil sands
requires a great deal of energy—nearly half as much
as the end product yields! Nevertheless, oil sands from
Alberta’s vast deposits are the source of about 50 percent
of Canada’s oil production. In 2013, nearly 2 million barrels of crude bitumen were produced per day. It is estimated that this amount will reach 3.7 million barrels per
day by 2020 and 5.2 million barrels per day by 2030.

711

23.2 Energy Resources: Fossil Fuels

Figure 23.9

Natural gas flows into storage tanks
Large amounts of water are delivered,
mixed with sand and chemicals and
pumped into the well

Waste water is stored in
an open pit and then
taken to a treatment plant

Stored gas is
sent to market
via pipelines

Pit
1000
2000

Depth in feet

3000
4000
5000
6000
7000

Water table
Well
THE PROCESS
Hydraulic fracturing involves
the injection of water, sand,
and chemicals at high
pressure into a well.

Natural gas and waste water flows
from fractures into well

The pressurized mixture
creates new cracks in the
rock layer. The cracks are
held open by the sand
grains.
When pressure is released,
hydraulic fracturing fluid
(waste water) and natural
gas flow to the surface.

Fractures
Well turns
horizontal

Obtaining oil from oil sand has environmental drawbacks. Substantial land disturbance is associated with
mining huge quantities of rock and sediment. Moreover,
large quantities of water are required for processing, and
when processing is completed, contaminated water and
sediments accumulate in toxic disposal ponds.
About 80 percent of the oil sands in Alberta are
buried too deep for surface mining. Oil from these deep
deposits must be recovered by using in situ (Latin for
“in place”) techniques. Using drilling technology, steam
is injected into the deposit to heat the oil sand, which
reduces the viscosity of the bitumen. The hot, mobile
bitumen migrates toward producing wells, which pump it
to the surface, while the sand is left in place. Production
using in situ techniques already rivals open-pit mining
and in the future will replace mining as the main source
of bitumen production from the oil sands.
Challenges facing in situ processes include increasing the efficiency of oil recovery, managing the water
used to make steam, and reducing the costs of energy
required for the process.

Hydraulic Fracturing In some shale deposits, there are
significant reserves of natural gas that cannot naturally
leave because of the rock’s low permeability. The practice
of hydraulic fracturing (often called fracking) shatters
the shale, opening up cracks through which the natural gas
can flow into wells and then be brought to the surface. Figure 23.9 illustrates the process. The fracturing of the shale
is initiated by pumping fluids into the rock at very high
pressures. The fluid is mostly water but also includes other

chemicals that aid in the fracturing process. Some of these
chemicals may be toxic, and there are concerns about fracking fluids leaking into freshwater aquifers that supply people
with drinking water. The injection fluid also includes sand,
so once fractures open up in the shale, the sand grains can
keep them propped open and permit the gas to continue
to flow. Once the fracturing has been accomplished, the
fracking fluid is brought back to the surface. This wastewater is then injected into deep disposal wells. In some locations, these injections appear to trigger numerous minor
earthquakes. Due to concerns about potential groundwater
contamination and induced seismicity, hydraulic fracturing
remains a controversial practice. Its environmental effects
remain a focus of continuing research.

23.2

Concept Checks

1. Why are coal, oil, and natural gas called
fossil fuels? Do all three form under the same
circumstances?
2. What part of U.S. energy consumption does each
of the fossil fuels represent? Where is most coal
used? How about petroleum?
3. What is an oil trap? Sketch two examples. What
do all oil traps have in common?
4. What are oil sands, and where are they most
plentiful?
5. Describe the circumstances in which hydraulic
fracturing is used.

Hydraulic fracturing
(“fracking”) This wellstimulation process is
commonly used in lowpermeability rocks such as
shale to increase oil and/or
natural gas flow.

712

CHAPTER 23

Energy and Mineral Resources

23.3

Nuclear Energy
Describe the importance of nuclear energy and discuss its pros and cons.

Nuclear energy meets an important part of U.S. energy needs. A glance back at Figure 23.2 shows
that nuclear power was the source of about 8 percent of U.S. energy consumption in 2014. Figure
23.2 also shows that 100 percent of that energy was used to produce electricity. The right side of
Figure 23.2 also shows that 22 percent of U.S. electricity is from nuclear energy.
The fuel for these nuclear power plants comes from
radioactive materials that release energy through the
process of nuclear fission. Fission is accomplished
by bombarding the nuclei of heavy atoms, commonly
uranium-235, with neutrons. This causes the uranium
nuclei to split into smaller nuclei and to emit neutrons
and heat energy. The ejected neutrons, in turn, bombard the nuclei of adjacent uranium atoms, producing
a chain reaction. If the supply of fissionable material
is sufficient and if the reaction is allowed to proceed
in an uncontrolled manner, an enormous amount of
energy is released, in the form of an atomic explosion.
In a nuclear power plant, the fission reaction is controlled by moving neutron-absorbing rods into or out of
the nuclear reactor. The result is a controlled nuclear
chain reaction that releases great amounts of heat. The
heat energy produced is transported from the reactor and
used to drive steam turbines that turn electrical generators, which is similar to what occurs in most conventional
power plants.

Uranium
Uranium-235 is the only naturally occurring isotope that
is readily fissionable, and it is therefore the primary fuel
used in nuclear power plants.* Although large quantities of uranium ore have been discovered, most contain
*Thorium, although not capable by itself of sustaining a chain reaction, can be
used with uranium-235 as a nuclear fuel.

Figure 23.10
Tsunami destroys nuclear
power plant In March
2011, an earthquake and
massive tsunami destroyed
Japan’s Fukushima nuclear
power plant. The event
triggered a reevaluation
of nuclear power in many
countries. (Photo by SSEI KATO/
AFP/Getty Images)

less than 0.05 percent uranium. Of this small amount,
99.3 percent is the nonfissionable isotope uranium-238,
and just 0.7 percent consists of the fissionable isotope
uranium-235. Because most nuclear reactors operate
with fuels that are at least 3 percent uranium-235, the
two isotopes must be separated in order to concentrate
the fissionable uranium-235. The process of separating the uranium isotopes is difficult and substantially
increases the cost of nuclear power generation.
Although uranium is a rare element in Earth’s crust, it
does occur in enriched deposits. Some of the most important occurrences are associated with what are believed to
be ancient placer deposits in streambeds.** For example,
in Witwatersrand, South Africa, grains of uranium ore (as
well as rich gold deposits) were concentrated by virtue of
their high density in rocks made largely of quartz pebbles.
In the United States, the richest uranium deposits are
found in Jurassic and Triassic sandstones in the Colorado
Plateau and in younger rocks in Wyoming. Most of these
deposits have formed through the precipitation of uranium
compounds from groundwater. Here, precipitation of uranium occurs as a result of a chemical reaction with organic
matter, as evidenced by the concentration of uranium in
fossil logs and organic-rich black shales.

Concerns Regarding Nuclear
Development
At one time, nuclear power was heralded as the clean,
cheap source of energy that would
replace fossil fuels. However, several
obstacles have emerged to hinder the
development of nuclear power as a
major energy source. One is the skyrocketing costs of building nuclear facilities that must contain numerous safety
features. There is also concern about
the possibility of a serious accidents.
The March 2011 emergency at
Japan’s Fukushima nuclear power
plant is a recent example (Figure
23.10). A powerful earthquake generated a tsunami that devastated the
coastal zone where the plant was situated. A series of equipment failures,
nuclear meltdowns, and releases of
radioactive materials followed.
**Placer deposits are discussed later in the chapter.

713

23.4 Renewable Energy

It should be emphasized that the concentrations
of fissionable uranium-235 and the design of reactors
are such that nuclear power plants cannot explode like
atomic bombs. The dangers arise from the possible
escape of radioactive debris during a meltdown of the
core or other malfunction. In addition, hazards such
as the disposal of nuclear waste and the relationship
that exists between nuclear energy programs and the
proliferation of nuclear weapons must be considered
when evaluating the pros and cons of nuclear power.
Worldwide, 11 percent of electricity is generated
by nuclear power plants, and the amount is increasing.
Although nuclear power capacity has remained relatively
unchanged in the United States for many years, it continues to grow worldwide. In 2015 more than 430 nuclear
plants were operating worldwide, and another 60 reactors
were under construction, the majority in Asian countries.
_TT85


23.4

Among the benefits, or “pros,” for nuclear energy
is the fact that nuclear power plants do not emit carbon
dioxide—the greenhouse gas that contributes significantly to global warming (see Chapter 21). By contrast,
the generation of electricity from fossil fuels produces
large quantities of carbon dioxide. Thus, substituting
nuclear power for power generated by fossil fuels represents one option for reducing carbon emissions.

23.3

Concept Checks

1. What portion of U.S. energy consumption is
provided by nuclear power?
2. What is the primary fuel used in nuclear power
plants?
3. List some pros and cons of nuclear energy.

Renewable Energy
List and discuss the major sources of renewable energy. Describe the contribution
of renewable energy to the overall U.S. energy supply.

Unlike fossils fuels, which are exhaustible, renewable energy sources regenerate and can be sustained
indefinitely. The use of renewable energy is not new. More than 150 years ago, wood supplied a high
percentage of our energy needs. Today coal, oil, and natural gas dominate, but the use of renewable
forms of energy is on the rise. In 2014 U.S. consumption of renewable energy represented about 10
percent of all energy used (Figure 23.11). About 13 percent of U.S. electricity is generated from renewable sources. The use of renewable fuels has been increasing durTOTAL: 9.6 quadrillion Btu
ing the past 40 years and is expected to continue growing in the
Solar 4%
decades to come. Nevertheless, the U.S. Department of Energy
Geothermal
projects that we will still rely on nonrenewable fuels to meet a
2%
Wind
significant portion of our needs.
18%

Solar Energy

TOTAL: 98.3 quadrillion Btu

The term solar energy generally refers to
the direct use of the Sun’s rays to supply
energy for the needs of people. The simCoal
plest and perhaps most widely used passive
18%
solar collectors are south-facing windows.
Petroleum
As sunlight passes through the glass, its
35%
Renewable
energy is absorbed by objects in the room.
energy 10%
These objects in turn radiate heat that
warms the air.
Nuclear electric
More elaborate systems used for home
Natural gas power 8%
28%
heating involve active solar collectors. These
roof-mounted devices are usually large, blackened boxes that are covered with a transparent material. The heat they collect can be transferred to where
it is needed by circulating air or fluids through pipes.
In Israel, for example, about 80 percent of all homes are
equipped with solar collectors used to provide hot water.
Research is currently under way to improve the
technologies for concentrating sunlight. One method
uses parabolic troughs as solar energy collectors. Each

Biofuels
22%
Biomass
50%

Hydropower
26%

Renewable energy In 2014
renewable energy represented about 10 percent
of U.S. energy consumption. (U.S. Energy Information
Administration)
(https://goo.gl/Le6OGn)

Biomass waste 5%

Wood
23%

SmartFigure 23.11

714

CHAPTER 23

Energy and Mineral Resources

Figure 23.12

receiver end of a Stirling engine. The
internal side of a receiver then heats
hydrogen gas, causing it to expand.
The pressure created by the expanding gas drives a piston, which turns a
small electric generator.

Parabolic troughs
concentrate sunlight
These solar collectors focus
sunlight onto collection
pipes filled with a fluid. The
heat is used to make steam
that drives turbines used to
generate electricity. (Photo by

Wind Energy

Jim West/Alamy Images)

collector resembles a large tube that has been cut in
half. Their highly polished surfaces reflect sunlight onto
a collection pipe (Figure 23.12). A fluid (usually oil) runs
through the pipe and absorbs the concentrated sunlight.
The fluid is heated to over 200°C (400°F) and is typically
used to make steam that drives a turbine to produce
electricity. Parabolic troughs gradually rotate to track
the Sun.
Another type of collector uses photovoltaic (solar) cells
that convert the Sun’s energy directly into electricity (Figure
23.13). Photovoltaic cells are usually connected together to
create solar panels, in which sunlight knocks electrons into
higher energy states to produce electricity. For many years
solar cells were used mainly to power calculators and novelty devices. Today, however, large photovoltaic power stations are connected to electrical grids to supplement other
power-generating facilities. The relatively high cost of solar
cells makes generating electricity from this source more
expensive than conventional sources. However, as the cost
of fossil fuels increases, advances in photovoltaic technology should narrow the price difference.
Another technology that is being developed, called
the Stirling dish, converts thermal energy to electricity by using a mirror array to focus the Sun’s rays on the
Figure 23.13
Photovoltaic (solar)
cells Photovoltaic cells
turn solar radiation directly
into electricity. The
desert Southwest, with
its generally cloud-free
skies, has the greatest
potential for solar energy
development. (Map data

Photovoltaic Solar
Resource Potential of
the United States

from National Renewable Energy
Laboratory; photo by Andrei Orlov/
Shutterstock)
kWh/m2/Day
<6.8 6.0

5.0

4.0

3.0 >2.2

Air has mass, and when it moves (that
is, when the wind blows), it contains
the energy of that motion—kinetic
energy. A portion of that energy can
be converted into other forms—
mechanical force or electricity—that
we can use to perform work.
Mechanical energy from wind is
commonly used for pumping water in
rural or remote places. The “farm windmill,” still a familiar sight in many rural areas, is an example. Mechanical
energy converted from wind can also be used for other
purposes, such as sawing logs, grinding grain, and propelling sailboats. In addition, wind-powered electric turbines generate electricity for homes and businesses and
for sale to utilities (see chapter-opening photo).
Today, modern wind turbines are being installed at
breakneck speed. In fact, worldwide, the installed wind
power capacity was nearly 370,000 megawatts (million
watts; MW) in 2014, an increase of more than 85 percent
over 2010 (Figure 23.14).* China has the greatest installed
capacity (more than 114,000 megawatts in 2014), followed
by the United States (about 66,000 megawatts in 2014).
According to the World Wind Energy Association, wind
turbines were supplying about 3 percent of worldwide
electricity demand at the beginning of 2015.
Wind speed is crucial in determining whether a
place is a suitable site for installing a wind-energy facility. Generally a minimum average wind speed of 21
kilometers (13 miles) per hour (or 6 meters per second)
is necessary for a large-scale wind-power plant to be
profitable. A small difference in wind speed results in a
large difference in energy production and, therefore, a
large difference in the cost
of the electricity generated. For example, a turbine
operating on a site with an
average wind speed of 19.3
kilometers (12 miles) per
hour would generate about
33 percent more electricity
than one operating at 17.7
kilometers (11 miles) per
hour. Also, there is little
energy to be harvested at
low wind speeds; air moving
*One megawatt is enough electricity
to supply 250–300 average American
households.

715

23.4 Renewable Energy

MW (Megawatt = 1 million watts)

at 9.6 kilometers (6 miles)
400,000
per hour contains less than
369,597
350,000
one-eighth the energy of air
318,644
moving at twice that speed.
300,000
283,132
Although the modern
238,435
250,000
U.S. wind industry began
in California, many states
197,943
200,000
have greater wind potential.
159,079
150,000
Figure 23.15 shows the esti120,715
mated average wind speeds
93,901
100,000
73,949
at a height of 80 meters
59,091
39,431 47,620
50,000
(260 feet) above the sur31,100
17,400 23,900
face—the level where most
0
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
commercial wind turbines
rotate. Areas with averby waterwheels has been used to power mills and other
age wind speeds greater than about 6 meters per second
machinery. Today, the power generated by falling water
(13 miles per hour) are considered to have potential for
development. At the end of 2014, Texas (14,208 MW) had is used to drive turbines that produce electricity, hence
the term hydroelectric power. In the United States,
the most installed wind capacity, followed by California
hydroelectric power plants satisfied about 7 percent of the
(5,914 MW), Iowa (5,708 MW), Oklahoma (3,782 MW),
country’s demand in 2014. Most of this energy is produced
and Illinois (3,568 MW).
at large dams, which allow for a controlled flow of water
Compared to burning fossil fuels to generate electricity, wind power produces little impact in terms of pol- (Figure 23.16). The water impounded in a reservoir is a form
lution. However, there are other problems related to wind of stored energy that can be released at any time to produce electricity.
energy, most of which are local. One of the most critical
Although water power is considered a renewable
is bird kills, because birds occasionally collide with wind
resource, the dams built to provide hydroelectricity have
turbines. Land erosion caused by improper installation,
finite lifetimes. Recall from Chapter 16 that all rivers
noise, and visual impact are also cited as potential envicarry suspended sediment, which is deposited behind
ronmental issues.
the dam as soon as it is built. Eventually sediment may
The U.S. Department of Energy currently provides
completely fill the reservoir. This takes 50 to 300 years,
funds to develop offshore wind technologies. Offshore
depending on the quantity of suspended material transwinds are stronger and blow more consistently than
ported by the river. An example is Egypt’s huge Aswan
winds over land. Data suggest that more than 4 million
High Dam, which was completed in the 1960s. It is estimegawatts of capacity is available on public land along
mated that half of the reservoir will be filled with sedithe coasts of the United States. This is four times more
ment from the Nile River by 2025.
than the country’s total electrical-generating capacity.
The availability of appropriate sites is an imporAlthough only a small fraction of U.S. electricity curtant limiting factor in the development of large-scale
rently generated comes from wind energy, the Department of Energy’s goal is to obtain
20 percent of U.S. electricity
from wind by 2030, with 4 perAnnual Average Wind Speed at 80 meters
cent of that amount anticipated
from offshore wind farms. This
target seems consistent with
the current growth rate of wind
energy nationwide. Thus, windWind
WindSpeed
Speed
generated electricity appears to
m/s
m/s
be shifting from being an alter>10.5
10.0
native to being a mainstream
9.5
9.0
energy source.

Hydroelectric Power
Falling water has been an energy
source for centuries. Through
much of human history, the
mechanical energy produced

8.5
8.0
7.5
7.0
6.5
6.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
4.0
<4.0

Figure 23.14
Global cumulative
installed wind capacity,
2000–2014

Figure 23.15
Wind energy potential for
the United States Large
wind systems require average wind speeds of about
6 meters per second (13
miles per hour). (Map data
from National Renewable Energy
Laboratory)

716

CHAPTER 23

Energy and Mineral Resources

Figure 23.16
Grand Coulee Dam More
than one-half of U.S. hydroelectric capacity is concentrated in Washington,
Oregon, and California. In
2014 about 29 percent of
the total hydropower was
generated in Washington,
the location of the nation’s
largest hydroelectric facility—Grand Coulee Dam.
(Photo by Science Source)

hydroelectric power plants. A good site provides a significant height for the water to fall and a high rate of flow.
Hydroelectric dams exist in many parts of the United
States, with the greatest concentrations occurring in
the Southeast and the Pacific Northwest. Most of the
best U.S. sites have already been developed, limiting the
Figure 23.17
Geothermal development
in Iceland Geothermal
sources account for 66
percent of Iceland’s primary
energy use. Much is used
directly for space heating—9 of 10 homes are
heated this way. About
25 percent of Iceland’s
electricity is generated by
geothermal sources. (Photo
by Simon Fraser/Science Photo
Library/Photo Researchers, Inc.)

Because the entire country consists of geologically
young volcanic rocks, warm water can be encountered in holes drilled almost anywhere.
_TT86


Krafla

ICELAND

Reykjavik

Geysir
Hengill

Grindavik
0
0

Key

100 km
50 mi

future expansion of hydroelectric
power. The total power produced
by hydroelectric sources might
still increase, but the relative share
provided by this source will likely
decline because other alternate
energy sources will increase at a
faster rate.
In recent years, a different type
of hydroelectric power production
has come into use. Called a pumped
water-storage system, it is actually a
type of energy management. During
times when demand for electricity is
low, unneeded power produced by
nonhydroelectric sources is used to
pump water from a lower reservoir
to a storage area at a higher elevation. Then, when demand for electricity is great, the water stored in the higher reservoir
is available to drive turbines and produce electricity to
supplement the power supply.

Geothermal Energy
Geothermal energy is harnessed by tapping natural
underground reservoirs of steam and hot water. These
occur where subsurface temperatures are high, due to
relatively recent volcanic activity or nearby magma chambers. Geothermal energy is put to use in two ways: The
steam and hot water are used for heating and to generate
electricity.
Iceland is a large volcanic island with current volcanic activity (Figure 23.17). In Iceland’s capital, Reykjavik,
underground steam and hot water are pumped into
buildings throughout the city for space heating. They
also warm greenhouses, where fruits and vegetables are
grown all year. In the United States, localities in several
western states use hot water from geothermal sources for
space heating.

Hydrothermal system greater than 150° C
Zone of rifting and volcanism

Greenland

Iceland
North
America

Mid-Atlantic
Ridge

Europe

Iceland straddles the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. This
divergent plate boundary is the site of numerous
active volcanoes and geothermal systems.

The steam at this power station in southwestern
Iceland is used to generate electricity. Hot (83°C)
water from the plant is sent via an insulated pipeline
to Reykjavik for space heating.

717

23.4 Renewable Energy

Figure 23.18

The Italians began generating electricity geothermally in 1904, so the idea is not new. In 2014, 24 countries produced more than 12,800 megawatts of power
this way. The United States was the leading producer,
responsible for more than 25 percent of the total. Nevertheless, geothermal power represents just 0.4 percent
(four-tenths of 1 percent) of U.S. electric power.
The first commercial geothermal power plant in the
United States was built in 1960 at The Geysers, north
of San Francisco (Figure 23.18). The Geysers remains the
world’s largest geothermal power plant, generating nearly
1000 megawatts annually. In addition to The Geysers,
geothermal development is occurring elsewhere in the
western United States, including Nevada, Utah, and the
Imperial Valley in southern California. The U.S. geothermal generating capacity in 2014 of 3525 megawatts
is enough to supply more than 3 million homes. This is
comparable to burning about 70 million barrels of oil
each year.
The following geologic factors favor a geothermal
reservoir of commercial value:
r A potent source of heat, such as a large magma
chamber deep enough to ensure adequate pressure
and slow cooling but not so deep that the natural
water circulation is inhibited. Such magma chambers
are most likely in regions of recent volcanic activity.
r Large and porous reservoirs with channels connected to the heat source, near which water can circulate and then be stored in the reservoir.
r A cap of low-permeability rocks that inhibits the
flow of water and heat to the surface. A deep, wellinsulated reservoir contains much more stored energy than a similar but uninsulated reservoir.
As with other alternative methods of power production, geothermal sources are not expected to provide a
high percentage of the world’s growing energy needs.

E Y E ON E A R T H

23.1

L

ake Powell is the reservoir that was created when
Glen Canyon Dam was built across the Colorado
River. As water in the lake is released, it drives
turbines and produces electricity. (Photo by Michael Collier)
QUESTION 1 What term is applied to the energy
generated at Glen Canyon Dam?
QUESTION 2 Is this energy considered renewable or
nonrenewable?
QUESTION 3 Explain why most dams and reservoirs do
not last indefinitely.

The Geysers This facility,
near the city of Santa Rosa
in northern California, is the
world’s largest electricitygenerating geothermal
development. Most of the
steam wells are about
3000 meters (10,000
feet) deep. California’s 35
geothermal power plants
were responsible for 80
percent of U.S. geothermal
power production in 2014.
(Kim Steele/Getty Images)

Nevertheless, in regions where its potential can be developed, the use of geothermal energy will continue to grow.

Biomass: Renewable Energy from
Plants and Animals
Biomass is organic material made from plants and animals. It is a renewable energy source because we can
always grow more trees and crops, and waste will always
exist. Some examples of biomass fuels are wood, crops,
manure, and some garbage. When burned, the chemical energy in biomass is released as heat. A common
example is burning a log in a wood stove or fireplace.
Wood and garbage can be burned to produce steam for
generating electricity or to provide heat to industries
and homes.

718

CHAPTER 23

Energy and Mineral Resources

Figure 23.19
Tidal power A. Simplified
diagram showing the
principle of the tidal dam.
Electricity is generated
only when a sufficient
water-height difference
exists between the bay and
the ocean. B. Tidal power
plant at Annapolis Royal,
Nova Scotia, on the Bay
of Fundy. (Photo by James P.

High tide

Bay at high tide

Dam
Current

Blair/National Geographic Image
Collection)

Power
generation
A.

B.
Impounded water

Low tide

Burning biomass is not the only way to release its
energy. Biomass can be converted to other usable forms
of energy, such as methane gas, or transportation fuels,
such as ethanol and biodiesel. In 2014, biomass fuels provided about 4.8 percent of the energy used in the United
States. Primary sources of biomass energy are as follows:
r Wood biomass includes wood chips from forestry
operations, residues from lumber, pulp/paper, and
furniture mills, and fuel wood for space heating. The
largest single source of wood energy is “black liquor,”
a residue of pulp, paper, and paperboard production.
r Biofuels include alcohol fuels such as ethanol, and
“biodiesel,” a fuel from grain oils and animal fats.
Most biofuel used in the United States is ethanol
produced from corn.
r Municipal waste contains biomass such as paper,
cardboard, food scraps, grass clippings, and leaves.
Waste can be recycled, composted, sent to landfills, or
used in waste-to-energy plants. There are hundreds
of landfills in the United States that recover biogas,
which is methane that forms when waste matter decomposes in low-oxygen (anaerobic) conditions. The
methane is burned to produce electricity and heat.

Tidal Power
Several methods of generating electrical energy from
the oceans have been proposed, but the ocean’s energy
potential remains largely untapped. The development of
tidal power is the principal example of energy production
from the ocean.
Tides have been used as a source of power for centuries. Beginning in the twelfth century, waterwheels
driven by the tides were used to power gristmills and
sawmills. During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, much of Boston’s flour was produced at a tidal mill.
Today far greater energy demands must be satisfied, and
more sophisticated ways of using the force created by the
perpetual rise and fall of the ocean must be employed.

Tidal power is harnessed by constructing a dam across
the mouth of a bay or an estuary in a coastal area having
a large tidal range (Figure 23.19A). The narrow opening
between the bay and the open ocean magnifies the variations in water level that occur as the tides rise and fall. The
strong in-and-out flow that results at such a site is then
used to drive turbines and electrical generators.
Tidal energy utilization is exemplified by the tidal
power plant at the mouth of the Rance River in France. By
far the largest yet constructed, this plant went into operation
in 1966 and produces enough power to satisfy the needs
of Brittany and also meet the demands of other regions.
Much smaller experimental facilities have been built near
Murmansk in Russia, near Taliang in China, and on the
Annapolis River estuary, an arm of the Bay of Fundy in the
Canadian province of Nova Scotia (Figure 23.19B).
Along most of the world’s coasts, it is not possible
to harness tidal energy. If the tidal range is less than 8
meters (25 feet), or if narrow, enclosed bays are absent,
tidal power development is not economically feasible.
For this reason, the tides will never provide a very high
portion of our ever-increasing electrical energy requirements. Nevertheless, the development of tidal power may
be worth pursuing at feasible sites because electricity
produced by the tides consumes no exhaustible fuels and
creates no noxious wastes.

23.4

Concept Checks

1. How important is renewable energy to the overall
U.S. energy supply?
2. What is the greatest use of renewable energy?
3. Describe two ways in which solar energy is used
to produce electricity.
4. Which has had the more rapid rate of growth rate
in the United States in recent years: wind power
or hydroelectric power?
5. What is biomass? List four examples.
6. Where in the United States is hydroelectric power
development most concentrated? How about
geothermal power development?

23.5 Mineral Resources

E Y E ON E A R T H

23.2

T

his image shows an active landfill where
tons of trash and garbage are dumped every
day. Eventually this site will be reclaimed
to resemble the area shown on the right and will
become a source of energy. (Left Photo by NHPA/
SuperStock; Right Photo by Jim West/Alamy Images)

QUESTION 1 Explain how an area filled with trash
and waste could become a source of energy. What
form of energy will it be? How might it be used?
QUESTION 2 Will this energy be considered
renewable or nonrenewable? Explain.

23.5

Mineral Resources
Distinguish among resource, reserve, and ore.

Earth’s crust is the source of a wide variety of useful and essential substances. In fact, practically
every manufactured product contains substances derived from minerals. Table 23.1 lists some important examples.
TABLE 23.1
Metal

Occurrence of Metallic Minerals
Principal Ores

Geologic Occurrences

Aluminum

Bauxite

Residual product of weathering

Chromium

Chromite

Magmatic differentiation

Copper

Chalcopyrite

Hydrothermal deposits; contact metamorphism; enrichment by weathering processes

Bornite
Chalcocite
Gold

Native gold

Hydrothermal deposits; placers

Iron

Hematite

Banded sedimentary formations; magmatic differentiation

Magnetite
Limonite
Lead

Galena

Hydrothermal deposits

Magnesium

Magnesite

Hydrothermal deposits

Dolomite
Manganese

Pyrolusite

Residual product of weathering

Mercury

Cinnabar

Hydrothermal deposits

Molybdenum

Molybdenite

Hydrothermal deposits

Nickel

Pentlandite

Magmatic differentiation

Platinum

Native platinum

Magmatic differentiation; placers

Silver

Native silver

Hydrothermal deposits; enrichment by weathering processes

Argentite
Tin

Cassiterite

Hydrothermal deposits; placers

Titanium

Ilmenite

Magmatic differentiation; placers

Tungsten

Wolframite

Rutile
Pegmatites; contact metamorphic deposits; placers

Scheelite
Uranium

Uraninite (pitchblende)

Pegmatites; sedimentary deposits

Zinc

Sphalerite

Hydrothermal deposits

719

720

CHAPTER 23

Energy and Mineral Resources

Figure 23.20
Most abundant elements
in the continental crust
More than 98 percent of
the continental crust is
composed of just eight
elements. The concentration of many elements
that are important mineral
resources is part of the
“others” category on the
graph.

Oxygen (O)
46.6%

Silicon (Si)
27.7%

Aluminum
(Al)
8.1%
Iron (Fe)
5.0%

Others
1.5%

Calcium (Ca)
3.6%
Sodium (Na)
Potassium (K)
2.6%
Magnesium (Mg) 2.8%
2.1%

Mineral resources are the endowment of useful minerals ultimately available commercially. Resources include
already identified deposits from which minerals can be
extracted profitably, called reserves, as well as known
deposits that are not yet economically or technologically
recoverable. Deposits inferred to exist but not yet discovered are also considered mineral resources. In addition,
the term ore is used to denote useful metallic minerals
that can be mined at a profit. In common usage, the term
ore is also applied to some nonmetallic minerals, such as
fluorite and sulfur. However, materials used for such purposes as building stone, road aggregate, abrasives, ceramics, and fertilizers are not usually called ores; rather, they
are classified as industrial rocks and minerals.
Recall from Chapter 3 that more than 98 percent of
the continental crust is composed of only eight elements.
Figure 23.21
Utah’s Bingham Canyon
copper mine This is one of
the largest open-pit mines
in the world. This huge
hole is nearly 4 kilometers
(2.5 miles) across and 900
meters (3000 feet) deep.
Although the amount of
copper in the rock is less
than 0.5 percent, the huge
volume of material removed
each day yields enough
metal to be profitable. In
addition to copper, the
mine produces gold, silver,
and molybdenum. (Photo by
Michael Collier)

Except for oxygen and silicon, all other elements make
up a relatively small fraction of common crustal rocks
(Figure 23.20). Indeed, the natural concentrations of many
elements are exceedingly small. A deposit containing the
average percentage of a valuable element is worthless if
the cost of extracting it exceeds the value of the material
recovered. To be considered valuable, an element must
be concentrated above the level of its average crustal
abundance. Generally, the lower the crustal abundance,
the greater the concentration.
For example, copper makes up about 0.0135 percent
of the crust. However, for a material to be considered a
copper ore, it must contain a concentration that is about
50 times this amount. Aluminum, in contrast, represents
8.13 percent of the crust and must be concentrated to
only about four times its average crustal percentage
before it can be extracted profitably.
It is important to realize that a deposit may
become profitable to extract or lose its profitability
because of economic changes. If demand for a metal
increases and prices rise, the status of a previously
unprofitable deposit changes, and it becomes an ore.
The status of unprofitable deposits may also change if a
technological advance allows the useful element to be
extracted at a lower cost than before. This occurred at
the copper-mining operation located at Bingham Canyon, Utah, one of the largest open-pit mines on Earth
(Figure 23.21). Mining was halted here in 1985 because
outmoded equipment had driven up the cost of extracting the copper beyond the selling price. The owners
responded by replacing an antiquated 1000-car railroad
with conveyor belts and pipelines for transporting the
ore and waste. These devices achieved a cost reduction

721

23.6 Igneous and Metamorphic Processes

of nearly 30 percent and returned this mining operation to profitability.
Over the years, geologists have been keenly interested in learning how natural processes produce localized concentrations of essential metallic minerals. One
well-established fact is that occurrences of valuable
mineral resources are closely related to the rock cycle.
That is, the mechanisms that generate igneous, sedimentary, and metamorphic rocks, including the processes of
weathering and erosion, play a major role in producing

23.6

concentrated accumulations of useful elements. Moreover, with the development of plate tectonics theory,
geologists added yet another tool for understanding the
processes by which one rock is transformed into another.

23.5

Concept Checks

1. Contrast resource and reserve.
2. What is an ore?

Igneous and Metamorphic Processes
Explain how different igneous and metamorphic processes produce economically
significant mineral deposits.

Some of the most important accumulations of metals, such as gold, silver, copper, mercury, lead,
platinum, and nickel, are produced by igneous and metamorphic processes (see Table 23.1). These
mineral resources, like most others, result from processes that concentrate desirable materials to
the extent that extraction is economically feasible.

Magmatic Differentiation and Ore
Deposits
The igneous processes that generate some metal deposits
are quite straightforward. For example, as a large magma
body cools, the heavy minerals that crystallize early tend
to settle to the lower portion of the magma chamber
(crystal settling). This type of magmatic differentiation
(see Figure 4.22, page 126) is particularly active in large
basaltic magmas where chromite (ore of chromium),
magnetite, and platinum are occasionally generated. Layers of chromite, interbedded with other heavy minerals,
are mined from such deposits in the Stillwater Complex
of Montana. Another example is the Bushveld Complex
in South Africa, which contains over 70 percent of the
world’s known reserves of platinum.

Pegmatite Deposits Magmatic differentiation
is important in the late stages of the magmatic process. This is particularly true of granitic magmas,
in which the residual melt can become enriched in
rare elements and heavy metals. Further, because
water and other volatile substances do not crystallize along with the bulk of the magma body, these
fluids make up a high percentage of the melt during the final phase of solidification. Crystallization
in a fluid-rich environment, where ion migration is
enhanced, results in the formation of crystals several centimeters, or even a few meters, in length.
The resulting rocks, called pegmatites, are composed of these unusually large crystals.
Most pegmatites are granitic in composition
and consist of unusually large crystals of quartz,

feldspar, and muscovite. Feldspar is used in the production of ceramics, and muscovite is used for electrical
insulation and glitter. Further, pegmatites often contain
some of the least abundant elements. Thus, in addition to
the common silicates, some pegmatites include semiprecious gems such as beryl, topaz, and tourmaline. Moreover, minerals containing the elements lithium, cesium,
uranium, and the rare earths* are occasionally found
(Figure 23.22). Most pegmatites are located within large
igneous masses or as dikes or veins that cut into the host
rock surrounding the magma chamber (Figure 23.23).
*The rare earths are a group of 15 elements (atomic numbers 57 through 71)
that possess similar properties. They are useful catalysts in petroleum refining
and are used to manufacture strong magnets for turbines and rechargeable
batteries for cell phones and computers.

Figure 23.22
Pegmatites This pegmatite
in the Black Hills of South
Dakota was mined for its
large crystals of spodumene, an important source
of lithium. Arrows are pointing to impressions left by
crystals. Note the person
in the upper center of the
photo for scale. (Photo by
James G. Kirchner)

722

CHAPTER 23

Energy and Mineral Resources

SmartFigure 23.23
Pegmatites and hydrothermal deposits Illustration of the relationship between
an igneous body and associated pegmatites and hydrothermal mineral deposits.

Geyser

(Photo by Greenshoots Communications/Alamy)
(https://goo.gl/AUDiZv)

Fault
Hydrothermal
disseminated
deposits

Hydrothermal
vein
deposits

Pegmatite
deposits

Magma
chamber

Not all late-stage magmas produce pegmatites, nor
do all have a granitic composition. Rather, some magmas
become enriched in iron or occasionally copper. For
example, at Kiruna, Sweden, magma composed of more
than 60 percent magnetite solidified to produce one of
the largest iron deposits in the world.

Hydrothermal Deposits
Among the best-known and most important ore deposits are those generated from hot, ion-rich fluids called
hydrothermal (hot-water) solutions. Included in this
group are the gold deposits of the Homestake Mine in
South Dakota; the lead, zinc, and silver ores near Coeur
d’Alene, Idaho; the silver deposits of the Comstock Lode
in Nevada; and the copper ores of the Keweenaw Peninsula in Michigan (Figure 23.24).

Figure 23.24
Native copper This nearly
pure metal from northern
Michigan’s Keweenaw
Peninsula is an excellent
example of a hydrothermal
deposit. At one time this
area was an important
source of copper, but it is
now largely depleted. (Photo
by E. J. Tarbuck)

Magma
chamber

High-grade gold ore
deposit in a quartz vein

Hydrothermal Vein Deposits The majority of hydrothermal deposits originate from hot, metal-rich fluids
that are remnants of late-stage magmatic processes.
During solidification, liquids plus various metallic
ions accumulate near the top of the magma chamber.
Because of their mobility, these ion-rich solutions can
migrate great distances through the surrounding rock
before they are eventually deposited, usually as sulfides of various metals. Some of this fluid moves along
openings such as fractures or bedding planes, where it
cools and precipitates the metallic ions to produce vein
deposits (see photo in Figure 23.23). Many of the most
productive deposits of gold, silver, and mercury occur as
hydrothermal vein deposits.

Disseminated Deposits Another important type
of accumulation generated by hydrothermal activity
is called a disseminated deposit. Rather than being
concentrated in narrow veins and dikes, these ores are
distributed as minute masses throughout the entire rock
mass. Much of the world’s copper is extracted from disseminated deposits, including those at Chuquicamata,
Chile, and the huge Bingham Canyon copper mine in
Utah (see Figure 23.21). Because these accumulations
contain only 0.4 to 0.8 percent copper, between 125 and
250 kilograms of ore must be mined for every 1 kilogram
of metal recovered. The environmental impact of these
large excavations, including the problem of waste disposal, is significant.
Some hydrothermal deposits have been generated
by the circulation of ordinary groundwater in regions
where magma was emplaced near the surface. The Yellowstone National Park area is a modern example of

23.6 Igneous and Metamorphic Processes

Figure 23.25

Hot, mineral-rich
water rises to
the seafloor

Black
smoker

Cold seawater
percolates into
the hot newly
formed crust

Black smoker
spewing hot,
mineral-rich
seawater

Sulfide deposits along a mid-ocean ridge Massive sulfide
deposits can result from the circulation of seawater through
the oceanic crust along active spreading centers. As seawater
infiltrates the hot basaltic crust, it leaches sulfur, iron, copper,
and other metals. The hot, enriched fluid returns to the
seafloor near the ridge axis along faults and fractures. Some
metal sulfides may be precipitated in these channels as the
rising fluid begins to cool. When the hot liquid emerges from
the seafloor and mixes with cold seawater, the sulfides precipitate to form massive deposits. Photo shows a close-up view of
a black smoker spewing hot, mineral-rich seawater along the
East Pacific Rise. (Photo by Fisheries and Oceans Canada/Uvic-Verena
Tunnicliffe/Newscom)

Mid-ocean ridge

such a situation. When groundwater invades a zone of
recent igneous activity, its temperature rises, greatly
enhancing its ability to dissolve minerals. These migrating hot waters remove metallic ions from intrusive igneous rocks and carry them upward, where they may be
deposited as an ore body. Depending on the conditions,
the resulting accumulations may occur as vein deposits,
as disseminated deposits, or, where hydrothermal solutions reach the surface in the form of hot springs or geysers, as surface deposits.

Hydrothermal Activity at Oceanic Ridges With the
development of plate tectonics theory, it became clear
that some hydrothermal deposits originated along ancient
oceanic ridges. A well-known example is found on the
island of Cyprus, where copper has been mined for more
than 4000 years. Apparently, these deposits represent
ores that formed on the seafloor at an ancient oceanic
spreading center.
Since the mid-1970s, active hot springs and metalrich sulfide deposits have been detected at several sites,
including study areas along the East Pacific Rise and the
Juan de Fuca Ridge. The deposits form where heated
seawater, rich in dissolved metals and sulfur, gushes
from the seafloor as particle-filled clouds called black
smokers. As shown in Figure 23.25, seawater infiltrates
the hot oceanic crust along the flanks of the ridge. As
the water moves through the newly formed material, it is
heated and chemically interacts with the basalt, extracting and transporting sulfur, iron, copper, and other metals. Near the ridge axis, the hot, metal-rich fluid rises
along faults. Upon reaching the seafloor, the spewing
liquid mixes with the cold seawater, and the sulfides precipitate to form massive sulfide deposits.

723

Origin of Diamonds
Another economically important mineral with an igneous origin is diamond. Although best known as gems,
diamonds are used extensively as abrasives. Diamonds
originate at depths of nearly 200 kilometers (125 miles),
where the confining pressure is great enough to generate this high-pressure form of carbon. Once crystallized,
the diamonds are carried upward through pipe-shaped
conduits that increase in diameter toward the surface.
In diamond-bearing pipes, nearly the entire pipe contains diamond crystals that are disseminated throughout an ultramafic rock called kimberlite. The most
productive kimberlite pipes are found in South Africa.
The only equivalent source of diamonds in the United
States is located near Murfreesboro, Arkansas, but this
deposit is exhausted and today serves merely as a tourist
attraction.

Metamorphic Processes
The role of metamorphism in producing mineral deposits is frequently tied to igneous processes. For example,
many of the most important metamorphic ore deposits
are produced by contact metamorphism. Here the
host rock is recrystallized and chemically altered by
heat, pressure, and hydrothermal solutions emanating
from an intruding igneous body. The extent to which
the host rock is altered depends on the nature of the
intruding igneous mass as well as the nature of the host
rock.
Some resistant materials, such as quartz sandstone,
may show very little alteration, whereas others, including
limestone, might exhibit the effects of metamorphism for

724

CHAPTER 23

Energy and Mineral Resources

several kilometers from the igneous pluton. As hot, ionrich fluids move through limestone, chemical reactions
take place, producing useful minerals such as garnet
and corundum. Further, these reactions release carbon
dioxide, which greatly facilitates the outward migration
of metallic ions. Thus, extensive aureoles of metal-rich
deposits commonly surround igneous plutons that have
invaded limestone strata.
The most common metallic minerals associated
with contact metamorphism are sphalerite (zinc), galena
(lead), chalcopyrite (copper), magnetite (iron), and
bornite (copper). The hydrothermal ore deposits may
be disseminated throughout the altered zone or exist as
concentrated masses that are located either next to the
intrusive body or along the margins of the metamorphic
zone.
Regional metamorphism can also generate useful mineral deposits. Recall that at convergent plate

23.7

boundaries, the oceanic crust and sediments that have
accumulated at the continental margins are carried to
great depths. In these high-temperature, high-pressure
environments, the mineralogy and texture of the subducted materials are altered, producing deposits of nonmetallic minerals such as talc and graphite.

23.6

Concept Checks

1. Describe two examples of mineral resources
associated with magmatic differentiation.
2. What are hydrothermal deposits? List two general
types.
3. Describe the process at oceanic ridges that
produces sulfide ore deposits.
4. Relate ore deposits to contact metamorphism.

Mineral Resources Related to Surface Processes
Discuss ways in which surface processes produce ore deposits.

The preceding discussion focused on mineral resources that are closely linked to igneous activity
and metamorphism. In this section, we look at examples of metallic mineral resources that accumulate as a result of surface processes.

Weathering and Ore Deposits
Weathering creates many important mineral deposits by
concentrating minor amounts of metals that are scattered
through unweathered rock into economically valuable
concentrations. Such a transformation is often termed
secondary enrichment, and it takes place in one of
two ways. In one situation, chemical weathering coupled
with downward-percolating water removes undesirable
materials from decomposing rock, leaving the desirable
elements enriched in the upper zones of the soil. The
Figure 23.26
Bauxite This ore of aluminum forms as a result
of weathering processes
under tropical conditions.
Its color varies from red
or brown to nearly white.
(Photo by E. J. Tarbuck)

second way is basically the reverse of the first. That is,
the desirable elements that are found in low concentrations near the surface are removed and carried to lower
zones, where they are redeposited and become more
concentrated.

Bauxite Bauxite, the principal ore of aluminum, is
one important example of an ore created as a result
of enrichment by weathering processes (Figure 23.26).
Although aluminum is the third-most-abundant element
in Earth’s crust, economically valuable concentrations
of this important metal are not common because most
aluminum is tied up in silicate minerals, from which it is
extremely difficult to extract.
Bauxite forms in rainy tropical climates, in association with the deeply weathered soils known as laterites.
(In fact, bauxite is sometimes called aluminum laterite.)
When aluminum-rich source rocks are subjected to the
intense and prolonged chemical weathering of the tropics, most of the common elements, including calcium,
sodium, and silicon, are removed by leaching. Because
aluminum is extremely insoluble, it becomes concentrated in the soil as bauxite, a hydrated aluminum oxide.
Thus, the formation of bauxite depends both on climatic
conditions in which chemical weathering and leaching
are pronounced and on the presence of an aluminumrich source rock. Important deposits of nickel and cobalt

725

23.7 Mineral Resources Related to Surface Processes

are also found in laterite soils that develop from igneous
rocks rich in ferromagnesian silicate minerals.

Other Deposits Many copper and silver deposits result
when weathering processes concentrate metals that are
deposited through a low-grade primary ore. Usually such
enrichment occurs in deposits containing pyrite (FeS2),
the most common and widespread sulfide mineral. Pyrite
is important because when it chemically weathers, sulfuric acid forms, which enables percolating waters to dissolve the ore metals. Once dissolved, the metals gradually
migrate downward through the primary ore body until
they are precipitated. Deposition takes place because of
changes that occur in the chemistry of the solution when
it reaches the saturated zone (the zone beneath the surface where all pore spaces are filled with groundwater).
In this manner, the small percentage of dispersed metal
can be removed from a large volume of rock and redeposited as a higher-grade ore in a smaller volume of rock.
This enrichment process is responsible for the economic success of many copper deposits, including one
located in Miami, Arizona. Here the ore was upgraded
from less than 1 percent copper in the primary deposit
to as much as 5 percent copper in some localized zones
of enrichment. When pyrite weathers (oxidizes) near the
surface, residues of iron oxide remain. The presence of
these rusty-colored caps at the surface indicates the possibility of an enriched copper ore below and is a visible
sign for prospectors.

Placer Deposits
The sorting of sediments by wind or water usually results
in like-sized grains being deposited together. However,
sorting according to the specific gravity of particles
also occurs. This latter type of sorting is responsible
for the creation of placers, which are deposits formed

when heavy minerals are mechanically concentrated by
currents. Placers associated with streams are among the
most common and best known, but the sorting action
of waves can also create placers along the shore. Placer
deposits usually involve minerals that are not only heavy
but also durable (to withstand physical destruction during transportation) and chemically resistant (to endure
weathering processes). Placers form because heavy minerals settle quickly from a current, whereas less-dense
particles remain suspended and are carried onward.
Common sites of accumulation include point bars on the
insides of meanders as well as cracks, depressions, and
other irregularities on streambeds.
Many economically important placer deposits exist,
with accumulations of gold the best known. Indeed, it
was the placer deposits discovered in 1848 that led to the
famous California Gold Rush. Years later, similar deposits created a gold rush to Alaska as well (Figure 23.27).
Panning for gold by washing sand and gravel from a flat
pan to concentrate the fine “dust” at the bottom was a
common method early prospectors used to recover the
precious metal, and it is a process similar to that which
created the placer in the first place.
In addition to gold, other heavy and durable minerals form placers. These include platinum, diamonds, and
tin. The Ural Mountains contain placers rich in platinum, and placers are important sources of diamonds
in southern Africa. Significant portions of the world’s
supply of cassiterite, the principal ore of tin, have come
from placer deposits in Malaysia and Indonesia. Cassiterite is often widely disseminated through granitic igneous rocks. In this state, the mineral is not sufficiently
concentrated to be extracted profitably. However, as the
enclosing rock dissolves and disintegrates, the heavy
and durable cassiterite grains are set free. Eventually
the freed particles are washed to a stream, where they
are deposited in placers that are significantly more
Figure 23.27
Placers These deposits
form when heavy minerals
are mechanically concentrated by currents. (Photo on
left by Underwood Archives/Getty
Images; photo on right from the
Library of Congress)

726

CHAPTER 23

Energy and Mineral Resources

concentrated than the original deposit. Similar circumstances and events are common to many minerals mined
from placers.
In some cases, if the source rock for a placer deposit
can be located, it too may become an important ore
body. By following placer deposits upstream, one can
sometimes locate the original ore body. This is how
the gold-bearing veins of the mother lode in California’s Sierra Nevada batholith were found, as well as the
famous Kimberley diamond mine of South Africa. The
placers were discovered first, and their source was found
at a later time.

23.8

23.7

Concept Checks

1. What is secondary enrichment?
2. Name the primary ore of aluminum and describe
its formation.
3. How might the mineral pyrite play a role in
creating an ore deposit?
4. Describe the way in which minerals accumulate
in placers. List four minerals that are mined from
such deposits.

Nonmetallic Mineral Resources
Distinguish between two broad categories of nonmetallic mineral resources and
list examples of each.
_TT87


Earth materials that are not used as fuels or processed for the metals they contain are referred to
as nonmetallic mineral resources. Realize that use of the word mineral is very broad in this economic context and is quite different from the geologist’s strict definition of mineral found in Chapter 3.
Nonmetallic mineral resources are extracted and processed either for the nonmetallic elements
they contain or for the physical and chemical properties they possess.
People often do not realize the importance of nonmetallic minerals because they see only the products that
result from their use and not the minerals themselves.
That is, many nonmetallics are used up in the process of creating other products. Examples include the
fluorite and limestone that are part of the steelmaking process, the abrasives required to make a piece of
machinery, and the fertilizers needed to grow a food
crop (Table 23.2).

TABLE 23.2

The quantities of nonmetallic minerals used each
year are enormous. A glance back at Figure 23.1
reminds us that the per capita consumption of nonfuel
resources in the United States totals more than 11
metric tons, of which about 94 percent are nonmetallics. Nonmetallic mineral resources are commonly
divided into two broad groups: building materials and
industrial minerals. Because some substances have
many different uses, they are found in both categories.

Occurrences and Uses of Nonmetallic Minerals

Mineral

Uses

Geologic Occurrences

Apatite

Phosphorus fertilizers

Sedimentary deposits

Asbestos

Incombustible fibers

Metamorphic alteration (chrysotile)

Calcite

Aggregate; steelmaking; soil conditioning; chemicals; cement; building stone

Sedimentary deposits

Clay minerals

Ceramics; china

Residual product of weathering (kaolinite)

Corundum

Gemstones; abrasives

Metamorphic deposits

Diamond

Gemstones; abrasives

Kimberlite pipes; placers

Fluorite

Steelmaking; aluminum refining; glass; chemicals

Hydrothermal deposits

Garnet

Abrasives; gemstones

Metamorphic deposits

Graphite

Pencil lead; lubricant; refractories

Metamorphic deposits

Gypsum

Plaster of Paris

Evaporite deposits

Halite

Table salt; chemicals; ice control

Evaporite deposits; salt domes

Muscovite

Insulator in electrical applications

Pegmatites

Quartz

Primary ingredient in glass

Igneous intrusions; sedimentary deposits

Sulfur

Chemicals; fertilizer manufacture

Sedimentary deposits; hydrothermal deposits

Sylvite

Potassium fertilizers

Evaporite deposits

Talc

Powder used in paints, cosmetics, etc.

Metamorphic deposits

727

23.8 Nonmetallic Mineral Resources

Figure 23.28

Limestone, perhaps the most versatile and widely used rock of all,
is the best example (Figure 23.28).
As a building material, it is used
not only as crushed rock and building stone but also in the making of
cement. Moreover, as an industrial
mineral, limestone is an ingredient
in the manufacture of steel and is
used in agriculture to reduce the
acidity of soils (see GEOgraphics
7.1, page 220).

Limestone quarry
Limestone is considered
both a building material
and an industrial mineral.
This quarry is near
Amsterdam, Indiana. (Photo
by Daniel Dempster/Alamy Images)

Building Materials
Natural aggregate consists of
crushed stone, sand, and gravel.
From the standpoint of quantity
and value, aggregate is a very
important building material. The
United States produces nearly 2 billion tons of aggregate per year, which represents about one-half of the
country’s entire nonenergy mining volume. Aggregate
is produced commercially in every state and is used
in nearly all building construction and in most public
works projects.
Besides aggregate, other important building materials include gypsum for plaster and wallboard, clay for
tile and bricks, and limestone and shale, which combine
to form cement. Cement and aggregate go into the making of concrete, a material that is essential to practically
all construction. Aggregate gives concrete its strength
and volume, and cement binds the mixture into a
rock-hard substance. Building just 2 kilometers of fourlane highway requires more than 85 thousand tons of
aggregate. Building an average six-room house requires
90 tons of aggregate.
Because most building materials are widely distributed and present in almost unlimited quantities, they
have little intrinsic value. Their economic worth comes
only after the materials are removed from the ground and
processed. Since their per-ton value compared with the
values of metals and industrial minerals is low, mining
and quarrying operations are usually undertaken to satisfy local needs. Except for special types of cut stone used
for building and monuments, transportation costs greatly
limit the distance most building materials can be profitably moved.

Industrial Minerals
Many nonmetallic resources are classified as industrial minerals. In some instances, these materials are
important because they are sources of specific chemical elements or compounds. Such minerals are used

to manufacture chemicals and produce fertilizers. In
other cases, their importance is related to the physical
properties they exhibit. Examples include minerals such
as corundum and garnet, which are used as abrasives.
Although supplies of industrial minerals are generally
plentiful, most of these minerals are not nearly as abundant as building materials. Moreover, deposits are far
more restricted in distribution and extent. As a result,
many of these nonmetallic resources must be transported
considerable distances, which of course adds to their cost.
Unlike most building materials, which need a minimum
of processing before they are ready to use, many industrial minerals require considerable processing to extract
the desired substance at the proper degree of purity for
its ultimate use.

Fertilizers The growth in world population beyond
7 billion requires that the production of basic food
crops continue to expand. Therefore, fertilizers—primarily nitrate, phosphate, and potassium compounds—
are extremely important to agriculture. The synthetic
nitrate industry, which derives nitrogen from the
atmosphere, is the source of practically all the world’s
nitrogen fertilizers. The primary source of phosphorus
and potassium, however, remains Earth’s crust. The
mineral apatite is the primary source of phosphate. In
the United States, most production comes from marine
sedimentary deposits in Florida and North Carolina.
Although potassium is an abundant element in many
minerals, the primary commercial sources are evaporite
deposits containing the mineral sylvite. In the United
States, deposits near Carlsbad, New Mexico, have been
especially important. Figure 23.29 shows a mining operation in southern Utah that produces sylvite (commonly
called potash).

728

CHAPTER 23

Energy and Mineral Resources

Figure 23.29
Potash mine evaporation ponds west of Moab,
Utah Potash (potassium chloride) at this site is
obtained using a system that combines solution
mining and solar evaporation. Water from the
nearby Colorado River is injected into deposits that
are 900 meters (3000 feet) below the surface. The
mineral-rich water is brought to the surface and
piped to 400 acres of shallow ponds. The water
evaporates, leaving behind deposits of potash
and common salt (sodium chloride). A blue dye
is added to assist the evaporation process. The
crystals are harvested and sent to a mill, where the
potash is separated from the salt by using a flotation process. (Photo by Michael Collier)

Sulfur Because it has many uses, sulfur is an important
nonmetallic resource. In fact, the quantity of sulfur used
is considered one indicator of a country’s level of industrialization. More than 80 percent is used to produce sulfuric acid. Although its principal use is in the manufacture
of phosphate fertilizer, sulfuric acid has many other
applications as well. Sources include deposits of native
sulfur associated with salt domes and volcanic areas, as
well as common iron sulfides such as pyrite. In recent
years an increasingly important source has been the sulfur removed from coal, oil, and natural gas in order to
make these fuels less polluting.
Salt Common salt, known by the mineral name halite,
is another important and versatile resource. It is among
the most prominent nonmetallic minerals used as a raw
material in the chemical industry. In addition, large
quantities are used to “soften” water and to keep streets
and highways free of ice. Of course, most people are
aware that it is also a basic nutrient and a part of many
food products.
Salt is a common evaporite, and thick deposits are
exploited using conventional underground mining techniques. Subsurface deposits are also tapped, using brine

wells in which a pipe is introduced into a salt deposit and
water is pumped down the pipe. The salt dissolved by the
water is brought to the surface through a second pipe. This
is also the process used to obtain the potassium chloride
(potash) in Figure 23.29. In addition, seawater continues
to serve as a source of salt, as it has for centuries. The salt
is harvested after the Sun evaporates the water.

23.8

Concept Checks

1. Which is greater, the per capita consumption
of metallic resources or of nonmetallic mineral
resources?
2. Distinguish between building materials and
industrial minerals.
3. List two examples of building materials. What are
three examples of industrial minerals?
4. What is an example of a substance that may be
either a building material or an industrial mineral?

24

Touring
Our Solar
System1

Selfie of Curiosity rover as it moves up the slopes of Mount
Sharp on Mars. This is a composite of several images captured by a camera located at the end of the rover’s robotic
arm. (Photo courtesy of NASA/JPL-Caltech/MSSS)
1This chapter was revised with the assistance of Professors Teresa Tarbuck and
Mark Watry.

P

lanetary geology is the study of the formation and evolution of the bodies
in our solar system—including the eight planets and myriad smaller objects: moons, dwarf
planets, asteroids, comets, and meteoroids. Studying these objects provides valuable
insights into the dynamic processes that operate on Earth. Understanding how other
atmospheres evolve helps scientists build better models for predicting climate change.
Studying tectonic processes on other planets helps us appreciate how these complex
interactions alter Earth. In addition, seeing how erosional forces work on other bodies allows
us to observe the many ways landscapes are created. Finally, the uniqueness of Earth, a
body that harbors life, is revealed through the exploration of other planetary bodies.

24.1

Our Solar System: An Overview
Describe the formation of the solar system according to the nebular theory.
Compare and contrast the terrestrial and Jovian planets.

The Sun is at the center of a revolving system, trillions of miles wide, consisting of eight planets,
their satellites, and numerous smaller asteroids, comets, and meteoroids. An estimated 99.85 percent of the mass of our solar system is contained within the Sun. Collectively, the planets account
for most of the remaining 0.15 percent. Starting from the Sun, the planets are Mercury, Venus,
Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune (Figure 24.1). Pluto was reclassified in 2003 as a
member of a new class of solar system bodies called dwarf planets.
Tethered to the Sun by gravity, all the planets travel
in the same direction, on slightly elliptical orbits (Table
24.1). Gravity causes objects nearest the Sun to travel
fastest. Therefore, Mercury has the highest orbital velocity, 48 kilometers (30 miles) per second, and the shortest
period of revolution around the Sun, 88 Earth days. By
contrast, the distant dwarf planet Pluto has an orbital
speed of just 5 kilometers (3 miles) per second and
requires 248 Earth-years to complete one revolution.
Most large bodies orbit the Sun approximately in the
same plane. The planets’ inclination with respect to the
Earth–Sun orbital plane, known as the ecliptic, is shown
in Table 24.1.

Nebular Theory: Formation of the
Solar System
The nebular theory, which explains the formation
of the solar system, proposes that the Sun and planets
formed from a rotating cloud of interstellar gases (mainly
hydrogen and helium) and dust called the solar nebula.
As the solar nebula contracted due to gravity, most of the
material collected in the center to form the hot protosun.

The remaining materials formed a thick, flattened,
rotating disk, within which matter gradually cooled and
condensed into grains and clumps of icy, rocky material. Repeated collisions resulted in most of the material clumping together into larger and larger chunks
that eventually became asteroid-sized objects called
planetesimals.
The composition of planetesimals was largely determined by their proximity to the protosun. As you might
expect, temperatures were highest in the inner solar
system and decreased toward the outer edge of the disk.
Therefore, between the present orbits of Mercury and
Mars, the planetesimals were composed of materials
with high melting temperatures—metals and rocky substances. Then, through repeated collisions and accretion,
these asteroid-sized rocky bodies combined to form the
four protoplanets that eventually became Mercury,
Venus, Earth, and Mars.
The planetesimals that formed beyond the orbit of
Mars, where temperatures were low, contained high percentages of ices—water, carbon dioxide, ammonia, and
methane—as well as small amounts of rocky and metallic
debris. It was mainly from these planetesimals that the
four outer planets eventually formed. The accumulation

735

24.1 Our Solar System: An Overview

SmartFigure 24.1

A.

Orbits of the planets
A. Artistic view of the solar
system, in which planets
are not drawn to scale.
B. Positions of the planets
shown to scale using astronomical units (AU), where
1 AU is equal to the average distance from Earth to
the Sun—150 million kilometers (93 million miles).

Kuiper belt

Neptune

Uranus
Asteroid belt
Earth

Sun

Mercury

(https://goo.gl/ZFtHNL)

Venus

Mars
Jupiter
Saturn

B.

Mercury
Venus
Earth
Mars
SUN
Neptune

30

Uranus

25

20

Saturn

15
10
Distance in astronomical units (AU)

of ices accounts, in part, for the large sizes and low densities of these outer planets. The two most massive planets, Jupiter and Saturn, had surface gravities sufficient
to attract and retain large quantities of hydrogen and
helium, the lightest elements.
It took roughly 1 billion years after the protoplanets
formed for the planets to gravitationally accumulate
most of the interplanetary debris. This was a period
of intense bombardment as the planets cleared their
orbits by collecting much of the leftover material. The
“scars” of this period are still evident on the Moon’s
surface. Because of the gravitational effect of the planets, particularly Jupiter, small bodies were flung into
planet-crossing orbits or into interstellar space. The
small fraction of interplanetary matter that escaped this
violent period became either asteroids or comets. By
comparison, the present-day solar system is a much quieter place, although many of these processes continue
today at a reduced pace.

Jupiter

5

0

The Planets: Internal Structures
and Atmospheres
The planets fall into two groups, based on location, size,
and density: the terrestrial (Earth-like) planets (Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars) and the Jovian (Jupiterlike) planets (Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune).
Because of their locations relative to the Sun, the four
terrestrial planets are also known as inner planets, and
the four Jovian planets are known as outer planets. A
correlation exists between planetary locations and sizes:
The inner planets are substantially smaller than the
outer planets, also known as gas giants. For example,
the diameter of Neptune (the smallest Jovian planet) is
nearly 4 times larger than the diameter of Earth. Furthermore, Neptune’s mass is 17 times greater than that
of Earth or Venus.
Other properties that differ among the planets
include densities, chemical compositions, orbital periods,

736

CHAPTER 24

TABLE 24.1

Touring Our Solar System

Planetary Data
Mean Distance from Sun

Planet

Symbol

AU*

Millions of Miles

0.39

Mercury

Millions of Kilometers

36

58

Orbital Velocity
Period of Revolution

Inclination of Orbit

mi/s

km/s

88d

7°00'

29.5

47.5

3°24'

21.8

35.0

0°00'

18.5

29.8

Venus

0.72

67

108

225d

Earth

1.00

93

150

365.25d

⊕

Mars

1.52

142

248

687d

1°51'

14.9

24.1

Jupiter

5.20

483

778

12yr

1°18'

8.1

13.1

Saturn

9.54

886

1427

30yr

2°29'

6.0

9.6

2870

84yr

0°46'

4.2

6.8

4497

165yr

1°46'

3.3

5.3

19.18

Uranus

1783

30.06

Neptune

2794

Diameter

Planet

Period of
Rotation

Mercury

59d

3015

4878

0.06

5.4

0.0

0.206

0

Venus

243d

7526

12,104

0.82

5.2

0.0

0.007

0

Earth

23h56m04s

7920

12,756

1.00

5.5

0.3

0.017

1

Miles

Kilometers

Relative Mass
(Earth = 1)

Average Density
(g/cm3)

Polar Flattening
(%)

Eccentricity†

Number of Known
Satellites‡

Mars

24h37m23s

4216

6794

0.11

3.9

0.5

0.093

2

Jupiter

9h56m

88,700

143,884

317.87

1.3

6.7

0.048

67

Saturn

10h30m

75,000

120,536

95.14

0.7

10.4

0.056

62

Uranus

17h14m

29,000

51,118

14.56

1.2

2.3

0.047

27

Neptune

16h07m

28,900

50,530

17.21

1.7

1.8

0.009

14

* AU = astronomical unit, Earth’s mean distance from the Sun.
†Eccentricity is a measure of the amount an orbit deviates from a circular shape. The larger the number, the less circular the orbit.
‡Includes all satellites discovered as of July 2015. Satellites are celestial bodies that orbit a planet rather than orbiting a star like the Sun.

and numbers of satellites (see Table 24.1). Variations in
the chemical composition of planets are largely responsible for their density differences. Specifically, the average
density of the terrestrial planets is about 5 times the density of water, whereas the average density of the Jovian
planets is only 1.5 times that of water. In fact, Saturn has
a density only 0.7 times that of water, which means that it
would float in a sufficiently large tank of water. The outer
planets are also characterized by long orbital periods and
numerous satellites.

Internal Structures Recall from Chapter 12 that
shortly after Earth formed, segregation of material
resulted in the formation of three major layers, defined by
their chemical composition: the crust, mantle, and core.
This type of chemical separation occurred in the other
planets as well. However, because the terrestrial planets
are compositionally different from the Jovian planets, the
nature of these layers is different as well (Figure 24.2).
The terrestrial planets are dense, having relatively
large cores of iron and nickel. The outer cores of Earth and
Mercury are liquid, whereas the cores of Venus and Mars
are thought to be only partially molten. This difference
is attributable to Venus and Mars having lower internal
temperatures than Earth and Mercury. Silicate minerals
and other lighter compounds make up the mantles of the

terrestrial planets. Finally, the silicate crusts of terrestrial
planets are relatively thin compared to their mantles.
The two largest Jovian planets, Jupiter and Saturn,
likely have small, solid cores consisting of iron compounds, like the cores of the terrestrial planets, and
rocky material similar to Earth’s mantle. Progressing outward, the layer above the core consists of liquid hydrogen
that is under extremely high temperatures and pressures.
There is substantial evidence that under these conditions,
hydrogen behaves like a metal in that its electrons move
freely about and are efficient conductors of both heat and
electricity. Jupiter’s intense magnetic field is thought to
be the result of electric currents flowing within a spinning layer of liquid metallic hydrogen. Saturn’s magnetic
field is much weaker than Jupiter’s, due to its smaller
shell of liquid metallic hydrogen. Above this metallic
layer, both Jupiter and Saturn are thought to be composed of molecular liquid hydrogen that is intermixed
with helium. The outermost layers are gases of hydrogen and helium, as well as ices of water, ammonia, and
methane—which mainly account for the low densities of
these giants.
Uranus and Neptune also have small iron-rich, rocky
cores, but their mantles are likely hot, dense water and
ammonia. Above their mantles, the amount of hydrogen
and helium increases, but these gases exist in much lower

737

24.1 Our Solar System: An Overview

concentrations than in Jupiter
and Saturn.
All planets except Venus
and Mars have significant
magnetic fields generated by
flow of metallic materials in
their liquid cores, or mantles.
Magnetic fields play an
important role in protecting
a planet’s surface from bombardment by the solar wind,
a stream of charged particles
ejected from the Sun. This
protection is necessary for
the survival of any life-forms.
Venus has a weak field due to
the interaction between the
solar wind and its uppermost
atmosphere (ionosphere),
while the weak Martian magnetic field is thought to be a
remnant from when its interior was hotter.

The Atmospheres of the
Planets The Jovian planets

Figure 24.2

TERRESTRIAL PLANETS

Comparing internal structures of the planets

Moon

Mercury

Mars

Key
Rocky crust
Rocky mantle
Metallic core

Venus

Earth

JOVIAN PLANETS

Uranus
Saturn

Jupiter
Key for Jupiter/Saturn
Visible clouds
Gaseous hydrogen/helium
Liquid molecular hydrogen
Liquid metallic hydrogen
Rocky/iron core

Neptune

Key for Uranus/Neptune
Visible clouds
Gaseous hydrogen/helium
Ices (water/methane)
Rocky/iron core

Solar heating (temperature)

have very thick atmospheres
composed mainly of hydrogen and helium, with lesser
amounts of water, methane, ammonia, and
Airless worlds have relatively warm surface
other hydrocarbons. By contrast, the terrestemperatures and/or weak gravities.
trial planets, including Earth, have relatively
meager atmospheres composed of carbon
Airless bodies
dioxide, nitrogen, and oxygen. Two factors
explain these significant differences: solar
heating (temperature) and gravity (Figure 24.3).
Mercury
Venus
These variables determine what planetary
Moon
gases, if any, were captured by planets during
Earth
the formation of the solar system and which
Mars
of them were ultimately retained.
Jupiter
Galilean
Asteroids
During planetary formation, the inner
moons
Europa
regions of the developing solar system were
Saturn
too hot for ices and gases to condense. By
Titan
contrast, the Jovian planets formed where
temperatures were low and solar heating of
Uranus
Triton
planetesimals was minimal. This allowed
Charon
Neptune
Pluto
water vapor, ammonia, and methane to
condense into ices. Hence, the gas giants
contain large amounts of these volatiles. As
the planets grew, the largest Jovian planets, Jupiter and Saturn, also attracted large
Bodies with an atmosphere
quantities of the lightest gases, hydrogen
and helium.
How did Earth acquire water and other
Bodies with significant atmospheres have low
volatile gases? It seems that early in the
surface temperatures and strong gravities.
history of the solar system, gravitational tugs by the
Gravity
developing protoplanets sent planetesimals into very
eccentric orbits. As a result, Earth was bombarded with

SmartFigure 24.3
Bodies with atmospheres
versus airless bodies Two
factors largely explain why
some solar system bodies
have thick atmospheres,
whereas others are airless.
Airless worlds have
relatively warm surface
temperatures and/or weak
gravities. Bodies with
significant atmospheres
have low surface temperatures and strong gravities.
(https://goo.gl/0H6CPo)

738

CHAPTER 24

Touring Our Solar System

icy objects that originated beyond the orbit of Mars.
This was a fortuitous event for organisms that currently
inhabit our planet. Mercury, our Moon, and numerous other small bodies lack significant atmospheres,
although they certainly would have been bombarded by
icy bodies early in their development.
Airless bodies develop where solar heating is
strong and/or gravities are weak. Simply stated, small
warm bodies have a better chance of losing their atmospheres because gas molecules are more energetic and
need less speed to escape their weak gravities. For
example, warm bodies with small surface gravity, such

Compressional
wave

Meteoroid

A. The energy of a rapidly moving body is transformed into
heat and shock waves.
High-speed
ejecta

Rebound
B. The rebound of over-compressed rock causes debris to be
explosively ejected from the crater.

Melt

Central
peak

Planetary Impacts

Fractured
rock
C. Heating melts some material that may be ejected from the
crater as glass beads.
Uplifted
crater rim

Figure 24.4
Formation of an impact
crater

as our Moon, are unable to hold even heavy gases such
as carbon dioxide and nitrogen. Mercury is massive
enough to hold trace amounts of hydrogen, helium, and
oxygen gases.
The slightly larger terrestrial planets, Earth,
Venus, and Mars, retain some heavy gases, including
water vapor, nitrogen, and carbon dioxide. However,
their atmospheres are miniscule compared to their
total mass. Early in their development, the terrestrial
planets probably had much thicker atmospheres. Over
time, however, these primitive atmospheres gradually
changed as light gases trickled away into space. For
example, Earth’s atmosphere continues to leak hydrogen and helium (the two lightest gases) into space.
This phenomenon occurs near the top of Earth’s atmosphere, where air is so tenuous that nothing stops the
fastest-moving particles from flying off into space. The
speed required to escape a planet’s gravity is called
escape velocity. Because hydrogen is the lightest gas,
it most easily reaches the speed needed to overcome
Earth’s gravity.
Billions of years in the future, the loss of hydrogen (one of the components of water) will eventually
“dry out” Earth’s oceans, ending its hydrologic cycle.
Life, however, may remain sustainable in Earth’s polar
regions.
The massive Jovian planets have strong gravitational
fields and thick atmospheres. Furthermore, because of
their great distance from the Sun, solar heating is minimal. This explains why Saturn’s moon Titan, which is
small compared to Earth but much farther from the Sun,
retains an atmosphere. Because the molecular motion
of a gas is temperature dependent, even hydrogen and
helium move too slowly to escape the gravitational pull of
the Jovian planets.

Ejecta
blanket

D. Small secondary craters often form when the material
“splashed” from the impact crater strikes the surrounding
landscape.
_TT88


Planetary impacts between solar system bodies have
occurred throughout the history of the solar system.
On bodies that have little or no atmosphere (like the
Moon) and, therefore, no air resistance, even the
smallest pieces of interplanetary debris (meteorites)
can reach the surface. At high enough velocities, this
debris can produce microscopic cavities on individual
mineral grains. By contrast, large impact craters
result from collisions with massive bodies, such as
asteroids and comets (Figure 24.4).
Planetary impacts were considerably more common
in the early history of the solar system than they are today.
Following that early period of intense bombardment,
the rate of cratering diminished dramatically, and it now
remains essentially constant. Because weathering and
erosion are almost nonexistent on the Moon and Mercury,
evidence of their cratered past is clearly evident.
On larger bodies, the presence of an atmosphere
may cause the impacting objects to break up and/or

739

24.2 Earth’s Moon: A Chip off the Old Block

decelerate. For example, Earth’s
atmosphere causes meteoroids with
masses of less than 10 kilograms
Crater ray
(22 pounds) to lose up to 90 percent
of their speed as they penetrate the
atmosphere. Therefore, impacts of
low-mass bodies produce only small
Secondary crater
craters on Earth. Our atmosphere is
chain
much less effective in slowing large
Central peak
bodies; fortunately, they make very
rare appearances.
The formation of a large impact
crater is illustrated in Figure 24.4.
The meteoroid’s high-speed impact
compresses the material it strikes,
Continuous ejecta
causing an almost instantaneous
rebound, which ejects material
Discontinuous ejecta
from the surface. On Earth, impacts
can occur at speeds that exceed
50 kilometers (30 miles) per second.
Impacts at such high speeds produce shock waves that compress
collected on Earth, as well as the Moon, allowing planboth the impactor and the material being impacted.
etary geologists to more fully understand such events.
Almost instantaneously, the over-compressed material rebounds and explosively ejects material out of the
newly formed crater. This process is analogous to the
detonation of an explosive device that has been buried
underground.
1. Briefly outline the steps in the formation of our
Craters excavated by objects that are several kilomesolar system, according to the nebular theory.
ters across often exhibit a central peak, such as the one
2. By what criteria are planets considered either
in the large crater in Figure 24.5. Much of the material
terrestrial or Jovian?
expelled, called ejecta, lands in or near the crater, where it
3. What accounts for the large density differences
accumulates to form a rim. Large meteoroids may generbetween the terrestrial and Jovian planets?
ate sufficient heat to melt and eject some of the impacted
rock as glass beads. Specimens of glass beads produced
4. Explain why the terrestrial planets have meager
in this manner, as well as melt breccia consisting of broatmospheres compared to the Jovian planets.
ken fragments welded by the heat of impact, have been

24.1

24.2

Concept Checks

Earth’s Moon: A Chip off the Old Block
List and describe the major features of Earth’s Moon and explain how maria basins
were formed.

The Earth–Moon system is unique partially because of the Moons large size relative to other
bodies in the inner solar system. Mars is the only other terrestrial planet that has moons, but its
tiny satellites are likely captured asteroids. Most of the 150 or so satellites of the Jovian planets are
composed of low-density rock–ice mixtures, none of which resemble the Moon. As we will see later,
our unique planet–satellite system is closely related to the mechanism that created it.
The diameter of the Moon is 3475 kilometers
(2160 miles), about one-fourth of Earth’s 12,756 kilometers (7926 miles). The Moon’s surface temperature
averages about 107°C (225°F) during daylight hours and
2153°C (2243°F) at night. Because its period of rotation
on its axis equals its period of revolution around Earth,

the same lunar hemisphere always faces Earth. All of the
landings of staffed Apollo missions were confined to the
side of the Moon that faces Earth.
The Moon’s density is 3.3 times that of water, comparable to that of mantle rocks on Earth but considerably less than Earth’s average density (5.5 times that of

Figure 24.5
Lunar crater Euler
This 20-kilometer-wide
(12-mile-wide) crater is
located in the southwestern part of Mare Imbrium.
Clearly visible are the bright
rays, central peak, secondary craters, and large accumulation of ejecta near the
crater rim. (Courtesy of NASA)

740

CHAPTER 24

Touring Our Solar System

water). The Moon’s relatively small iron core is thought to
account for much of this difference.
The Moon’s low mass relative to Earth results in
a lunar gravitational attraction that is one-sixth that of
Earth. A person who weighs 150 pounds on Earth weighs
only 25 pounds on the Moon, although the person’s mass
remains the same. This difference allows an astronaut to
carry a heavy life-support system with relative ease. If
not burdened with such a load, an astronaut could jump
six times higher on the Moon than on Earth. The Moon’s
small mass (and low gravity) is the primary reason it was
not able to retain an atmosphere.

Figure 24.6
Telescopic view of the
lunar surface The major
features are the dark
maria and the light, highly
cratered highlands. (Lick
Observatory Publications Office)

come from the rocky mantle of the impactor, while
its core was assimilated into the growing Earth. This
impact model is consistent with the Moon having a
proportionately smaller core than Earth’s and, hence,
a lower density.

The Lunar Surface When Galileo first pointed his
telescope toward the Moon, he observed two different
types of terrain: dark lowlands and brighter, highly cratered highlands (Figure 24.6). Because the dark regions
appeared to be smooth, resembling seas on Earth, they
were called maria (mar = sea, singular mare). The
Apollo 11 mission showed conclusively that the maria are
exceedingly smooth plains composed of basaltic lavas.
How Did the Moon Form?
These vast plains are strongly concentrated on the side
of the Moon facing Earth and cover about 16 percent
Until recently, the origin of the Moon—our nearest
of the lunar surface. The lack of large volcanic cones on
planetary neighbor—was a topic of considerable debate
these surfaces is evidence of high eruption rates of very
among scientists. Current models show that Earth is too
fluid basaltic lavas similar to the Columbia Plateau flood
small to have formed with a moon, particularly one so
basalts on Earth.
large. Furthermore, a captured moon would likely have
By contrast, the Moon’s light-colored areas reseman eccentric orbit similar to the captured moons that
ble
Earth’s
continents, so the first observers dubbed
orbit the Jovian planets.
them
terrae
(Latin for “lands”). These areas are now
The current consensus is that the Moon formed as
generally
referred
to as the lunar highlands because
a result of a collision between a Mars-sized body and
they
are
elevated
several
kilometers above the maria.
a youthful, semimolten Earth about 4.5 billion years
Rocks
retrieved
from
the
highlands are mainly brecago. During this collision, some of the ejected debris
cias,
pulverized
by
massive
bombardment early in the
was thrown into orbit around Earth and gradually
Moon’s
history.
The
arrangement
of terrae and maria
coalesced to form the Moon. Computer simulations
has
resulted
in
the
legendary
“face”
of the “man in the
show that most of the ejected material would have
Moon.”
Some of the most obvious lunar features are impact
craters. A meteoroid 3 meters (10 feet) in diameter can
blast out a crater 50 times larger, or about 150 meters
(500 feet) in diameter. The larger craters shown in
Figure 24.6, such as Kepler and Copernicus (32
and 93 kilometers [20 and 57 miles] in diameter,
Mare Imbrium
respectively), were created from bombard(Sea of Rains)
ment by bodies 1 kilometer (0.62 mile) or
more in diameter. These two craters are
thought to be relatively young because of
the bright rays (light-colored ejected material) that radiate from them for hundreds of
Mare Tranquillitatus
kilometers.
(Sea
of
Tranquility)
Copernicus
Kepler
crater

crater

Lunar
Highlands

History of the Lunar Surface The
evidence used to unravel the history of
the lunar surface comes primarily from
radiometric dating of rocks returned from
Apollo missions and studies of crater densities—counting the number of craters per unit
area. The greater the crater density, the older the
feature is inferred to be. Such evidence suggests
that, after the Moon coalesced, it passed through the
following four phases: (1) formation of the original

741

24.2 Earth’s Moon: A Chip off the Old Block

crust, (2) excavation of the large impact basins,
(3) filling of maria basins, and (4) formation of rayed
craters.
During the late stages of its accretion, the Moon’s
outer shell was most likely completely melted—literally a magma ocean. Then, about 4.4 billion years
ago, the magma ocean began to cool and underwent
magmatic differentiation (see Chapter 4). Most of the
dense minerals, olivine and pyroxene, sank, while
less-dense silicate minerals floated to form the Moon’s
crust. The highlands are made of these igneous rocks,
which rose buoyantly like “scum” from the crystallizing magma. The most common highland rock type is
anorthosite, which is composed mainly of calcium-rich
plagioclase feldspar.
Once formed, the lunar crust was continually
impacted as the Moon swept up debris from the solar
nebula. During this time, several large impact basins
were created. Then, about 3.8 billion years ago, the
Moon, as well as the rest of the solar system, experienced
a sudden drop in the rate of meteoritic bombardment.
The Moon’s next major event was the filling of the
large impact basins, which had been created at least 300
million years earlier (Figure 24.7). Radiometric dating of
the maria basalts puts their age between 3.0 billion and
3.5 billion years, considerably younger than the initial
lunar crust.
The maria basalts are thought to have originated
at depths between 200 and 400 kilometers (125 and
250 miles). They were likely generated by a slow rise
in temperature attributed to the decay of radioactive
elements. Partial melting probably occurred in several
isolated pockets, as indicated by the diverse chemical makeup of the rocks retrieved during the Apollo
missions. Recent evidence suggests that some mareforming eruptions may have occurred as recently as 1
billion years ago.
Other lunar surface features related to this period
of volcanism include small shield volcanoes (8–12 kilometers [5–7.5 miles] in diameter), evidence of pyroclastic eruptions, rilles (narrow winding valleys thought to
be lava channels), and grabens (down-faulted valleys).
The last prominent features to form were rayed craters, as exemplified by the 93-kilometer-wide (56-milewide) Copernicus crater shown in Figure 24.7. Material
ejected from these craters blankets the maria surfaces
and many older, rayless craters. The relatively young
Copernicus crater is thought to be about 1 billion years
old. Had it formed on Earth, weathering and erosion
would have long since obliterated it.

Today’s Lunar Surface The Moon’s small mass and
low gravity account for its lack of atmosphere and flowing
water; therefore, the processes of weathering and erosion

Impact of an asteroid-size body produced a huge crater
hundreds of kilometers in diameter and disturbed the lunar
crust far beyond the crater.

SmartFigure 24.7
Formation and filling of
large impact basins
(Photo by NASA)
(https://goo.gl/9g1WUy)

Filling of the impact crater with fluid basalts, perhaps derived
from partial melting deep within the lunar mantle.

Today these basins make up the lunar maria and a few similar
large structures on Mercury.

that continually modify Earth’s surface are absent. In
addition, tectonic forces are no longer active on the
Moon, so quakes and volcanic eruptions have ceased.
Because the Moon is unprotected by an atmosphere,
erosion is dominated by the impact of tiny particles from
space (micrometeorites) that continually bombard its
surface and gradually smooth the landscape. This activity
has crushed and repeatedly mixed the upper portions of
the lunar crust.

742

CHAPTER 24

Touring Our Solar System

Figure 24.8
Astronaut Harrison
Schmitt, sampling the
lunar surface Notice the
footprint (inset) in the lunar
“soil,” called regolith, which
lacks organic material and
is therefore not a true soil.
Harrison Schmitt was the
only geologist to go to the
Moon. (Courtesy of NASA)

Both the maria and terrae are mantled with a layer
of gray, unconsolidated debris derived from a few billion years of meteoric bombardment (Figure 24.8). This
soil-like layer, properly called lunar regolith (rhegos =
blanket, lithos = stone), is composed of igneous rocks,
breccia, glass beads, and fine lunar dust. The lunar regolith is anywhere from 2 to 20 meters (6.6 to 66 feet) thick,
depending on the age of the lunar surface in that particular region.

24.2

Concept Checks

1. Briefly describe the origin of the Moon.
2. Compare and contrast the Moon’s maria and
highlands.
3. How are maria on the Moon similar to the
Columbia Plateau in the Pacific Northwest?
4. How is crater density used in the relative dating of
the Moon’s surface features?
5. Summarize the major stages in the development
of the modern lunar surface.

24.3

Terrestrial Planets
Outline the principal characteristics of Mercury, Venus, and Mars. Describe their
similarities to and differences from Earth.

The terrestrial planets, in order from the Sun, are Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars. Here we
consider the three other Earth-like planets and compare their features to those of Earth.

Mercury: The Innermost Planet
Mercury, the innermost and smallest planet, revolves
around the Sun quickly (88 days) but rotates slowly on
its axis. Mercury’s day–night cycle, which lasts 176 Earth
days, is very long compared to Earth’s 24-hour cycle. One
“night” on Mercury is roughly equivalent to 3 months on
Earth and is followed by the same duration of daylight.

Mercury has the greatest temperature extremes, from as
low as 2173°C (2280°F) at night to noontime temperatures exceeding 427°C (800°F), hot enough to melt tin
and lead. These extreme temperatures make life as we
know it impossible on Mercury.
Mercury absorbs most of the sunlight that strikes it,
reflecting only 6 percent into space, a characteristic of terrestrial bodies with little or no atmosphere. The minuscule

743

24.3 Terrestrial Planets

amount of gas that is present on Mercury may have originated from
several sources, including
ionized gas from the Sun,
ices that vaporized during a relatively recent
comet impact, and/
or outgassing of the
planet’s interior.
Although Mercury is small and scientists expected the
planet’s interior to
have already cooled,
NASA’s Messenger
spacecraft measured
Mercury’s magnetic field
in 2012 and found it to
be about 100 times less than
Earth’s. This suggests that Mercury has a large core that remains hot
and fluid—a requirement for generating a magnetic field.
Mercury resembles Earth’s Moon in that it has very
low reflectivity, no sustained atmosphere, numerous volcanic features, and a heavily cratered terrain (Figure 24.9). The
largest-known impact crater (1300 kilometers [800 miles]
in diameter) on Mercury is Caloris Basin. Images and
other data gathered by Mariner 10 show evidence of volcanism in and around Caloris Basin and a few other smaller
basins. Also like our Moon, Mercury has smooth plains
that cover nearly 40 percent of the area imaged by Mariner
10. Most of these smooth areas are associated with large
impact basins, including Caloris Basin, where lava partially
filled the basins and surrounding lowlands. Consequently,
these smooth plains appear to be similar in origin to lunar
maria. Recently, Messenger found evidence of volcanism
by revealing thick volcanic deposits similar to those in the
Columbia Basin on Earth. Researchers were also surprised
by the recent detection of probable ice caps on Mercury.

Venus: The Veiled Planet
Venus, second only to the Moon in brilliance in the
night sky, is named for the Roman goddess of love and
beauty. It orbits the Sun in a nearly perfect circle once
every 225 Earth days. However, Venus rotates in the
opposite direction of the other planets (retrograde
motion) at an agonizingly slow pace: 1 Venus day is
equivalent to about 243 Earth days. Venus has the densest atmosphere of the terrestrial planets, consisting
mostly of carbon dioxide (97 percent)—the prototype
for an extreme greenhouse effect. As a consequence,
the surface temperature of Venus averages more than
450°C (900°F) day and night. Temperature variations
at the surface are generally minimal because of the
intense mixing within the planet’s dense atmosphere.
Investigations of the planet’s extreme and uniform

Figure 24.9
Two views of Mercury On
the left is a monochromatic
image, while the image on
the right is color enhanced.
These are high-resolution
mosaics constructed
from thousands of images
obtained by the Messenger
orbiter. (Courtesy of NASA)

surface temperature led scientists to more fully understand how the greenhouse effect operates on Earth.
The composition of the Venusian interior is probably
similar to Earth’s. However, Venus’s weak magnetic field
means its internal dynamics must be very different from
Earth’s. Scientists think that mantle convection operates on
Venus, but the processes of plate tectonics do not appear to
have contributed to the present Venusian topography.
The surface of Venus is completely hidden from view
by a thick cloud layer composed mainly of tiny sulfuric
acid droplets. In the 1970s, despite extreme temperatures
and pressures, four Russian spacecraft landed successfully and obtained surface images. As expected, however,
all the probes were crushed by the planet’s immense
atmospheric pressure, approximately 90 times that on
Earth, within an hour of landing. Using radar imaging,
the unstaffed spacecraft Magellan mapped Venus’s surface in stunning detail (Figure 24.10).
A few thousand impact craters have been identified
on Venus—far fewer than on Mercury and Mars but
more than on Earth. Researchers expected that Venus
would show evidence of extensive cratering from the
heavy bombardment period but found instead that a
period of extensive volcanism was responsible for resurfacing Venus. The planet’s thick atmosphere also limits
the number of impacts by breaking up large incoming
meteoroids and incinerating most of the small debris.
About 80 percent of the Venusian surface consists
of low-lying plains covered by lava flows, some of which
traveled along lava channels that extend hundreds of
kilometers (Figure 24.11). Venus’s Baltis Vallis, the longestknown lava channel in the solar system, meanders
6800 kilometers (4225 miles) across the planet. More than
1000 volcanoes with diameters greater than 20 kilometers
(12 miles) have been identified on Venus. However, high
surface pressures keep the gaseous components in lava

744

CHAPTER 24

Touring Our Solar System

Figure 24.10

on Earth or Mars (Figure 24.12). Maat Mons, the largest
volcano on Venus, is about 8.5 kilometers (5 miles) high
and 400 kilometers (250 miles) wide. By comparison,
Mauna Loa, the largest volcano on Earth, is about 9
kilometers high (5.5 miles) and only 120 kilometers
(75 miles) wide.
Venus also has major highlands consisting of
plateaus, ridges, and topographic rises that stand
above the plains. The rises are thought to have
formed where hot mantle plumes encountered
the base of the planet’s crust, causing uplift.
Much like with mantle plumes on Earth, abundant volcanism is associated with mantle upwelling on Venus. Recent data collected by the
European Space Agency’s Venus Express suggest
that Venus’s highlands contain silica-rich granitic
rock. As such, these elevated landmasses resemble
Earth’s continents, albeit on a much smaller scale.

Global view of the surface
of Venus This computergenerated image of Venus
was constructed from years
of investigations, culminating with the Magellan
mission. The twisting bright
features that cross the
globe are highly fractured
ridges and canyons of the
eastern Aphrodite highland.
(Courtesy of NASA)

Aph

r

gh
e hi
odit

land

s

Mars: The Red Planet

Elevation of surface
Low

High

from escaping. This retards the production of pyroclastic
material and lava fountaining, phenomena that tend
to steepen volcanic cones. In addition, Venus’s high
temperature allows lava to remain mobile longer and
thus flow far from the vent. Both of these factors result
in volcanoes that tend to be flatter and wider than those
Figure 24.11
Extensive lava flows on
Venus This Magellan radar
image shows a system of
lava flows that originated
from a volcano named
Ammavaru, approximately
300 kilometers (186 miles)
west of the scene. The lava,
which appears bright in
this radar image, has rough
surfaces, whereas the
darker flows are smooth.
Upon breaking through the
ridge belt (left of center),
the lava collected in a
100,000-square-kilometer
pool. (Courtesy of NASA)

Mars, approximately one-half the diameter of Earth,
revolves around the Sun in 687 Earth days. Mean surface
temperatures range from lows of 2140°C (2220°F) at the
poles in the winter to highs of 20°C (68°F) at the equator in
the summer. Although seasonal temperature variations are
similar to Earth’s, daily temperature variations are greater
due to the very thin atmosphere of Mars (only 1 percent as
dense as Earth’s). The tenuous Martian atmosphere consists primarily of carbon dioxide (95 percent), with small
amounts of nitrogen, oxygen, and water vapor.

Martian Topography Mars, like the Moon, is pitted
with impact craters. The
smaller craters are usually filled with wind-blown
dust—confirming that Mars
is a dry, desert world. The
reddish color of the Martian
landscape is due to iron oxide
(rust). Large impact craters
provide information about the
nature of the Martian surface. For example, where the
Martian surface is composed
of dry rocky debris, ejecta
similar in size and shape to
that surrounding lunar craters is found. However, some
Martian craters feature ejecta
that looks like a muddy slurry was splashed from the
crater. Planetary geologists infer that a layer of permafrost (frozen, icy soil) lies below portions of the Martian
surface and that the heat of impacts melted the ice to
produce the fluid-like appearance of these ejecta.
About two-thirds of the surface of Mars consists of
heavily cratered highlands, concentrated mostly in its

745

24.3 Terrestrial Planets

southern hemisphere (Figure 24.13). The period of
Maat Mons
extreme cratering occurred early in the planet’s
history and ended about 3.8 billion years ago, as it
did in the rest of the solar system. Thus, Martian
highlands are similar in age to the lunar highlands.
Based on relatively low crater counts, the
Sapas Mons
northern plains, which account for the remaining one-third of the planet, are younger than the
highlands. If Mars once had abundant water, it
would have flowed to the north, which is lower
in elevation, forming an expansive ocean (shown
Lava flows
Lava flows
in blue in Figure 24.13, indicating lower elevation). The relatively flat topography of the northern plains, possibly the smoothest surface in the
solar system, is consistent with vast outpourings
of fluid basaltic lavas. Visible on these plains are
volcanic cones, some with summit pits (craters)
and lava flows with wrinkled edges.
Located along the Martian equator is an
Grand Canyon. Thus, it consists of graben-like valleys
enormous elevated region about the size of North Amersimilar to the East African Rift valleys. Once formed,
ica, called the Tharsis bulge. This feature, about 10 kiloValles Marineris grew by water erosion and collapse of
meters (6 miles) high, appears to have been uplifted and
the rift walls. The main canyon is more than 5000 kilocapped with a massive accumulation of volcanic rock that
meters (3000 miles) long, 7 kilometers (4 miles) deep,
includes the solar system’s largest volcanoes.
and 100 kilometers (60 miles) wide.
The tectonic forces that created the Tharsis region
Other prominent features on the Martian landscape
also produced fractures that radiate from its center, like
are large impact basins. Hellas, the largest identifiable
spokes on a bicycle wheel. Along the eastern flanks of
the bulge, a series of vast canyons called Valles Marineris basin, is about 2300 kilometers (1400 miles) in diameter
and has the planet’s lowest elevation. Debris ejected from
(Mariner Valleys) developed. Valles Marineris is so vast
this basin contributed to the elevation of the adjacent
that it can be seen in the image of Mars in Figure 24.13.
highlands. Other buried crater basins that are even larger
This canyon network was largely created by down-faultthan Hellas probably exist.
ing rather than the stream erosion that carved Arizona’s

Two hemispheres of Mars

NASA)

Two Hemispheres of Mars
Color represents height
above (or below) the mean
planetary radius: White is
about 12 kilometers above
average, and dark blue is
8 kilometers below average.

Elysium Mons
Olympus Mons

(Courtesy of NASA)

Tharsis bulge
Equator

Equator
Cratered
highlands
Valles Marineris
Hellas
Argyre

Low

Volcanoes on Venus Sapas
Mons is a broad volcano,
400 kilometers (250 miles)
wide. The bright areas
in the foreground are
lava flows. Another large
volcano, Maat Mons, is in
the background. (Courtesy of

Figure 24.13
Northern
lava plains

–8

Figure 24.12

–4

0

4
Altitude (km)

8

12
High

746

CHAPTER 24

Touring Our Solar System

SmartFigure 24.14

dust storms with winds up to 270 kilometers (170 miles)
per hour can persist for weeks. Dust devils have also
been photographed. Most of the Martian landscape
resembles Earth’s rocky deserts, with abundant dunes
and low areas partially filled with dust.

Olympus Mons This
massive inactive shield
volcano on Mars covers an
area about the size of the
state of Arizona. (Courtesy of
NASA) (https://goo.gl/RlbimQ)

Water Ice on Mars Liquid water does not appear

Caldera of
Olympus Mons

Outline of the
State of Arizona

Volcanoes on Mars Volcanism has been prevalent on
Mars throughout most of its history. The scarcity of impact
craters on some volcanic surfaces suggests that the planet
is still active. Mars has several of the solar system’s largest
known volcanoes, including the largest, Olympus Mons,
which is about the size of Arizona and stands nearly three
times higher than Mount Everest. This gigantic volcano
was last active about 100 million years ago and resembles
Earth’s Hawaiian shield volcanoes (Figure 24.14).
How did the volcanoes on Mars grow so much larger
than similar structures on Earth? The largest volcanoes
on the terrestrial planets tend to form where plumes of
hot rock rise from deep within their interiors. On Earth,
moving plates keep the crust in constant motion. Consequently, mantle plumes tend to produce a chain of volcanic structures, like the Hawaiian Islands. By contrast,
plate tectonics on Mars is absent, so successive eruptions
accumulate in the same location, creating enormous volcanoes rather than a string of smaller ones.

Wind Erosion on Mars The dominant force currently
shaping the Martian surface is wind erosion. Extensive
Figure 24.15
Similar rock outcrops on Mars and
Earth This set of images compares a
rock outcrop on Mars (left) with similar
rocks on Earth. The rock outcrop on Earth
formed in a streambed, which suggests
that the Martian rocks formed in a similar
environment. Based on this finding, the
scientist John Grotzinger concluded that
there was once “a vigorous flow on the
surface of Mars.” (Courtesy of NASA)

to exist anywhere on the Martian surface. However,
poleward of about 30 degrees latitude, ice can be found
within 1 meter (3 feet) of the surface. In the polar
regions, it forms small permanent ice caps. Current estimates place the maximum amount of water ice held by
the Martian polar ice caps at about 1.5 times the amount
covering Greenland.
Considerable evidence indicates that in the first 1
billion years of the planet’s history, liquid water flowed
on the surface, creating stream valleys and related features (Figure 24.15). One location where running water
was involved in carving valleys can be seen in the Mars
Reconnaissance Orbiter image in Figure 24.16. Notice the
stream-like banks that contain numerous teardrop-shaped
islands. These valleys appear to have been cut by catastrophic floods with discharge rates that were more than
1000 times greater than those of the Mississippi River.
Most of these large flood channels emerge from areas
of chaotic topography that appear to have formed when
the surface collapsed. The most likely source of water for
these flood-created valleys was the melting of subsurface
ice. If the meltwater was trapped beneath a thick layer
of permafrost, pressure could mount until a catastrophic
release occurred. As the water escaped, the overlying surface would collapse, creating the chaotic terrain.
Not all Martian valleys appear to have resulted from
water released in this manner. Some exhibit branching,
tree-like patterns resembling dendritic drainage networks
on Earth. In addition, the Opportunity rover investigated
structures similar to features created by water on Earth—
including layered sedimentary rocks, playas (salt flats),
and lake beds. Minerals that form only in the presence of
water, such as hydrated sulfates, were also detected. Small
spherical concretions of hematite, dubbed “blueberries,”
were found that probably precipitated from water to form
lake sediments. Nevertheless, except in the polar regions,

A typical sample of the sedimentary rock conglomerate
This NASA image obtained by Curiosity rover shows
rounded gravel fragments within a rock outcrop consis- that contains rounded gravel fragments deposited in a
tent with the sedimentary rock conglomerate. Weathered stream bed on Earth.
rock fragments can be seen below.

1 cm

1 cm

24.3 Terrestrial Planets

water does not appear to have significantly altered the
topography of Mars for more than 1 billion years.
On August 6, 2012, the Mars rover Curiosity landed
in Gale Crater, near what NASA calls Mount Sharp. As of
April 2015, Curiosity had traveled over 10 kilometers (6
miles), examining the lower slopes of this layered mountain
in an effort to investigate how the region’s ancient environment evolved from having lakes and rivers to the much drier
conditions observed today. At a target zone NASA calls “Big
Arm,” the Mars Hand Lens Imager (MAHLI) took images of
sandstone bedrock containing some rounded grains, indicating that the grains traveled long distances before becoming
part of the sediment that later hardened into this sandstone
(see GEOgraphics 24.1). The fact that these grains appeared
to have been carried by running water is strong evidence
that climatic conditions dramatically changed in the distant
past. We can only imagine what Curiosity will uncover in its
quest to study the climate and geology of Mars.

24.3

Concept Checks

1. What body in our solar system is most like
Mercury?
2. Venus was once referred to as “Earth’s twin.”
How are these two planets similar? How do they
differ from one another?
3. What surface features do Mars and Earth have in
common?

Figure 24.16
Earth-like stream channels are strong evidence that Mars
once had flowing water Inset shows a close-up of a streamlined island where running water encountered resistant material along its channel. (Courtesy of NASA)

E Y E ON E A R T H

24.1

M

ariner 9 obtained this image of Phobos, one
of two tiny moons of Mars. Phobos has a
diameter of only 24 kilometers (15 miles). The
two moons of Mars were not discovered until the late
1800s because their size made them nearly impossible
to view telescopically. (Photo by NASA)

QUESTION 1 In what way is Phobos similar to Earth’s
moon?
QUESTION 2 List characteristics of Phobos that make it
different from Earth’s moon.
QUESTION 3 Search the Internet to learn how Phobos
and its companion moon, Deimos, got their names.

4. Why are the largest volcanoes on Earth so much
smaller than the largest ones on Mars?
5. What evidence suggests that Mars had an active
hydrologic cycle in the past?

747

750

CHAPTER 24

Touring Our Solar System

24.4

Jovian Planets
Summarize and compare the features of Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune,
including their ring systems.

The four Jovian planets, in order from the Sun, are Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune. Because
of their location within the solar system and their size and composition, they are also commonly
called the outer planets and the gas giants.

Jupiter: Lord of the Heavens
The giant among planets, Jupiter has a mass 2.5 times
greater than the combined mass of all other planets,
satellites, and asteroids in the solar system. However, it
pales in comparison to the Sun, with only 1/800 of the
Sun’s mass.
Jupiter orbits the Sun once every 12 Earth years, and
it rotates more rapidly than any other planet, completing
one rotation in slightly less than 10 hours. When viewed
telescopically, the effect of this fast spin is noticeable.
The bulge of the equatorial region and the slight flattening at the poles are evident (see the “Polar Flattening”
column in Table 24.1).
Figure 24.17
The structure of Jupiter’s
atmosphere The areas
of light clouds (zones)
are regions where gases
are ascending and cooling. Sinking and warming
dominate the flow in the
darker cloud layers (belts).
This convective circulation, along with the planet’s
rapid rotation, generates
the high-speed winds
observed between the belts
and zones. (NASA)

Jupiter’s appearance is mainly attributable to the
colors of light reflected from its three main cloud layers
(Figure 24.17). The warmest, and lowest, layer is composed
mainly of water ice and appears blue-gray; it is generally
not seen in visible-light images. The middle layer, where
temperatures are lower, consists of brown to orangebrown clouds of ammonium hydrosulfide droplets. These
colors are thought to be by-products of chemical reactions
occurring in Jupiter’s atmosphere. Near the top of its
atmosphere lie white wispy clouds of ammonia ice.
Because of its immense gravity, Jupiter is shrinking
a few centimeters each year. This contraction generates
most of the heat that drives Jupiter’s atmospheric circulation. Thus, unlike winds on Earth, which are driven by
solar energy, the huge convection currents observed in
its atmosphere are produced by
heat emanating from Jupiter’s
s
interior.
lt
e
B
louds)
c
k
r
Jupiter’s convective flow
a
d
(
produces
alternating darkds
g win
Stron
colored belts and light-colored zones, as shown in FigZones uds)
lo
c
ure
24.17. The light clouds
t
(brigh
(zones) are regions where
warm material is ascending
ds
g win
n
o
r
and
cooling, whereas the dark
t
S
belts
indicate cool material that
Belts uds)
o
l
is
sinking
and warming. This
c
(dark
convective circulation, along with
Jupiter’s rapid rotation, generates the
high-speed, east–west flow observed between
the belts and zones.
The largest storm on the planet is the Great Red
Spot. This enormous anticyclonic storm that is twice the
size of Earth has been known for 300 years. In addition
to the Great Red Spot, there are various white and brown
oval-shaped storms. The white ovals are the cold cloud
tops of huge storms many times larger than hurricanes on
Earth. The brown storm clouds reside at lower levels in
the atmosphere. Lightning in various white oval storms
has been photographed by the Cassini spacecraft, but the
strikes appear to be less frequent than on Earth.
Jupiter’s magnetic field, the strongest in the solar
system, is probably generated by a rapidly rotating, liquid metallic hydrogen layer surrounding its core. Bright
auroras associated with the magnetic field have been
photographed over Jupiter’s poles (Figure 24.18). Unlike

751

24.4 Jovian Planets

Earth’s auroras, which occur only in conjunction with
heightened solar activity, Jupiter’s auroras are continuous.

Jupiter’s Moons Jupiter’s satellite system, consisting
of 67 moons discovered thus far, resembles a miniature
solar system. Galileo discovered the 4 largest satellites,
referred to as Galilean satellites, in 1610 (Figure 24.19).
The two largest, Ganymede and Callisto, are roughly the
size of Mercury, whereas the two smaller ones, Europa
and Io, are about the size of Earth’s Moon. The eight
largest moons appear to have formed around Jupiter as
the solar system condensed.
Jupiter also has many very small satellites (about
solar system lie beneath the icy surfaces of some of Jupi20 kilometers [12 miles] in diameter) that revolve in
ter’s moons. For example, detailed images from Galileo
the opposite direction (retrograde motion) of the larghave revealed that Europa’s icy surface is quite young
est moons and have eccentric (elongated) orbits steeply
and exhibits cracks apparently filled with dark fluid from
inclined to the Jovian equator. These satellites appear
below. This suggests that under its icy shell, Europa
to be asteroids or comets that passed near enough to be
must have a warm, mobile interior—perhaps an ocean.
either gravitationally captured by Jupiter or remnants of
Because liquid water is a necessity for life as we know
the collisions of larger bodies.
it, there is considerable interest in sending an orbiter to
The Galilean moons can be observed with binocuEuropa—and, eventually, a lander capable of launching a
lars or a small telescope and are interesting in their own
robotic submarine—to determine whether it harbors life.
right. Images from Voyagers 1 and 2 revealed, to the
surprise of most geoscientists, that each of the four GaliJupiter’s Rings One of the surprising aspects of the
lean satellites is a unique world (see Figure 24.19). The
Galileo mission also unexpectedly revealed that the com- Voyager 1 mission was the discovery of Jupiter’s ring
position of each satellite is strikingly different, implying a
different evolution for each. For example, Ganymede has
a dynamic core that generates a strong magnetic field not
observed in other satellites.
The innermost of the Galilean moons, Io, is perhaps
the most volcanically active body in our solar system.
More than 80 active, sulfurous volcanic centers have
been discovered. Umbrella-shaped plumes have been
observed rising from Io’s surface to heights approaching 200 kilometers (125 miles) (Figure 24.20A). The heat
source for volcanic activity is tidal energy generated by
A. Io is one of only three
B. Europa, the smallest
a relentless “tug of war” between Jupiter and the other
volcanically active bodies
of the Galilean moons,
Galilean satellites—with Io as the rope. The gravitational
other than Earth known
has an icy surface that
to exist in the solar system.
is crisscrossed by many
field of Jupiter and the other nearby satellites pull and
linear features.
push on Io’s tidal bulge as its slightly eccentric orbit
takes it alternately closer to and farther from
Jupiter. This gravitational flexing of Io is
transformed into heat (similar to the backand-forth bending of a piece of sheet
metal) and results in Io’s spectacular
sulfurous volcanic eruptions. Lava,
thought to be mainly composed of silicate minerals, regularly erupts on its
surface (Figure 24.20B).
The planets closer to the Sun than
Earth are considered too warm to contain
liquid water, and those farther from the
Sun are generally too cold (although recall
C. Ganymede, the largest Jovian
D. Callisto, the outermost of the
that Mars probably had abundant liquid
satellite, exhibits cratered areas,
Galilean satellites, is densely
water at some point in its history). The best
smooth regions, and areas covered
cratered, much like Earth’s Moon.
prospects of finding liquid water within our by numerous parallel grooves.

Figure 24.18
View of Jupiter’s aurora,
taken by the Hubble
Space Telescope This
phenomenon is produced
by high-energy electrons
racing along Jupiter’s
magnetic field. The electrons excite atmospheric
gases and make them
glow. (Courtesy of NASA/John
Clark)

Figure 24.19
Jupiter’s four largest
moons These moons are
often referred to as the
Galilean moons because
Galileo discovered them.
(Courtesy of NASA)

752

CHAPTER 24

Figure 24.20

Touring Our Solar System
B.

A.

A volcanic eruption on
Jupiter’s moon Io
(Courtesy of NASA; Jet Propulsion
Laboratory/University of Arizona/
NASA)

This plume of volcanic gases
and debris is rising more than
100 kilometers (60 miles) above
Io’s surface.

The bright red area on the left side of the
image (see arrow) is newly erupted lava.

system. More recently, the ring system was thoroughly
investigated by the Galileo mission. By analyzing how
these rings scatter light, researchers determined that the
rings are composed of fine, dark particles similar in size
to smoke particles. Furthermore, the faint nature of the
rings indicates that these minute particles are widely dispersed. The main ring is composed of particles believed
to be fragments blasted from the surfaces of Metis and
Adrastea, two small moons of Jupiter. Impacts on Jupiter’s
moons Amalthea and Thebe are believed to be the source
of the debris from which the outer gossamer ring formed.

Saturn: The Elegant Planet
Requiring more than 29 Earth years to make one revolution, Saturn is almost twice as far from the Sun as Jupiter,
yet their atmospheres, compositions, and internal structures are remarkably similar. The most striking feature
of Saturn is its system of rings, first observed by Galileo
in 1610 (Figure 24.21). Through his primitive telescope,

the rings appeared as two small bodies adjacent to the
planet. Their ring nature was determined 50 years later
by Dutch astronomer Christian Huygens.
Saturn’s atmosphere, like Jupiter’s, is dynamic.
Although the bands of clouds are fainter and wider
near the equator, rotating “storms” similar to Jupiter’s
Great Red Spot occur in Saturn’s atmosphere, as does
intense lightning. Although the atmosphere is about 93
percent hydrogen and 3 percent helium by volume, the
clouds (or condensed gases) are composed of ammonia,
ammonia hydrosulfide, and water, each segregated by
temperature. As on Jupiter, the dynamics of Saturn’s
atmosphere are driven by the heat released by gravitational compression.

Saturn’s Moons The Saturnian satellite system consists of 62 known moons, of which 53 have been named.
The moons vary significantly in size, shape, surface age,
and origin. Twenty-three of the moons are “original”
satellites that formed in tandem with their parent planet.

Figure 24.21
Saturn’s dynamic ring
system The two bright
rings, called the A ring
(outer) and B ring (inner),
are separated by the
Cassini division. A second
small gap (Encke gap) is
also visible as a thin line in
the outer portion of the A
ring. (Courtesy of NASA)

Cassini division

Encke gap

Saturn

D C

B

A

753

24.4 Jovian Planets

Saturn’s Ring System In the early 1980s, the nuclearpowered Voyagers 1 and 2 explored Saturn within
160,000 kilometers (100,000 miles) of its surface. More
information was collected about Saturn in that short
time than had been acquired since Galileo first viewed
this “elegant planet” in the early 1600s. More recently,
observations from ground-based telescopes, the Hubble
Space Telescope, and the Cassini-Huygens spacecraft,
have added to our knowledge of Saturn’s ring system. In
1995 and 1996, when the positions of Earth and Saturn
allowed the rings to be viewed edge-on, Saturn’s faintest
rings and satellites became visible. (The rings were visible edge-on again in 2009.)
Saturn’s ring system is more like a large rotating disk
of varying density and brightness than a series of independent ringlets. Each ring is composed of individual
particles—mainly water ice, with lesser amounts of rocky
debris—that circle the planet while regularly impacting one another. There are only a few gaps; most of the
areas that look like empty space either contain fine dust
particles or coated ice particles that are inefficient light
reflectors.
Figure 24.23

Figure 24.22
Hyperion, Saturn’s impact-pummeled satellite Planetary
geologists think Hyperion’s surface is so weak and porous that
impacts punch into its surface. (Courtesy of NASA)

At least 3 (Rhea, Dione, and Tethys) show evidence of
tectonic activity, where internal forces have ripped apart
their icy surfaces. Others, like Hyperion, are so porous
that impacts punch into their surfaces (Figure 24.22).
Many of Saturn’s smallest moons have irregular shapes
and are only a few tens of kilometers in diameter.
Saturn’s largest moon, Titan, is larger than Mercury
and is the second-largest satellite in the solar system.
Titan and Neptune’s Triton are the only satellites in the
solar system known to have substantial atmospheres.
Titan was visited and photographed by the CassiniHuygens probe in 2005. The atmospheric pressure at
Titan’s surface is about 1.5 times that at Earth’s surface,
and the atmospheric composition is about 98 percent
nitrogen and 2 percent methane, with trace organic
compounds. Titan has Earth-like landforms and geologic
processes, such as dune formation and streamlike erosion
caused by methane “rain.” In addition, the northern latitudes appear to have lakes of liquid methane.
Enceladus is another unique satellite of Saturn—one
of the few where active eruptions have been observed
(Figure 24.23). The outgassing, comprised mostly of water,
is thought to be the source that replenishes the material
in Saturn’s E ring. The volcanic-like activity occurs in
areas called “tiger stripes” that consist of four large fractures with ridges on either side.

Labtayt Sulci

Enceladus, Saturn’s
tectonically active, icy
satellite The northern
hemisphere contains a
1-kilometer-deep (0.6-miledeep) chasm, and linear
features called tiger stripes
are visible in the lower
right. Inset image shows
jets spurting ice particles,
water vapor, and organic
compounds from the area
of the tiger stripes. (Courtesy
of NASA)

Tiger stripes

Jets spurting ice and water

754

CHAPTER 24

Figure 24.24
Two of Saturn’s ring
moons (Courtesy of NASA)

Touring Our Solar System

moons—condensing
from a flattened cloud
of dust and gases that
Encke gap
Moon
encircled the parent
planet. Or perhaps the
rings formed later, when
Moon
a moon or large asteroid was gravitationally
pulled apart after straying too close to a planet.
Yet another hypothesis
suggests that a foreign
body collided catastrophically with one
of the planet’s moons,
the fragments of which
A. Pan is a small moon about 30 kilometers in
B. Prometheus, a potato-shaped moon, acts
would
tend to jostle one
diameter that orbits in the Encke gap, located
as a ring shepherd. Its gravity helps confine
in the A ring. It is responsible for keeping the
the moonlets in Saturn’s thin Fring.
another and form a flat,
Encke gap open by sweeping up any stray
thin ring. Researchers
material that may enter.
expect more light to be shed on the origin of planetary
rings as the Cassini spacecraft continues its tour of
Most of Saturn’s rings fall into one of two categories,
Saturn.
based on density. Saturn’s main (bright) rings, designated
A and B, are tightly packed and contain particles ranging in size from a few centimeters (pebble-size) to tens
Uranus and Neptune: Twins
of meters (house-size), with most of the particles being
roughly the size of a large snowball (see Figure 24.21). In
Although Earth and Venus have many similar traits,
these dense rings, particles collide frequently as they orbit Uranus and Neptune are perhaps more deserving of
the planet. Although Saturn’s main rings (A and B) are
being called “twins.” They are nearly equal in diameter
40,000 kilometers (25,000 miles) wide, they are very thin, (both about four times the size of Earth), and they are
only 10–30 meters (30–100 feet) from top to bottom.
both bluish in appearance, as a result of methane in their
At the other extreme are Saturn’s faint rings. Satatmospheres. Their days are nearly the same length, and
urn’s outermost ring (E ring), not visible in Figure
their cores are made of rocky silicates and iron—similar
24.21, is composed of widely dispersed, tiny particles.
to the other gas giants. Their mantles, made mainly of
Recall that volcanic-like activity on Saturn’s satellite
water, ammonia, and methane, are thought to be very
Enceladus is thought to be the source of material for
different from those of Jupiter and Saturn. One of the
the E ring.
most pronounced differences between Uranus and NepStudies have shown that the gravitational tugs of
tune is the time they take to complete one revolution
nearby moons tend to “shepherd” the ring particles by
around the Sun—84 and 165 Earth years, respectively.
gravitationally altering their orbits (Figure 24.24). For
example, the F ring, which is very narrow, appears to
Uranus: The Sideways Planet Unique to Uranus is
be the work of satellites located on either side that conthe orientation of its axis of rotation. Whereas the other
fine the ring by pulling back particles that try to escape.
planets resemble spinning toy tops as they circle the Sun,
On the other hand, the Cassini division, a clearly visible
Uranus is like a top that has been knocked on its side but
gap in Figure 24.21, arises from the gravitational pull of
remains spinning (Figure 24.25). This unusual characterMimas, one of Saturn’s moons.
istic of Uranus is likely due to one or more impacts that
Some of the ring particles are believed to be debris
essentially knocked the planet sideways from its original
ejected from the moons embedded in them. It is also
orientation early in its evolution.
possible that material is continually recycled between
Uranus shows evidence of huge storm systems
the rings and the ring moons. The ring moons gradually
equivalent in size to those in the United States. Recent
sweep up particles, which are subsequently ejected by
photographs from the Hubble Space Telescope also
collisions with large chunks of ring material or perhaps
reveal banded clouds composed mainly of ammonia and
by energetic collisions with other moons. It seems, then,
methane ice—similar to the cloud systems of the other
that planetary rings are not timeless features as we once
gas giants.
thought; rather, they are continually recycled.
The origin of planetary ring systems is still
Uranus’s Moons Spectacular views from Voyager 2
being debated. Perhaps the rings formed simultaneshowed that Uranus’s five largest moons have varied terously and from the same material as the planets and
rains. Some have long, deep canyons and linear scars,

755

24.4 Jovian Planets

Figure 24.25

whereas others possess large, smooth areas on otherwise
crater-riddled surfaces. Studies conducted at NASA’s Jet
Propulsion Laboratory suggest that Miranda, the innermost of the five largest moons, was recently geologically
active—most likely driven by gravitational heating, as
occurs on Io.

Uranus, surrounded by
its major rings and a few
of its known moons Also
visible in this image are
cloud patterns and several
oval storm systems. This
false-color image was
generated from data
obtained by Hubble’s Near
Infrared Camera. (Image by

Uranus’s Rings A surprise discovery in 1977 showed that
Uranus has a ring system. The discovery was made as Uranus passed in front of a distant star and blocked its view, a
process called occultation (occult = hidden). Observers saw
the star “wink” briefly five times (meaning five rings) before
the primary occultation and again five times afterward.
More recent ground- and space-based observations indicate
that Uranus has at least 10 sharp-edged, distinct rings orbiting its equatorial region. Interspersed among these distinct
structures are broad sheets of dust.

Hubble Space Telescope, courtesy
of NASA)

Neptune: The Windy Planet Because of Neptune’s
great distance from Earth, astronomers knew very little
about this planet until 1989. Twelve years and nearly 3
billion miles of Voyager 2 travel provided investigators an
amazing opportunity to view the outermost planet.
Neptune has a dynamic atmosphere, much like that
of the other Jovian planets (Figure 24.26). Record wind
speeds exceeding 2400 kilometers (1500 miles) per hour
encircle the planet, making Neptune one of the windiest
places in the solar system. Neptune also exhibits large
dark spots, thought to be rotating storms similar to Jupiter’s Great Red Spot. However, Neptune’s storms appear
to have comparatively short life spans—usually only a
few years. Another feature that Neptune has in common
with the other Jovian planets is layers of white, cirrus-like
clouds (probably frozen methane) about 50 kilometers (30
miles) above the main cloud deck.

above the surface and were blown downwind for more
than 100 kilometers (60 miles).

Neptune’s Rings Neptune has five named rings;
two of them are broad, and three are narrow, perhaps
no more than 100 kilometers (60 miles) wide. The
Figure 24.26
Neptune’s dynamic
atmosphere

Neptune’s Moons Neptune has 14 known satellites,
the largest of which is Triton; the other 13 are small,
irregularly shaped bodies. Triton is the only large moon
in the solar system that exhibits retrograde motion, indicating that it most likely formed independently and was
later gravitationally captured by Neptune (Figure 24.27).
Triton and a few other icy moons erupt “fluid” ices—
an amazing manifestation of volcanism. Cryovolcanism
(from the Greek kryos, meaning “frost”) describes the
eruption of magmas derived from the partial melting
of ice instead of silicate rocks. Triton’s icy magma is a
mixture of water ice, methane, and probably ammonia.
When partially melted, this mixture behaves as molten
rock does on Earth. In fact, upon reaching the surface,
these magmas can generate quiet outpourings of ice lavas
that can flow great distances from their source—similar
to the fluid basaltic flows on Hawaii. They also occasionally produce explosive eruptions that can generate the ice
equivalent of volcanic ash. In 1989, Voyager 2 detected
active plumes on Triton that rose 8 kilometers (5 miles)

(Courtesy of NASA)

Great dark spot

Cirrus-like clouds
Dark spot with
bright core

756

CHAPTER 24

Touring Our Solar System

Figure 24.27

outermost ring appears to be partially confined by the
satellite Galatea. Neptune’s rings, like Jupiter’s, appear
faint, which suggests that they are composed mostly
of dust-size particles. Neptune’s rings also display red
colors, indicating that the dust is composed of organic
compounds.

Triton, Neptune’s largest moon The bottom of
the image shows Triton’s
wind- and sublimationeroded south polar cap.
Sublimation is the process
whereby a solid (ice)
changes directly to a gas.
(Courtesy of NASA)

24.4

Concept Checks

1. What is the nature of Jupiter’s Great Red Spot?
2. What is distinctive about Jupiter’s satellite Io?
3. How are Jupiter and Saturn similar to one
another?
4. What two roles do ring moons play in the nature
of planetary ring systems?
5. How are Saturn’s satellite Titan and Neptune’s
satellite Triton similar to one another?
6. Name three bodies in the solar system that exhibit
active volcanism.

E Y E ON E A R T H

24.2

I

n 2012, the Hubble Space Telescope captured these
images of auroras above the giant planet Uranus.
These light shows on Uranus appear to last for only a
few minutes and consist of faint glowing dots. These are
unlike auroras on Earth, which can color the sky shades
of green, red, or purple for hours. (Photo by NASA)

QUESTION 1 What is unusual about the location of the
auroras on Uranus?
QUESTION 2 What does this indicate about the
locations of Uranus’s “north” and “south” magnetic
poles?

24.5

Small Solar System Bodies
List and describe the principal characteristics of the small bodies that inhabit the
solar system.

There are countless chunks of debris in the vast spaces separating the eight planets and in the outer
reaches of the solar system. In 2006, the International Astronomical Union organized solar system
objects not classified as planets or moons into two broad categories: (1) small solar system bodies, including asteroids, comets, and meteoroids, and (2) dwarf planets. The newest grouping,
dwarf planets, includes Ceres, a body about 1000 kilometers (600 miles) in diameter and the largest
known object in the asteroid belt, and Pluto, a former planet.

757

24.5 Small Solar System Bodies

Asteroids and meteoroids
are composed of rocky and/
or metallic material with
compositions somewhat like
the terrestrial planets. They
are distinguished according
to size: Asteroids are much
larger than meteoroids,
which range in size from
minute grains to 1 meterwide objects. Comets, on the
other hand, are collections
of ices, dust, and small rocky
particles that originate in the outer reaches of the solar
system.

Asteroids: Leftover Planetesimals
Asteroids are small bodies (planetesimals) that remain
from the formation of the solar system, which means
they are about 4.6 billion years old. Most asteroids orbit
the Sun between Mars and Jupiter, in the region known
as the asteroid belt (Figure 24.28). There are only four
asteroids with diameters greater than 400 kilometers
(250 miles). However, the solar system hosts an
estimated 1 to 2 million asteroids larger than 1 kilometer
(0.6 mile) and many millions that are smaller. Some travel
along eccentric orbits that take them very near the Sun,
and others regularly pass close to Earth and the Moon
(Earth-crossing asteroids). Many of the recent largeimpact craters on the Moon and Earth probably resulted
from collisions with asteroids. An estimated 1000 to 2000
Earth-crossing asteroids are more than 0.6 kilometer
(0.37 mile) in diameter. Inevitably, Earth–asteroid
collisions will occur again (see GEOgraphics 24.2).
Because most asteroids have irregular shapes, planetary geologists initially speculated that they might be
fragments of a broken planet that once orbited between
Mars and Jupiter. However, the combined mass of all
asteroids is now estimated to be less than 1/1000 of
the modest-sized Earth. Today, most researchers agree
that asteroids are leftover debris from the solar nebula.
Asteroids have lower densities than scientists originally
thought, suggesting that they are porous bodies, like
“piles of rubble,” loosely bound together (Figure 24.29).
In February 2001, an American spacecraft became
the first visitor to an asteroid. Although it was not
designed for landing, NEAR Shoemaker landed successfully on Eros and collected information that has
planetary geologists both intrigued and perplexed.
Images obtained as the spacecraft drifted toward
the surface of Eros revealed a barren, rocky surface
composed of particles ranging in size from fine dust
to boulders up to 10 meters (30 feet) across. Researchers unexpectedly discovered that fine debris tends
to concentrate in the low areas, where it forms flat
deposits resembling ponds. Surrounding the low areas,

Figure 24.28
Asteroid belt

Mars

The asteroid belt The
orbits of most asteroids lie
between Mars and Jupiter.
Also shown in red are the
orbits of a few known nearEarth asteroids.

Earth

Jupiter

the landscape is marked by an abundance of large
boulders.
One of several hypotheses to explain the boulderstrewn topography is seismic shaking, which would cause
the boulders to move upward as the finer materials sink.
This is analogous to what happens when a jar of sand and
various-sized pebbles is shaken: The larger pebbles rise
to the top, while the smaller sand grains settle to the bottom (sometimes referred to as the Brazil nut effect).
Indirect evidence from meteorites suggests that
some asteroids might have been heated by a large impact
event. A few large asteroids may have completely melted,
causing them to differentiate into a dense iron core and
a rocky mantle. In November 2005, the Japanese probe
Hayabusa landed on a small near-Earth asteroid named
25143 Itokawa; it returned to Earth in June 2010. Analyzed samples suggest that the surface of the asteroid
was identical in composition to meteorites and was once
part of a larger asteroid. Hayabusa 2, launched in 2014,
is expected to land on its target, asteroid 1999 JU3, in
July 2018. After exploring this asteroid by digging into its
surface to extract fresh samples, it is scheduled to return
to Earth in 2020.
Figure 24.29
Giant asteroid Vesta
(Photo courtesy of NASA)

760

CHAPTER 24

Touring Our Solar System

Figure 24.30
Changing orientation of a
comet’s tail as it orbits the
Sun (Photo by Dan Schechter/

Tail of ionized
gases

Tail of ionized
gases

Science Source)

Fully
formed,
curved
dust tail

Sun

Dust tail
beginning
to form

Tail composed of dust

Orbit

Comets: Dirty Snowballs
Comets, like asteroids, are leftover material from the formation of the solar system. They are loose collections of
rocky material, dust, water ice, and frozen gases (ammonia, methane, and carbon dioxide) and thus are nicknamed “dirty snowballs.” Recent space missions to comets
have shown their surfaces to be dry and dusty, which indicates that their ices are hidden beneath a rocky layer.
Most comets reside in the outer reaches of the solar
system and take hundreds of thousands of years to complete a single orbit around the Sun. However, a smaller
Figure 24.31
Coma of Comet
Holmes The nucleus of the
comet is within the bright
spot in the center. Comet
Holmes, which orbits the
Sun every 6 years, was
uncharacteristically active
during its most recent entry
into the inner solar system.
(Courtesy of NASA)

number of short-period
comets (those having orbital
periods of less than 200
years), such as the famous
Halley’s Comet, make regular
encounters with the inner
solar system (Figure 24.30).
The shortest-period comet
(Encke’s Comet) orbits the
Sun once every 3 years.

Structure and Composition
of Comets All the phenom-

ena associated with comets
come from a small central
body called the nucleus.
Ion tail
These structures are typically
1 to 10 kilometers in diameter, but nuclei 40 kilometers
across have been observed. When comets reach the inner
solar system, solar energy begins to vaporize their ices. The
escaping gases carry dust from the comet’s surface, producing a highly reflective halo called a coma (Figure 24.31).
Within the coma, the small glowing nucleus with a diameter of only a few kilometers can sometimes be detected.
As comets approach the Sun, most develop tails that
can extend for millions of kilometers. The tail of a comet
points away from the Sun in a slightly curved manner
(see Figure 24.30), which led early astronomers to believe
that the Sun has a repulsive force that pushes away
particles of the coma to form the tail. Scientists have
identified two solar forces known to contribute to tail
formation: radiation pressure caused by radiant energy
(light) emitted by the Sun and the charged particles of
the solar wind. Sometimes a single tail composed of
both dust and ionized gases is produced, but two tails
are often observed (see Figure 24.30). The heavier dust
particles produce a slightly curved tail that follows the
comet’s orbit, whereas the extremely light ionized gases
are “pushed” directly away from the Sun, forming the
second tail.
As a comet’s orbit carries it away from the Sun, the
gases forming the coma recondense, the tail disappears,
and the comet returns to cold storage. Material that was
blown from the coma to form the tail is lost forever. When
all the gases are expelled, the inactive comet, which
closely resembles an asteroid, continues its orbit without a
coma or tail. It is believed that few comets remain active
for more than a few hundred close orbits of the Sun.
The very first samples from a comet’s coma (Comet
Wild 2) were returned to Earth in January 2006 by
NASA’s Stardust spacecraft (Figure 24.32). Images from
Stardust show that the comet’s surface was riddled with
flat-bottomed depressions and appeared dry, although at
least 10 gas jets were active. Laboratory studies revealed

761

24.5 Small Solar System Bodies

Figure 24.32

that the coma contained a wide range
of organic compounds and substantial
amounts of silicate crystals.

Comet Wild 2 This image
shows Comet Wild 2, as
seen by NASA’s Stardust
spacecraft. The inset
shows an artist’s depiction of jets of gas and dust
erupting from Comet Wild 2.

The Realm of Comets: The Kuiper
Belt and Oort Cloud Most comets originate in one of two regions:
the Kuiper belt or the Oort cloud.
Named in honor of astronomer Gerald Kuiper, who predicted its existence, the Kuiper belt hosts comets that orbit in
the outer solar system, beyond Neptune (see Figure 24.1). This disc-shaped structure is thought
to contain about a billion objects over 1 kilometer (0.62 mile) in size. However, most comets
are too small and too distant to be observed
from Earth, even using the Hubble Space Telescope. Like the asteroids in the inner solar system, most Kuiper belt comets move in slightly
elliptical orbits that lie roughly in the same plane
as the planets. A chance collision between two
Kuiper belt comets or the gravitational influence of
one of the Jovian planets occasionally alters their orbits
sufficiently to send them into our view.
Halley’s Comet originated in the Kuiper belt. Its
orbital period averages 76 years, and every one of its 29
appearances since 240 b.c.e. has been recorded, thanks
to ancient Chinese astronomers—testimony to their
dedication as astronomical observers and the endurance
of Chinese culture. In 1910, Halley’s Comet made a
very close approach to Earth, making for a spectacular
display.
Named for Dutch astronomer Jan Oort, the Oort
cloud consists of comets that are distributed in all directions from the Sun, forming a spherical shell around the
solar system. Most Oort cloud comets orbit the Sun at distances greater than 10,000 times the Earth–Sun distance.
The gravitational effect of a distant passing star may send
an occasional Oort cloud comet into a highly eccentric orbit
that carries it toward the Sun. However, only a tiny fraction
of Oort cloud comets have orbits that bring them into the
inner solar system.

Meteoroids: Visitors to Earth
Nearly everyone has seen meteors, commonly (but inaccurately) called “shooting stars.” These streaks of light
can be observed in as little as the blink of an eye or
can last as “long” as a few seconds. They occur when a
small solid particle, a meteoroid, enters Earth’s atmosphere from interplanetary space. Heat, created by friction between the meteoroid and the air, produces the
light we see trailing across the sky. Most meteoroids
originate from one of three sources: (1) interplanetary
debris missed by the gravitational sweep of the planets

(Courtesy of NASA)

during formation of the solar system, (2) material that is
continually being ejected from the asteroid belt, or (3)
the rocky and/or metallic remains of comets that once
passed through Earth’s orbit. A few meteoroids are probably fragments of the Moon, Mars, or possibly Mercury,
ejected by a violent asteroid impact. Before Apollo astronauts brought Moon rocks back to Earth, meteorites
were the only extraterrestrial materials that could be
studied in the laboratory.
Meteoroids less than about 1 meter (3 feet) in diameter generally vaporize before reaching Earth’s surface.
Some, called micrometeorites, are so tiny and their rate
of fall so slow that they drift to Earth continually as
space dust. Researchers estimate that thousands of meteoroids enter Earth’s atmosphere every day. After sunset
on a clear, dark night, many are bright enough to be seen
with the naked eye.

Meteor Showers Occasionally, meteor sightings
increase dramatically to 60 or more per hour. These
displays, called meteor showers, result when Earth
encounters a swarm of meteoroids traveling in the
same direction at nearly the same speed as Earth. The
close association of these swarms to the orbits of some
short-term comets strongly suggests that they represent

762

CHAPTER 24

Touring Our Solar System
TABLE 24.2

Major Meteor Showers

Shower

Approximate
Dates

Quadrantids

January 4–6

Associated Comet

Lyrids

April 20–23

Comet 1861 I

Eta Aquarids

May 3–5

Halley’s Comet

Delta Aquarids

July 30

Perseids

August 12

Comet Swift-Tuttle

Draconids

October 7–10

Comet Giacobini-Zinner

Orionids

October 20

Halley’s Comet

Taurids

November 3–13

Encke’s Comet

Andromedids

November 14

Comet Biela

Leonids

November 18

Comet 1866 I

Geminids

December 4–16

material lost by these comets (Table 24.2). Some swarms,
not associated with the orbits of known comets, are
probably the scattered remains of the nucleus of a longdefunct comet. The notable Perseid meteor shower
that occurs each year around August 12 is likely material ejected from the comet Swift–Tuttle on previous
approaches to the Sun.
Most meteoroids large enough to survive passage
through the atmosphere to impact Earth probably originate among the asteroids, where chance collisions or
gravitational interactions with Jupiter modify their orbits
and send them toward Earth. Earth’s gravity does the
rest.

SmartFigure 24.33
Meteor Crater, near Winslow, Arizona This cavity is about 1.2
kilometers (0.75 mile) across and 170 meters (560 feet) deep. The
solar system is cluttered with asteroids and comets that can strike
Earth with explosive force. (Photo by Michael Collier) (http://goo.gl/0UNWkM)

A few very large meteoroids have blasted craters on
Earth’s surface that strongly resemble those on our Moon.
At least 40 terrestrial craters exhibit features that could be
produced only by an explosive impact of a large asteroid
or perhaps even a comet nucleus. More than 250 others
may be of impact origin. Notable among them is Arizona’s Meteor Crater, a huge cavity more than 1 kilometer
(0.6 mile) wide and 170 meters (560 feet) deep, with an
upturned rim that rises above the surrounding countryside (Figure 24.33). More than 30 tons of iron fragments
have been found in the immediate area, but attempts to
locate the main body have been unsuccessful. Based on
the amount of erosion observed on the crater rim, the
impact likely occurred within the past 50,000 years.

Types of Meteorites The remains of meteoroids,
when found on Earth, are referred to as meteorites
(Figure 24.34). Classified by their composition, meteorites are either (1) irons, mostly aggregates of iron with
5–20 percent nickel; (2) stony (also called chondrites),
silicate minerals with inclusions of other minerals; or
(3) stony–irons, mixtures of the two. Although stony
meteorites are the most common, irons are found in
large numbers because metallic meteorites withstand
impacts better, weather more slowly, and are easily distinguished from terrestrial rocks. Iron meteorites are
probably fragments of once-molten cores of large asteroids or small planets.
One type of stony meteorite, called a carbonaceous
chondrite, contains organic compounds and occasionally

763

24.5 Small Solar System Bodies

simple amino acids, which are some of the
basic building blocks of life. This discovery confirms similar findings
in observational astronomy,
which indicate that numerous
organic compounds exist in
interstellar space.
Data from meteorites
0
have been used to ascertain
the internal structure of
Earth and the age of the
solar system. If meteorites
represent the composition
of the terrestrial planets, as
some planetary geologists
suggest, our planet must
contain a much larger percentage of iron than is indicated by surface rocks. This is one reason that geologists
think Earth’s core is mostly iron and nickel. In addition,
radiometric dating of meteorites indicates that the age
of our solar system is about 4.6 billion years. This “old
age” has been confirmed by data obtained from lunar
samples.

Dwarf Planets
Since its discovery in 1930, Pluto has been a mystery to
astronomers who were searching for another planet in
order to explain irregularities in Neptune’s orbit. At the
time of its discovery, Pluto was thought to be the size of
Earth—too small to significantly alter Neptune’s orbit.
Recently, it was determined that Pluto’s diameter is about
2370 kilometers (1470 miles), about one-fifth the diameter of Earth and less than half that of Mercury (long
considered the solar system’s “runt”).
More attention was given to Pluto’s status as a planet
when astronomers discovered another large icy body in
orbit beyond Neptune. Soon, more than 1000 of these
Kuiper belt objects were discovered forming a band of
objects—a second “asteroid belt,” but located at the outskirts of the solar system. The Kuiper belt objects are rich
in ices and have physical properties similar to those of
comets. Many other planetary objects, some perhaps larger
than Pluto, are thought to exist in this belt of icy worlds
beyond Neptune’s orbit. Researchers soon recognized that
Pluto was unique among the planets—completely different
from the four rocky, innermost planets, as well as the four
gaseous giants.
In 2006, the International Astronomical Union, the
group responsible for naming and classifying celestial
objects, voted to designate a new class of solar system
objects called dwarf planets. These celestial bodies orbit
the Sun and are essentially spherical due to their own
gravity but are not large enough to sweep their orbits

SmartFigure 24.34
Iron meteorite found near
Meteor Crater, Arizona
(Courtesy of M2 Photography/Alamy)
(https://goo.gl/bbT16J)

10
cm

clear of other debris. By this definition, Pluto is recognized as a dwarf planet and was the prototype for this
new category of planetary objects. Other dwarf planets
include Eris, a Kuiper belt object, and Ceres, the largestknown asteroid.
In July 2015, when this chapter was being finalized,
NASA’s New Horizons spacecraft shot past Pluto, after a
9-year journey that brought it within 12,500 kilometers
(7800 miles) of Pluto’s surface. Images transmitted from
New Horizons showed Pluto to be a complex body with
several distinct terrains including mountainous areas,
ice plains, and rugged areas showing a history of impacts
(Figure 24.35). One of the most interesting regions,
named Sputnik Planum (planum = plain or flat area), is
found in Pluto’s southern hemisphere. Sputnik Planum
Figure 24.35

Sputnik
Planum

This enhanced color image
is used to detect differences in the composition
and texture of Pluto’s
surface The bright area in
the lower-central region,
sometimes referred to as
“the heart of the heart” is
formally named Sputnik
Planum and is thought to
be the source of exotic
ices that flowed to produce
the two bluish lobes near
the bottom of the image.
(Courtesy of NASA)


