for water, organic compounds, and other potential evidence of microbial life. Among the most fascinating bits of evidence to come back from Mars were the photographs of rock formations dating to 3.7 billion years ago, near the time we believe life began on Earth (Fig. 3). Geologist Nora Noffke, at Old Dominion University, examined these photographs using the same criteria geologists use to define microfossils of early life on Earth. She observed many features of Martian rock that resemble ancient terrestrial fossils of microbial mats—possibly cyanobacteria similar to those of Antarctic lakes. For example, flat stretches of sediment show layers that appear folded or even rolled up, as if a flexible mat of living cells had torn and rolled back onto itself. Noffke compiled such a large group of features that ultimately, she argues, if such forms indicate fossil life on Earth, they must also indicate fossil life on Mars. 

If microbial life once existed on Mars, could some forms live on, perhaps under the rock strata where pockets of water remain? As of this writing, Curiosity’s quest for data rolls on. 

How can we be sure that a fossil formation arose biogenically—that is, from a life-form? Could you define quantitative criteria for microbial fossils? Noffke, Nora. 2015. Ancient sedimentary structures in the <3.7 Ga Gillespie Lake Member, Mars, that resemble macroscopic morphology, spatial associations, and temporal succession in terrestrial microbialites. Astrobiology 15:169–192. 

Finally, we address the exciting century of molecular microbiology, in which microbial genetics, genomics, and evolution have transformed the practice of medicine and our understanding of the natural world. 

What Is a Microbe? 

From early childhood, we hear that we are surrounded by microscopic organisms, or “germs,” which we cannot see. What are these microbes? Our modern concept of a microbe has deepened through the use of two major research tools: Microscopy is covered in Chapter 2, and genome sequencing is presented in Chapter 7. Exciting tools of “synthetic biology,” to engineer new kinds of microbes, are described in Chapter 12. 

Microbial communities. Many microbes form complex multicellular assemblages, such as mushrooms, kelps, and biofilms. In these structures, cells are differentiated into distinct types that complement each other’s functions, as in multicellular organisms. And yet, some multicellular worms and arthropods require a microscope for us to see but are not considered microbes. 

genetic material that takes over the metabolism of a cell to generate more virus particles. Some viruses consist of only a short chromosome packed in protein. Other kinds of viruses, such as pandoraviruses that infect amebas, show the size and complexity of a cell. Although viruses are not fully functional cells, some viral genomes may have evolved from cells. 

Each section of text contains Thought Questions that may have various answers. Possible responses are provided at the back of the book. 

0.2 µm. Could even smaller cells be discovered? What factors may determine the minimum size of a cell? 

In practice, our definition of a microbe derives from tradition as well as genetic considerations. In this book we consider microbes to include prokaryotes (cells lacking a nucleus, including bacteria and archaea) as well as certain classes of eukaryotes (cells with a nucleus), such as algae, fungi, and protists (discussed in Chapter 20). The bacteria, archaea, and eukaryotes—known as the three “domains”— evolved from a common ancestral cell (see Section 1.5 and Chapter 21). Viruses and even smaller infectious particles are discussed in Chapters 6 and 11. 

Microbiology (holding the flask), examines a culture of the sulfur bacteria with a colleague. 

Colored bars indicate gene sequences. 

Smith, and Claire Fraser past president of The Insti(Fig. 1.7) at The Institute tute for Genomic Research for Genomic Research microbial genomes. devised a special computational strategy for assembling large amounts of sequence data—a strategy later used to sequence the human genome. Today we sequence new bacterial genomes daily. In addition to sequencing individual genomes, computational strategies are used to sequence thousands of genomes of microbes sampled from a natural environment, such as the acid drainage from an iron mine. The collection of sequences taken directly from the environment is called a metagenome. The first metagenome of an acid mine was in 2004. Now, metagenomes are sequenced for microbial communities of medical interest, such as that of the human colon. Human gut microbes contain 100 times more genes in their metagenomes than the human genome contains— and many of these microbial genes contribute to our health! Comparing genomes has revealed a set of core genes shared by all organisms. These core genes add further evidence that all life on Earth, including humans, shares a common ancestry. Genomes are discussed further in Chapter 7, and the evolution of genomes and metagenomes is discussed in Chapters 17 and 21. 

microbiology, scientists established the fundamental principles of disease pathology and microbial ecology that are still in use today. This period laid the foundation for modern biology, in which genetics and molecular biology provide powerful tools for scientists to manipulate microorganisms for medicine, research, and industry. 

Production and destruction by fort cheeses ripening in cathedral of Cologne, Germany, decaying from the action of lithotrophic microbes. The process is accelerated by acid rain. 

which wiped out a third of Europe’s population in the fourteenth century, was caused by Yersinia pestis, a bacterium spread by rat fleas. Ironically, the plague-induced population decline enabled the social transformation that led to the Renaissance, a period of unprecedented cultural advancement. In the nineteenth century, the bacterium Mycobacterium tuberculosis stalked overcrowded cities, and tuberculosis was so common that the pallid appearance of tubercular patients became a symbol of tragic youth in European arts, such as Puccini’s opera La Bohème. Today, societies throughout the world are devastated by the epidemic of acquired Historians traditionally emphasize the role of warfare in shaping human destiny, and the brilliance of leaders, or the advantage of new technology, in determining which civilizations rise or fall. Yet the fate of human societies is often determined by microbes. For example, much of the native population of North America was exterminated by smallpox introduced by European invaders. Throughout history, more soldiers have died of microbial infections than of wounds in battle. founder of professional nursing, Nightingale also founded the science of medical statistics. She used methods invented by French statisticians to demonstrate the high mortality rate due to disease among British soldiers during the Crimean War. To show the deaths of soldiers due to various this chart, blue wedges represent deaths due to infectious disease, red wedges represent deaths due to wounds, and black wedges represent all other causes of death. Infectious disease accounts for more than half of all mortality. Before Nightingale, no one understood the impact of disease on armies, or on other crowded populations, such as in cities. Nightingale’s statistics convinced the British government to improve army living conditions and to upgrade the standards of army hospitals. In modern epidemiology, statistical analysis continues to be a crucial tool in determining the causes of disease. 

Leeuwenhoek, the first person to observe individual microbes. bacteria viewed through a replica of Leeuwenhoek’s instrument. 

his teeth after drinking a hot beverage suggested that heat killed microbes—a profoundly important principle for the study and control of microbes ever since. Leeuwenhoek is believed to have died, ironically, of a disease contracted from sheep whose bacteria he had observed. Historians have often wondered why it took so many centuries for Leeuwenhoek and his successors to determine the link between microbes and disease. Although observers such as Agostino Bassi de Lodi (1773–1856) noted cases of microbes associated with pathology (see Table 1.2), the very ubiquity of microbes—most of them actually harmless—may have obscured their more deadly roles. In addition, it was hard to distinguish between microbes and the single-celled components of the human body, such as blood cells and sperm. It was not until the nineteenth century that human tissues could be distinguished from microbial cells by the application of differential chemical stains (discussed in Chapter 2). Thought Question 1.3 Why do you think it took so long for humans to connect microbes with infectious disease? 

Do Microbes Have Parents? 

The observation of microscopic organisms led priests and philosophers to wonder where these tiny beings came from. In the eighteenth century, scientists and church leaders intensely debated the question of spontaneous generation. Spontaneous generation is the concept that living creatures such as maggots could arise spontaneously, without parental organisms. Chemists of the day tended to support spontaneous generation, as it appeared similar to the way chemicals changed during reaction. Christian church leaders, however, supported the biblical view that all organisms have “parents” going back to the first week of creation. The Italian priest Francesco Redi (1626–1697) showed that maggots in decaying meat were the offspring of flies. Meat kept in a sealed container, excluding flies, did not produce maggots. Thus, Redi’s experiment argued against spontaneous generation for macroscopic organisms. The meat still putrefied, however, producing microbes that seemed to arise “without parents.” To disprove spontaneous generation of microbes, another Italian priest, Lazzaro Spallanzani (1729–1799), showed that a sealed flask of meat broth sterilized by boiling failed to grow microbes. Spallanzani also noticed that microbes often appeared in pairs. Were these two parental microbes coupling to produce offspring, or did one microbe become two? Through long and tenacious observation, Spallanzani watched a single microbe grow in size until it split in two. Thus he demonstrated cell fission, the process by which cells arise by the splitting of preexisting cells. Even Spallanzani’s experiments, however, did not put the matter to rest. Proponents of spontaneous generation argued that the microbes in the priest’s flask lacked access to oxygen and therefore could not grow. The pursuit of this question was left to future microbiologists, including the famous French microbiologist Louis Pasteur (1822–1895) related questions, Pasteur and his contemporaries laid the foundations for modern microbiology. Louis Pasteur reveals the biochemical basis of microbial growth. Pasteur began his scientific career as a chemist and wrote his doctoral thesis on the structure of organic crystals. He discovered the fundamental chemical property of chirality, the fact that some organic molecules exist in two forms that differ only by mirror symmetry. In other words, the two structures are mirror images of one another, like the right and left hands. Pasteur found that when microbes were cultured on a nutrient substance containing both mirror forms, only one mirror form was consumed. 

Although spontaneous generation was discredited as a continual source of microbes, at some point in the past the first living organisms must have originated from nonliving materials. How did the first microbes arise? Experiments that aim to replicate the conditions of early Earth yield in sedimentary rock that formed more than 2 billion years ago, and amazingly similar formations are found on Mars. The experimental basis for the origin of life and evolution is discussed in detail in Chapter 17. 

(Fig. 1.14). As a college student, Koch conducted biochemical experiments on his own digestive system. Koch’s curiosity about the natural world led him to develop principles and methods crucial to microbial investigation, including the pure-culture technique and the famous Koch’s postulates for identifying the causative agent of ing anthrax and tuberculosis in Europe, bubonic plague in India, and malaria in New Guinea (Fig. 1.15). 

1. The microbe is found in all cases of the disease but is absent from healthy individuals. 2. The microbe is isolated from the diseased host and grown in pure culture. 3. When the microbe is introduced into a healthy, susceptible host (or animal model), the host shows the same 4. The same strain of microbe is obtained from the newly diseased host. When cultured, the strain shows the same characteristics as before. 

version called the petri dish (or “petri plate”) was invented by a colleague, Julius Richard Petri (1852–1921). The petri dish is a round dish with vertical walls covered by an inverted dish of slightly larger diameter. Today the petri dish, generally made of disposable plastic, remains an indispensable part of the microbiological laboratory. Another improvement in solid-substrate culture was the replacement of gelatin with materials that remain solid at higher temperatures, such as the gelling agent agar (a polymer of the sugar galactose). The use of agar was recommended by Angelina Hesse (1850–1934), a microscopist and illustrator, to her husband, Walther Hesse (1846– 1911), a young medical colleague of Koch (Fig. 1.16). Agar comes from red algae (seaweed), which is used by East Indian birds to build nests; it is the main ingredient in the delicacy “bird’s nest soup.” Dutch colonists used agar to make jellies and preserves, and a Dutch colonist from Java introduced it to Angelina Hesse. The Hesses used agar to develop the first effective growth medium for tuberculosis bacteria. Pure culture and growth conditions are discussed further in Chapters 4 and 5. Note that some kinds of microbes cannot be grown in pure culture—that is, without other organisms. For example, the marine cyanobacterium Prochlorococcus, a major source of Earth’s oxygen, requires heterotrophic bacteria to remove toxic oxygen radicals. And all viruses can be cultured only within their host cells (see Chapter 6). The discovery of viruses is explored at the end of this section. 

1. The microbe is found in all cases of the disease but is absent from healthy individuals. 

2. The microbe is isolated from the diseased host and grown in pure culture. 

3. When the microbe is introduced into a healthy, susceptible host, the same disease occurs. 

4. The same strain of microbe is obtained from the newly diseased host. 

1.4 How could you use Koch’s postulates (Fig. 1.17) to demonstrate the causative agent of influenza? What problems not encountered with anthrax would you need to overcome? 

Before the work of Koch and Pasteur, many patients died of infections transmitted unwittingly by their own doctors. 

serious threats to public health. To combat evolving drug resistance, we continually need to research and develop new antibiotics. Microbial biosynthesis of antibiotics is discussed in Chapter 15, and the medical use of antibiotics is discussed in Chapter 27. 

1.5 Why do you think some pathogens generate immunity readily, whereas others evade the immune system? 1.6 How do you think microbes protect themselves from the antibiotics they produce? 

Robert Koch devised techniques of pure culture to container devised by Julius Petri. Koch’s postulates provide a set of criteria to establish a causative link between an infectious agent and a disease. Edward Jenner established the practice of vaccination, inoculation with cowpox to prevent smallpox. Jenner’s discovery was based on earlier observations by Lady Mary Montagu and others that a mild case of smallpox could prevent future cases. Louis Pasteur developed the first vaccines based on attenuated strains, such as the rabies vaccine. Ignaz Semmelweis and Joseph Lister showed that antiseptics could prevent transmission of pathogens from doctor to patient. Alexander Fleming discovered that the Penicillium mold generates a substance that kills bacteria. Howard Florey and Ernst Chain purified the substance penicillin, the first commercial antibiotic to save human lives. Dmitri Ivanovsky and Martinus Beijerinck discovered viruses as filterable infective particles. Viruses, which may be harmful or beneficial, infect all kinds of cells. 

Koch’s growth of microbes in pure culture was a major grown on Koch’s plate media containing agar or gelatin. advance, enabling the systematic study of microbial physiolThe bacteria that Winogradsky isolated can grow only on ogy and biochemistry. But how does pure culture relate to inorganic minerals; in fact, some species are actually poi“natural” environments, such as a forest or a human intessoned by organic food. For example, nitrifiers convert tine, where countless kinds of microbes interact? ammonia to nitrate, forming a crucial part of the nitrogen In hindsight, the invention of pure culture eclipsed the cycle in natural ecosystems. Winogradsky cultured nitriequally important study of microbial ecology (discussed in fiers on a totally inorganic solution containing ammonia Chapters 21 and 22). Microbes cycle the many minerals and silica gel, which supported no other kind of organism. essential for all life, including all atmospheric nitrogen gas This experiment was an early example of enrichment culand much of the oxygen. Yet less than 0.1% of all microbial ture, the use of selective growth media that support certain species can be cultured in the laboratory. Indeed, unculclasses of microbial metabolism while excluding others. turable microbes make up the majority of Earth’s entire Instead of isolating pure colonies, Winogradsky built biosphere. Only the outer skin of Earth supports complex a model wetland ecosystem containing regions of enrichmulticellular life. The depths of Earth’s crust, to at least ment for microbes of diverse metabolism. This model is 3 kilometers (km) down, as well as the atmosphere 15 km called the Winogradsky column (Fig. 1.22). The model out into the stratosphere, remain the domain of microbes. consists of a glass tube containing mud (a source of wetland So, to a first approximation, Earth’s ecology is microbial bacteria) mixed with shredded newsprint (an organic carecology. bon source) and calcium salts of sulfate and carbonate (an inorganic carbon source for autotrophs). After exposure to light for several weeks, several zones of color develop, full Microbes Support Natural Ecosystems of mineral-metabolizing bacteria. At the top, cyanobacteria The first microbiologists to culture microbes in the laboconduct photosynthesis, using light energy to split water ratory selected the kinds of nutrients that feed humans, and produce molecular oxygen. Below, purple sulfur bactesuch as beef broth or potatoes. Some of Koch’s contemria use photosynthesis to split hydrogen sulfide, producing poraries, however, suspected that other kinds of microbes living in soil or wetlands consume more exotic fare. Soil (donate electrons to) alternative electron acceptors such as samples were known to oxidize hydrogen gas, and this sulfate. Sulfate-reducing bacteria produce hydrogen sulfide activity was eliminated by treatment with heat or acid, and precipitate iron. suggesting microbial origin. Ammonia in sewage was oxiLike a battery cell, the gradient from oxygen-rich condized by donating electrons to oxygen, forming nitrate. ditions at the surface to highly reduced conditions below Nitrate formation was eliminated by antibacterial treatgenerates a voltage potential. We now know that the entire ment. These findings suggested the existence of microbes Earth’s surface acts as a battery—for humans, a potential that “eat” hydrogen gas or ammonia instead of beef or ity is described in Chapter 14. Winogradsky and later microbial ecoloAmong the first to study gists showed that bacteria perform unique microbes in natural habitats was roles in geochemical cycling, the global the Russian scientist Sergei Wininterconversion of inorganic and organic ogradsky (1856–1953). Winoforms of nitrogen, sulfur, phosphorus, and gradsky waded through marshes other minerals. Without these essential to discover microbes with metabconversions (nutrient cycles), no plants or Purple sulfur olisms quite alien from human animals could live. Bacteria and archaea fix Green sulfur ered that species of the bacterium Beggiatoa oxidize hydrogen sulfide by plants. This process is called nitrogen fixation (Fig. 1.23). Other bacterial speBeggiatoa fixes carbon dioxide into biomass without consuming any several stages back to nitrogen gas. NitroFIGURE 1.22  Winogradsky organic food. Organisms that feed gen fixation and geochemical cycling are solely on inorganic minerals are designed by Sergei Winogradsky. discussed further in Chapters 21 and 22. 

Bacterial symbionts of legumes fix nitrogen. 

Within plant cells, certain bacteria fix nitrogen as endosymbionts, organisms living symbiotically inside larger organisms. Endosymbiotic bacteria known as rhizobia induce the roots of legumes to form special nodules to facilitate bacterial nitrogen fixation. Rhizobial endosymbiosis was first observed by Martinus Beijerinck. Microbial endosymbiosis, in a variety of diverse forms, is widespread in all ecosystems. Many interesting cases involve animal or human hosts. Endosymbiotic microbes make essential nutritional contributions to host animals. Ruminant animals such as cattle, as well as insects such as termites, require digestive bacteria to break down cellulose and other plant polymers. Even humans obtain about 15% of their nutrition from colonic bacteria (Fig. 1.25). Intestinal bacteria such as multispecies communities adhering to a surface. Biofilms play major roles in all ecosystems and within parts of the digested food particle. Most kinds of plant fibers that we consume actually require microbial enzymes to digest (see Chapter 21). Many invertebrates, such as hydras and corals, harbor endosymbiotic phototrophs that provide products of photosynthesis in return for protection and nutrients. Other kinds of endosymbiosis involve more than nutrition. In the light organs of squid, luminescent bacteria, such as Aliivibrio fischeri, produce light (bioluminescence) that helps the host evade nocturnal predators. The host squid controls the amount and direction of light that leaves the organ so that it matches the illumination from the moon, rendering the squid nearly invisible. Bacteria that normally inhabit the human intestine and skin protect our bodies from infection by pathogens. Gut bacteria regulate development of our immune system, and even send signals to the brain. The human microbiota or microbiome is the collection of all microbes associated with the human body. Physicians increasingly consider the human microbiome to be a part of the body, as essential as a limb or an organ. In 2016, the are discussed further in Chapter 21. 

Note: The terms microbiota and microbiome have similar meaning. “Microbiota” refers to the ecological community of microbes living within or upon the human body. “Microbiome” refers to the community of microbes associated with a human organ, or with a different defined habitat such as soil or plants. Another term, metagenome, refers to the collective genetic sequences found in all the microbes of a microbiome. 

Sergei Winogradsky developed the first system of enrichment culture, called the Winogradsky column, to grow microbes from natural environments. Chemolithotrophs (or lithotrophs) metabolize inorganic minerals, such as ammonia, instead of the organic nutrients used by the microbes isolated by Koch. Geochemical cycling depends on bacteria and archaea that cycle nitrogen, phosphorus, and other minerals throughout the biosphere. Endosymbionts are microbes that live within host organisms and provide essential functions for their hosts, such as nitrogen fixation for legume plants, or digestion of complex food molecules for humans and other animals. Martinus Beijerinck was the first to demonstrate that nitrogen-fixing rhizobia grow as endosymbionts within leguminous plants. 

Microbes Include Eukaryotes and Prokaryotes of life, they faced a conceptual dilemma because microbes could not be categorized as either animals or plants, which since ancient times had been considered the two “kingdoms” or major categories of life. Taxonomists attempted to apply these categories to microbes—for example, by including algae and fungi with plants. But German naturalist Ernst Haeckel (1834–1919) recognized that microbes differed from both plants and animals in fundamental aspects of their lifestyle, cellular structure, and biochemistry. Haeckel proposed that microscopic organisms constituted a third kind of life—neither animal nor plant—which he called Monera. In the twentieth century, biochemical studies revealed profound distinctions even within the Monera. In particular, microbes such as protists and algae contain a nucleus enclosed by a nuclear membrane, whereas bacteria do not. Herbert Copeland (1902–1968) proposed a system of classification that divided Monera into two groups: the eukaryotic protists (protozoa and algae) and the prokaryotic bacteria. Copeland’s four-kingdom classification (plants, animals, eukaryotic protists, and prokaryotic bacteria) was later modified by Robert Whittaker (1920–1980) to include fungi as another kingdom of eukaryotic microbes. Whittaker’s system thus generated five kingdoms: bacteria, protists, fungi, and the multicellular plants and animals. 

scheme, modified by the endosymbiosis theory. through endosymbiosis. 

(Fig. 1.26). Margulis tried to explain how it is that eukaryotic cells contain mitochondria and chloroplasts, membranous organelles that possess their own chromosomes. She proposed that eukaryotes evolved by merging with bacteria to form composite cells by intracellular endosymbiosis, in which one cell internalizes another that grows within it. The endosymbiosis may ultimately generate a single organism whose formerly independent members are now incapable of independent existence. Margulis proposed that early in the history engulfed by pre-eukaryotic cells, where they evolved into mitochondria, the eukaryote’s respiratory organelles. Similarly, she proposed that a phototroph related to cyanobacteria was taken up by a eukaryote, giving rise to the chloroplasts of phototrophic algae and plants. 

Are there cellular microbes that differ from both bacteria and eukaryotes? Gene sequence analysis led to another startling advance in our understanding of how cells evolved. In 1977, Carl Woese (1928–2012), at the University of Illinois, was studying a group of recently discovered prokaryotes that live in seemingly hostile environments, such as the boiling sulfur springs of Yellowstone, or that conduct unusual kinds of metabolism, such as production of methane (methanogenesis). Woese used the sequence of the to measure the time since the divergence of two species (discussed in Chapter 17). The divergence of rRNA genes showed that the newly discovered prokaryotes were a distinct form of life: archaea (Fig. 1.27). The archaea resemble bacteria in their relatively simple cell structure, in their lack of a nucleus, and in their ability to grow in a wide range of environments. In fact, many archaea grow along with bacteria within the human colon, or in common soil or water. But certain types of archaea, such as the autoclave-cultured archaeon Geogemma, grow in environments more extreme than any that support bacteria. The genetic sequences of archaea differ as much from those of bacteria as from those of eukaryotes; in fact, their gene expression machinery is more similar to that of Woese’s discovery replaced the classification scheme of five kingdoms with three equally distinct groups, now called the three “domains”: Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya (Fig. 1.28). In the three-domain model, the bacterial ancestor of mitochondria derives from ancient proteobacteria (shaded pink in the figure), whereas chloroplasts derive from ancient cyanobacteria (shaded green). 

The endosymbiosis theory was highly controversial because it implied a polyphyletic, or multiple, ancestry sequence analysis produced compelling evidence of the bacterial origin of mitochondria and chloroplasts. Both of these classes of organelles contain circular molecules evidence established the common ancestry between mitochondria and respiring bacteria, and between chloroplasts and cyanobacteria. The symbiotic origins and evolution of mitochondria and chloroplasts are discussed further in Chapter 17. 

Small-subunit rRNA sequences reveal three deeply branching domains of life. 

rRNA sequences. The length of each branch approximates the time of divergence from the last common ancestor. For a more detailed tree, see Chapter 17. 

The three-domain classification is largely supported by the sequences of microbial genomes, although some genes are transferred both within and between the domains (discussed in Chapter 17). Thought Question 1.8 What arguments support the classification of Archaea as a third domain of life? What arguments support the classification of archaea and bacteria together, as prokaryotes, distinct from eukaryotes? 

Classifying microbes was a challenge historically because of the difficulties in observing distinguishing characteristics of different categories. Ernst Haeckel recognized that microbes constitute a form of life distinct from animals and plants. Herbert Copeland and Robert Whittaker classified prokaryotes as a form of microbial life distinct from eukaryotic microbes such as protists. Lynn Margulis proposed that eukaryotic organelles such as mitochondria and chloroplasts evolved by endosymbiosis from prokaryotic cells engulfed by Carl Woese discovered a domain of prokaryotes, Archaea, whose genetic sequences diverge equally from those of bacteria and those of eukaryotes. Archaea grow in a wide range of environments; some species grow under conditions that exclude bacteria and eukaryotes. 

During the twentieth century, amid world wars and societal transformations, the field of microbiology exploded with new knowledge (see Table 1.2). More than 99% of what we know about microbes today was discovered after 1900 by scientists too numerous to cite in this book. Advances in biochemistry and microscopy revealed the fundamental structure and function of cell membranes and proteins. microbiology, these advances produced the technology of applications for human medicine and industry (discussed in Chapters 7–12). 

Column contains magnetic lenses. 

organisms. The mechanisms of bacterial recombination us to transfer genes between the genomes of virtually all types of organisms. 

Gene regulation discovered in bacteria provided models for animals and plants. The fi rst key discoveries of gene expression were made in bacteria and bacteriophages. Regulatory DNA-binding proteins were discovered in bacteria and then subsequently found in all classes of living organisms. 

We now know that in natural environments, genes frequently move between species. Furthermore, recombinant concerned molecular biologists that in 1975 they held a Berg and Maxine Singer at Asilomar (Pacific Grove, California) was possibly the first time in history that a group of scientists organized and agreed to regulate and restrict their own field. On the positive side, the emerging world of molecular biology excited the imagination of young scientists Francisco. Growing numbers of students entered the field of molecular biology, seeking to invent medical cures—or even to clone dinosaurs, as in Michael Crichton’s novel and film Jurassic Park (1993). While the idea of cloning a dinosaur remains science fiction, the tools of microbial genetics of long-dead organisms preserved in museums. 

1.9 Do you think engineered strains of bacteria should be patentable? What about sequenced genes or genomes? 

Genetics of bacteria, bacteriophages, and fungi in the early twentieth century revealed fundamental insights about gene transmission that apply to all organisms. emerged from a series of experiments in the twentieth Molecular microbiology generated key advances, such as the cloning of the first recombinant molecules Genome sequence determination and bioinformatic analysis became the tools that shape the study of biology in the twenty-first century. Microbial discoveries transformed medicine and industry. Biotechnology produces new kinds of pharmaceuticals and industrial products. Synthetic biology engineers new kinds of organisms with useful functions. 

Advances in microbial science raise important questions for society. How can medical research control emerging diseases? How do microbes contribute to global cycles of carbon and nitrogen? How can microbial metabolism clean up polluted environments, such as the vast oil spill from the explosion of the Deepwater Horizon wellhead in 2010? How can we engineer viruses to treat human diseases? This book explores the current explosion of knowledge about microbial cells, genetics, and ecology. We introduce the applications of microbial science to human affairs, from medical microbiology to environmental science. Most important, we discuss research methods—how scientists make the discoveries that will shape tomorrow’s view of microbiology. Chapter 2 presents the imaging tools that make possible our increasingly detailed view of the structures of cells (Chapter 3) and viruses (Chapter 6). Chapters 4 and 5 introduce microbial nutrition and growth in diverse habitats, including what we discover from microbial genomes. Throughout, we invite readers to share with us the excitement of discovery in microbiology. 

intracellular pathogens, some of which cause trachoma and sexually transmitted disease. The environmental chlamydia Simkania propagates within an ameba, a model for human infection. Grant Jensen at the California Institute of Technology visualized a Simkania cell within its host cell, using electron microscopy at supercold temperatures (cryo-electron microscopy). Cryo-electron microscopy reveals how the intracellular chlamydia recruits host membranes to surround itself. Thus, Simkania induces its host cell to remodel a compartment where the chlamydia can grow. Source: Martin Pilhofer et al. 2014. Environ. Microbiol. 16:417. 

icroscopy reveals the vast realm of microorganisms invisible to the unaided eye. The microscope enables us to count the number of microbes in the human bloodstream or in dilute natural environments such as the ocean. It shows us how microbes swim and respond to signals such as a new food source. Fluorescence microscopy captures single molecules within a living cell. Electron microscopy explores the cell’s interior and models viruses, even catching a virus in the act of infection. 

electron microscopy images of the same specimen. Correlation would allow us to tag an object of interest inside a cell with a fluorophore, watch it move in real time during some dynamic cellular event, and then, in a moment of interest, molecular resolution. 

Most microbes are too small to be seen; that is, they are microscopic, requiring the use of a microscope to be seen. But why can’t we see microbes without magnification? The answer is surprisingly complex. In fact, our definition of “microscopic” is based on the properties of our eyes. We define what is visible and what is microscopic in terms of the human eye. 

chlamydia (Simkania species) infecting an ameba. In ameba provides clues to the process of human chlamydial infection. The computer-generated model shows how Simkania’s own envelope (inner and outer membranes) is enclosed by host cell membranes. The pathogen remodels the host intracellular membranes to protect itself from host defenses. To investigate the function of environmental and First in Chapter 2, we present light microscopy, and the theory and practice of observing microbes, which are essential for every student and professional in the field or clinic. We then explore exciting advanced tools for research. Fluorescence and super-resolution imaging, electron microscopy, and scanning probe microscopy push ever farther the frontiers of the unseen. And we continue to invent new kinds of microscopy, such as chemical imaging microscopy, to reveal microbial metabolism at work. 

For example, our eyes can detect a large population of microbes, such as a spot of mold on a piece of bread (about a million cells) or a cloudy tube of bacteria in liquid culture ability to determine the presence of an object, differs from resolution. When the unaided eye detects the presence of mold or bacteria, it cannot resolve distinct cells. To resolve most kinds of microbial cells, our eyes need assistance—that is, magnification. Magnification reveals object means increasing the object’s apparent dimensions. As the distance increases between points of detail, our eyes can now resolve the object’s shape as a magnified image. 

2.1 As shown in the image passing through your cornea and lens is inverted on your retina. Why, therefore, does the world appear right side up? 

as visualized by light microscopy or by scanning electron microscopy. Note that with bright-field light microscopy, the cell shape is just discernible under the highest power. With scanning electron microscopy, cell shapes appear in greater detail (higher resolution). Certain shapes of bacteria are common to many taxonomic groups. For example, both bacteria and archaea form similarly shaped rods, or bacilli (singular, bacillus), and cocci (spheres; singular, coccus), as shown in Thus, rods and spherical shapes evolved independently within different taxa. In contrast, a unique bacterial shape that evolved in only one taxon is the spirochete, a tightly coiled spiral. Species of spirochetes cause diseases such as syphilis and Lyme disease. Paramecium may be The spiral form of the cell is maintained by just visible to the unaided human eye. internal axial filaments and flagella, as well as an outer sheath. (For more on spirochetes, see is the “spirillum” (plural, spirilla), a wide, rigid spiral cell that is similar to a rod-shaped bacillus. 

The genus name Bacillus refers to a specific taxonomic group of bacteria, but the term “bacillus” (plural, bacilli) refers to any rod-shaped bacterium or archaeon. 

X-ray crystallography, range of resolution. 

bacteria by their absorption of light. The specimen is commonly viewed as a dark object against a light-fi lled based on special properties of light, include fluorescence, dark-field, and phase-contrast microscopy. resolve details several orders of magnitude smaller than from the metal-coated surface of an object, generating beam travels through the object, where the electrons are absorbed by an electron-dense metal stain. 

crobe, never observed before. What kinds of questions about this microbe might be answered by light microscopy? What questions would be better addressed by electron microscopy? 

Another example of chemical imaging, showing nitrogenfixing cyanobacteria, is presented in eTopic 2.1. 

Resolution is the smallest distance by which two objects can be separated and still be distinguished as separate. Magnification is an increase in the apparent size of an Eukaryotic microbes may be large enough to resolve subcellular structures under a light microscope. Other eukaryotic cells are as small as bacteria. Bacteria and archaea are generally too small for subcellular resolution by a light microscope. Their shapes include characteristic forms such as rods and cocci. Different kinds of microscopy resolve cells and subcellular structures of different sizes. Chemical imaging microscopy reveals the chemical composition of a cell. 

How do light rays magnify an image? Light microscopy directly extends the lens system of our own eyes. Light is part of the spectrum of electromagnetic radiation (Fig. 2.8), a form of energy propagated as waves that are associated with electrical and magnetic fields. Regions of the electromagnetic spectrum are defined by wavelength, which for visible light is about 400–750 nm. Radiation of longer wavelengths includes infrared and radio waves, whereas shorter wavelengths include ultraviolet rays and X-rays. 

Magnification. The human retina absorbs radiation within a range of wavelengths, 400–750 nm (0.40– 0.75 μm), which we define as visible light. But the smallest distance our retina can resolve is 150 μm, about 300 times the wavelength of light. Thus, we are unable to access all of the information contained in the light that enters our eyes. To use more of the information carried within the light, we must spread the light rays apart far enough for our retina to perceive the resolved image. 

radiation is composed of electrical and magnetic waves includes the visible range of light. 

to or smaller than the size of the object. If the wavelength of the radiation is larger than the object, then most of the wave’s energy will simply pass through the object, like an ocean wave passing around a dock post. Thus, radar, with a wavelength of 1–100 centimeters (cm), cannot resolve microbes, though it easily resolves cars and people. 

The object blocks part of the light. 

The light bends when it enters a substance that changes its speed. 

The wavefront of the light bounces off the surface. 

incident light is scattered in all directions. Object size is near incident wavelength. 

Light rays and electron beams offer glimpses into the astonishing world within a cell. But what are all those intriguing knobs and tubules made of? Chemical imaging microscopy shows more than the outline of bacteria; it shows what they’ve been eating. nanoscale secondary ion mass spectrometry (NanoSIMS). 

The imaging method starts with an ionizing probe, a source of energy that breaks up the large organic molecules of a sample (Fig. 1). The molecular fragments, called “secondary ions,” fly off from the source and are captured by a mass spectrometer. This instrument measures fragment masses of the secondary ions, generating a mass spectrum. Mass spectra are taken from thousands of locations, scanned across a bacterial cell. 

to a different form, usually heat. (That is why a live specimen eventually “cooks” on the slide if observed for too long.) When a microbial specimen absorbs light, it can be observed as a dark spot against a bright field, as in bright-field microscopy. Some molecules that absorb light of a specific wavelength reemit energy as light with a longer wavelength; this is called fluorescence. Fluorescence microscopy is discussed in Section 2.4. 

is said to be refractive and, by definition, has a higher refractive index than air. Refraction is the key property that enables a lens to magnify an image. 

food we consume? Our intestinal epithelium secretes a mucus layer, which helps prevent colonization by pathogens. But the mucus also “farms” bacteria, whose feeding helps moderate the buildup of secretions. Wagner’s group used different types of bacteria to colonize gnotobiotic (germ-free) mice. The mice were injected is readily incorporated into mouse proteins and secretions, but the bacteria inoculated into the mouse’s intestinal lumen have no direct access to the threonine, only to mouse secretions containing it. Thus, NanoSIMS of the intestinal bacteria reveals which ones are snacking on mucus. the fluorescent probes identify single cells of Bacteroides The parallel panels show the atomic percent (at%) of the and Ruminococcaceae acquire nitrogen from the host (gold or yellow color, white arrowhead). The third panel shows that some but not all of the bacteria show carbon uptake. 

Scattering means that a portion of the wavefront is converted to a spherical wave originating from the object of bacteria suspended in a culture tube. Special optical arrangements (such as dark-field microscopy, discussed in Section 2.5) can use scattered light to detect (but not resolve) microbial shapes smaller than the wavelength of light. 

Wagner use NanoSIMS to image bacteria foraging on the gut epithelium. 

and Ruminococcaceae strains were shown to be the main snackers on host mucus. These observations will help medical researchers characterize the composition and dynamics of a healthy gut microbiome. 

Magnification requires the bending of light rays, as in refraction. As a wavefront of light enters a refractive material, such as glass, the region of the wave that first reaches the material is slowed, while the rest of the wave continues at its original speed until it also passes into the refractive ). As the entire wavefront continues through the refractive material, its path continues, bent at an angle from its original direction. 

Wavefront slows in glass, causing a change in direction. 

Parabolic lens bends light rays to intersect at a focal point. 

emerges from a piece of glass of even thickness. How do its new speed and direction compare with its original (incident) speed and direction? 

The eye perceives the expanded light rays as a virtual image—that is, an image that appears to represent a much larger object farther away. The expansion of light rays, or magnification, increases the distances between points of the image. The details of the magnified image become larger than the spacing of photoreceptor units in the retina. Thus, our eye can perceive details that the unaided eye cannot see. 

The spreading of light rays does not in itself increase resolution. For example, an image composed of dots does not gain detail when enlarged on a photocopier, nor does an image composed of pixels gain detail when enlarged on a computer screen. In these cases, magnification fails to show details because the individImage ual details of the image expand in proplane portion to the expansion of the overall detail is called empty magnification. The resolution of detail in microsinterference rings that are unresolved. copy is limited by the wave nature of light. In theory, a perfect lens that What factors limit resolution of an image? The wavefocuses all of the light from an object should form a perlength of light limits the sharpness of the peak intensity fect image as its rays converge through the focal point. of a point of detail. The finite width of the wavefront capBut light rays actually form wavefronts of infinite extent. tured by the lens leads to interference and widens the peak Since the width of the lens is finite, only part of the waveintensity. Thus, bright-field light microscopy resolves only front enters, causing interference. The converging edges details that are greater than half the wavelength of light, of the wave interfere with each other to form alternating about 200 nm (0.2 μm). Nevertheless, in advanced optical regions of light and dark (Fig. 2.12 ). Thus, a point methods such as fluorescence microscopy (see Section 2.4), source of light (such as a point of detail in a specimen) computation can extract positional detail from light rays. forms an image of a bright central peak surrounded by Such methods, called super-resolution imaging, enable us interference rings of light and dark. Even a well-focused to track cellular molecules at a precision of 20–40 nm (disbright object appears as a bright disk surrounded by cussed in Section 2.4). faint rings. Suppose an object consists of a collection of point sources of light. Each point source generates a central peak of intensity. The width of this central peak will define the To Summarize resolution, or separation distance, between any two points Electromagnetic radiation interacts with an object and of the object (Fig. 2.12). This resolution determines the acquires information we can use to detect the object. degree of detail that can be observed. In practice, any Contrast between object and background makes it object, such as a stained microbe against a bright field, can possible to detect the object and resolve its component be considered a large collection of points of light that act as partly resolved peaks of intensity. 

The wavelength of the radiation must be equal to or smaller than the size of the object for a microscope to resolve the object’s shape. 

Absorption means that the energy from light (or other electromagnetic radiation) is acquired by the object. Reflection means that the wavefront bounces off the surface of a particle at an angle equal to its incident angle. Scattering means that a wavefront interacts with an object of smaller dimension than the wavelength. Light scattering enables the detection of objects whose detail cannot be resolved. 

Refraction is the bending of light as it enters a substance that slows its speed. Refraction through a curved lens magnifies an image, enlarging its details beyond the spacing between our eye’s photoreceptors. 

The most common kind of light microscopy is called bright-field microscopy, in which an object such as a bacterial cell is perceived as a dark silhouette blocking the Details of the object are defined by the points of light surrounding its edge. Here we explain how a typical student’s microscope works, and how to use it to image microbes. 

Wavelength and resolution. Our eyes can resolve a distance as small as 100–200 μm, while the resolution limit from the wavelength of light is 200 nm (0.2 μm)—that is, 500- to 1,000-fold smaller. Thus, the greatest magnification that can improve our perception of detail is about 1,000×. Any greater magnification expands the image size, but the width of the image peaks expands without resolution (see Fig. 2.12). As we noted in the previous section, this expansion without increasing resolution is called empty magnification. 

Light and contrast. For any given lens system, a balanced amount of light yields the highest contrast between the dark specimen and the light background. High contrast is needed to perceive the full resolution at a given magnification. 

Resolution improves. 

Use of immersion oil in microscopy. Immersion oil with a refractive index comparable to that of glass (n = 1.5) prevents light rays from bending away from the objective lens. 

between the object and the objective lens (air, as shown so far). For the highest-power objective lens, generally 100×, a zone of constant refractive index is maintained by replacing air with immersion oil between the object and the lens. Immersion oil has a refractive index comparable to that of the lens (n = 1.5) (Fig. 2.14). Immersion oil minimizes the loss of light rays by refraction and makes it possible to reach 100× magnification with minimal distortion. In a two-lens system, 100× objective is multiplied by 10× ocular magnification to yield 1,000× total magnification. 

problem would you have in designing such a lens to generate this light cone? 

mirror-reversed. Keep this mirror reversal in mind when exploring a field of cells. a secondary magnification step through the ocular lens total magnification of the object by objective times ocular lenses. The magnification factor of the ocular lens is multiplied by the magnification factor of the objective lens to generate the total magnification (power). For example, a 10× ocular multiplied by a 40× objective generates 400× total magnification. The nosepiece of a compound microscope typically holds three or four objective lenses of different magnifying power, such as 4×, 10×, 40×, and 100× (requiring immersion oil). These lenses are arranged so as to rotate in turn into the optical column. In a high-quality instrument the lenses are set at different heights from the slide so as to be parfocal. In a parfocal system, when an object is focused with one lens, it remains in focus, or nearly so, when another lens is rotated to replace the first. 

Objective lenses can be obtained in several different grades of quality, manufactured with different kinds of correction for aberrations. Lenses should feature at minimum the following corrections: “plan” correction for field curvature, to generate a field that appears flat; and “apochromat” correction for spherical and chromatic aberrations. 

Only a small area of a slide can be visualized within the field of view of a given lens. The higher the magnification, the smaller the field of view that will be seen. 

Optimize the amount of light. At lower power, too much light will wash out the light absorption of the specimen. At higher power, more light needs to be collected, lest everything appear dark. To optimize light, the condenser must be set at the correct vertical position to focus on the specimen, and the diaphragm must be adjusted to transmit the amount of light that produces the best contrast. 

Focus the objective lens. The focusing knob permits adjustment of the focal distance between the objective lens and the specimen on the slide so as to bring the specimen into the focal plane, the plane that contains the focal points for light entering the lens from all directions. Typically, we focus first using a low-power objective, which generates a greater depth of field—that is, a range of planes in which the object appears in or near focus. After focusing under low power, we can rotate a higher-power lens into view and then fine-tune the adjustment. 

Too close to lens; image is blurred. 

Electrical controller maintains temperature. 

ensis, the biological insecticide, packages its cytoplasm into a spore, leaving behind an empty cell wall. Suppose, under a microscope, you observe what appears to be a hollow cell. How can you tell whether the cell is indeed hollow or is simply out of focus? 

and crystal violet are cationic (positively charged) dyes. Chloride (Cl–) is the counter-ion. 

phosphoryl groups on membrane phospholipids (discussed in Section 3.2). The positively charged groups react with negatively charged groups in the bacterial cell envelope. Different stains vary with respect to the strength of their binding and the degree of binding to different parts of a cell. 

to cells, but not to the external medium or surrounding tissue (in the case of pathological samples). The most commonly used simple stain is methylene blue, originally is shown in First we fi x a drop of culture on a slide by treating with methanol or by heating on a slide warmer. Either treatment denatures cell proteins, exposing side chains that bind to the glass. We then flood the slide with methylene blue solution. The positively charged molecule binds to the negatively charged cell envelope of fi xed bacteria. After excess stain is washed off and the slide has been dried, we observe it under high-power magnification using immersion oil. of cell but not another. The most famous differential stain is the Gram stain, devised in 1884 by the Danish physician Hans Christian Gram (1853–1938). Gram fi rst used the Gram stain to distinguish pneumococcal (Streptococcus pneumoniae) bacteria from human lung bacteria appear dark purple among human white blood cells. Other species of bacteria, such as Proteus mirabilis (a cause of urinary infections), fail to retain the purple whether they retain the stain. 

1. Place a loopful of the culture on a clean slide. 

4. Fix cells to slide by adding drop of methanol; air-dry. 

2. Spread in a thin film over the slide. 

6. Wash off stain with water. 

Procedure for simple staining with methylene blue. 

5. Stain (e.g., with methylene blue, 1 min). 

1. Add methanol to fix cells to surface; Cells are fixed to slide surface. 

2. Add crystal violet stain (1 min). 

Cell membrane (inner membrane) 1. Crystal violet is added. 

Iodine complex with crystal violet increases stain retention. 

4. Wash with ethanol (20 s). 

2. Iodide complexes with crystal violet. 

Gram-negative cells. 

3. Add iodine, which binds stain to Gram-positive cells (1 min). 

5. Add safranin counterstain (1 min). 

Gram-positive cells absorb safranin but remain dark purple. 

Gram-negative cells. 

thick cell walls that retain the crystal violet stain. Gram-negative cells have thinner cell walls, which lose the crystal violet stain but layers of peptidoglycan retain the crystal violet–iodide complex. In a Gram-negative cell, the stain leaks out. 

Gram-negative material, which is stained pale pink by the safranin. Gram-positive cells also retain safranin; thus, if the cells are decolorized too long, both Gram-positive and Gram-negative cells will appear pink due to safranin. How does the Gram stain distinguish different cell types? Most Gram-negative species of bacteria possess a cell wall that is thinner and more porous than that of Gram-positive cell has five or more layers. The multiple layers of peptidoglycan retain enough stain complex that the cell appears purple. The Gram stain became a key tool for identifying pathogens in the clinical laboratory. As we’ll see in Chapter 3, the Gram stain effectively distinguishes Proteobacteria (a clade of bacteria with a thin cell wall and an outer membrane) from Firmicutes (bacteria with a thick cell wall and no outer membrane.) Proteobacteria include Escherichia coli and many related intestinal bacteria. Another important Gramnegative group is the Bacteroidetes, whose species work with Proteobacteria to digest our food (discussed in Chapters 13 and 21). 

Clostridium tetani. 

Most intestinal bacteria are mutualists; that is, they share positive contributions with their host (the human body). However, the gut community may be invaded by deadly faecalis, and Clostridium difficile. Still other groups of bacteria and archaea have different kinds of cell walls that may stain Gram-positive, Gramnegative, or variable (discussed in Chapters 18 and 19). Moreover, even Firmicutes such as Bacillus species show variable stain results depending on their growth state and environmental conditions. 

Spore stain. When samples are boiled with malachite green, the stain binds specifically to the endospore coat cause of anthrax), as well as spores of Clostridium botulinum, which produces botulinum toxin. opaque particles such as India ink added to darken the surrounding medium and reveal transparent components such as the outer capsule of a pathogen (presented in Chapter 3). Other kinds of negative stains are used for electron microscopy (see Section 2.6). Antibody tags. Stains linked to antibodies can identify precise strains of bacteria or even specific molecular components of cells. The antibody (which binds a specific cell protein) is linked to a reactive enzyme for detection, or to a fluorophore (fluorescent molecule) for immunofluorescence microscopy (discussed next, in Section 2.4). 

In bright-field microscopy, image quality depends on the wavelength of light; the magnifying power of a lens; and the position of the focal plane, the region where the specimen is in focus (that is, where the sharpest image is resolution through the objective and ocular lenses. Fixing and staining a specimen kills it but improves contrast and resolution. The Gram stain differentiates between two major bacterial taxa, which stain either Gram-positive or Gramnegative. Eukaryotes stain negative. Acid-fast, spore, negative, and antibody stains are other kinds of differential stains. 

Fluorescence microscopy (also called epifluorescence microscopy) is a powerful tool for identifying specific kinds of microbes, such as pathogens or members of environmental communities. Fluorescence also reveals specific cell parts at work, such as division proteins in the act of accomplishing cell fission. The profound importance of fluorescence for microbial discovery was acknowledged by the awarding of the 2008 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for Roger Tsien) and the 2014 Nobel in Chemistry for the development of super-resolved fluorescence microscopy, or super-resolution imaging (to Eric Betzig, Stefan Hell, and William Moerner). In fluorescence microscopy, the specimen absorbs light of a defined wavelength and then emits light of lower energy, thus longer wavelength; that is, the specimen “fluoresces.” Some microbes, such as cyanobacteria and algae, fluoresce on their own (autofluorescence), owing to endogenous fluorescent molecules such as chlorophyll. For other aims, specific their chlorophyll. Every tenth cell or so, however, develops as Fluorescence microscopy is also used by marine ecologists to reveal tiny bacteria and plankton growing in seawater, a highly dilute natural environment (discussed in Chapter 21). Such observations support the study of microbial responses to climate change. Microbes, including viruses, bacteria, and protists, are detected by fluorescence of DNA-specific environmental debris. For medicine, fluorescence enables detection of microbial pathogens that colonize the relatively large cells and infection by Listeria monocytogenes, the cause of listeriosis, a dangerous food-borne disease. In this study, the Listeria fluorescence). The bacteria (green) propel themselves through a human cell by polymerizing “tails” of the cell’s Thus, fluorescence can visualize three different components within one microscopic field. 

How and when does a molecule fluoresce? Fluorescence occurs when a molecule absorbs light of a specific wavelength (the excitation wavelength) that has just the right energy needed to raise an electron to a higher-energy orbital (Fig. 2.24). Because this higher-energy electron state is unstable, the electron decays to an orbital of slightly lower energy, while losing some energy as heat. The electron then falls to its original level by emitting a photon of less energy and longer wavelength (the emission wavelength). 

The reflected blue light enters the objective lens, which focuses it onto the specimen, where it excites fluorophores to fluoresce green. The fluorescence emanates in all directions from the specimen (like a point source). Since the light rays point in all directions, a small portion of the fluorescent light (green) returns through the objective lens to reach the dichroic mirror. The green light now has a longer wavelength, above the penetration limit of the mirror, so it continues through to the ocular lens. The ocular lens focuses the fluorescent light onto the photodetectors of a highly sensitive digital camera. Fluorescence can be observed in live organisms. The fluorescent organisms are commonly held in place on the slide—for example, by a pad of agarose gel. 

Excitation photon is absorbed by electron. 

tion is released as heat and as a photon of longer wavelength in the of absorption and emission spectra for a fluorophore. 

Emission filter restricts wavelength range. 

emitted photon has a longer wavelength (less energy) because part of the electron’s energy of absorption was lost as heat. The optical system for f luorescence microscopy uses filters to limit incident light to the wavelength Light source of excitation and emitted light to the wavelength of Excitation filter restricts wavelength range. emission (Fig. 2.25). The wavelengths of excitation and emission are determined by the choice of f luorophore; in Objective lens this case we show excitation light as blue, and emission as green. Because only a small portion of the spectrum is used, f luorescence requires a high-intensity light source such as a tungsten arc lamp. The light passes through a filter that screens out all but the peak wavelengths of excitation. The excitation light (blue) is then ref lected by a dichroic mirror (dichroic filter), a material that ref lects Specimen (object) light below a certain wavelength but transmits light above that wavelength. 

in these molecules provide closely spaced molecular orbitals that condense to form the fluorophore. 

Chemical affi nity. Certain fluorophores have chemical affi nity for certain classes of biological molecules. For emission) specifically binds membranes. 

Labeled antibodies. Antibodies that specifically bind a cell component are chemically linked to a fluorophore molecule. The use of antibodies linked to fluorophores is known as immunofluorescence. to a fluorophore will hybridize to a specific sequence in the genome. Thus we can label one position in the Gene fusion reporter. Cells can be engineered with a gene fusion, a fused gene that expresses one of their own or one of many variants expressing different colors. 

fused to cyan fluorescent protein, binding at a sequence near the polymerase subunit to yellow fluorescent protein (Pol-YFP) in dividing cells of Bacillus subtilis. 

color arises from the membrane-specific fluorophore yellow, owing to a fused gene encoding yellow fluorescent the center of the cell, but sometimes they separate, visible as two yellow spots. 

The emitted light travels in all directions from the point source of the object, and its resolution is limited by the wavelength. Thus, fluorescence cannot resolve the detailed shape of a protein, or distinguish two proteins that are close together. But we can detect the location of a DNA-binding protein within a cell and resolve it as distinct from another fluorescent object located elsewhere. Furthermore, computational techniques called super-resolution imaging enable us to pinpoint the protein’s location with a precision tenfold greater than the resolution of ordinary optical microscopy. 

fusion proteins to form complexes at the cell poles that are absent in non-GFP cells. Thus, in cellular biology, it is always important to confirm data with the results of a different kind of technique—for example, localization of the target protein with a labeled antibody. 

localization by computation: a form of super-resolution imaging. 

first to demonstrate the possibility of single-molecule tracking of fluorescent proteins in bacteria. 

aeruginosa, treated with the antibiotic tobramycin. The biofilm is treated with f luorophores that reveal live cells (green) beneath the dead cells, killed by tobramycin (red). structure of the biofilm. The method of confocal microscopy is explained in eTopic 2.2. 

Spirochete detected, but the cell is too narrow for resolution. 

Chemical imaging microscopy maps the distribution of chemicals within a cell. 

the limit of resolution of light or because their cytoplasm is transparent. These techniques take advantage of special properties of light waves, such as light scattering (dark field) and phase contrast. 

Fluorescence microscopy can now be coupled to new tools of chemical imaging microscopy. Chemical imaging uses mass spectrometry (analysis of molecular fragments by mass) to visualize the distribution of chemicals in a biological sample, such as a microbial colony. The chemical distribution can actually be observed within a cell, at 100-nm resolution, using nanoscale secondary ion mass spectrometry (NanoSIMS). Chemical imaging offers extraordinary opportunities to map the structure and function of cells (see Special Topic 2.1). In natural communities, such as soil or the intestinal microbiome, the distribution of chemicals can be mapped onto specific microbes or subcellular compartments defined by fluorescence microscopy. 

objects scatter light into center. 

Spider light stop excludes all but outer ring of light. 

but an annular ring of light from the light source. The annular ring converges as a hollow cone of light focused on the specimen. Only light scattered by the specimen enters the objective lens; the field background appears dark. 

2.7 Some early observers claimed that the rotary motions observed in bacterial flagella could not be distinguished from whiplike patterns, comparable to the motion of eukaryotic flagella. Can you imagine an experiment to distinguish the two and prove that the flagella rotate? Hint: Bacterial flagella can get “stuck” to the microscope slide or coverslip. 2.8 Compare and contrast fluorescence microscopy with dark-field microscopy. What similar advantage do they provide, and how do they differ? 

Flagella are detected, although their fine structure is not resolved, because their width is below the threshold of resolution by light. 

of cyanobacteria with stalked protist. Cultured from Antarctica, Lake interference (right), the peaks of the waves are opposite one lesser amplitude. 

by approximately one-quarter of a wavelength. The phase plate contains a central disk of refractive material that retards light from the specimen by another quarter wavelength, increasing the phase difference to half a wavelength. The light from the specimen and the transmitted light are now fully out of phase; they cancel, In the phase-contrast microscope, the annular ring forms a hollow cone of light that passes through the refractive material of the specimen. When the transmitted and refracted light cones re-join at the focal point, they are out of phase; their amplitudes cancel each other, and that region of the image appears dark against a bright background. 

Dark-field microscopy uses scattered light to detect objects too small to be resolved by light rays. Extremely small microbes and thin structures can be detected. The shapes of objects are not resolved. 

All cells are built of macromolecular structures. The foremost tool for observing the shapes of these structures is thousand times that of light microscopy. Other kinds of microscopy are emerging, such as scanning probe microscopy, which images the contours of live bacteria. For atomlevel detail of a macromolecule, the tool of choice remains X-ray crystallography. 

How does an electron microscope work? Electrons are ejected from a metal subjected to a voltage potential. Like photons, the electrons travel in a straight line, interact with matter, and carry information about their interaction. And also like photons, electrons can exhibit the properties of waves. The wavelength associated with an electron is 100,000 times smaller than that of a photon; for example, an electron accelerated over a voltage of 100 kilovolts (kV) has a wavelength of 0.0037 nm, compared with 400–750 nm for visible light. However, the actual resolution of electrons in microscopy is limited not by the wavelength, but by the aberrations of the lensing systems used to focus electrons. The magnetic lenses used to focus electrons never achieve the precision required to utilize the full potential resolution of the electron beam. 

Phase-contrast microscopy with Zernike optics superimposes refracted light and transmitted light shifted out of phase so as to reveal differences in refractive index as patterns of light and dark. Live cells with transparent cytoplasm, and the organelles of eukaryotes, can be observed with high contrast. with Nomarski optics superimposes interference bands on an image, accentuating small differences in refractive index. 

Image is inverted. 

Image is inverted and rotated. 

around the magnetic field lines. The U-shaped magnet acts as a lens, focusing the spiraling electrons much as a refractive lens focuses light rays. 

Electrons are focused by means of a magnetic field directed along the line of travel of the beam (Fig. 2.37). As a beam of electrons enters the field, it spirals around the magnetic field lines. The shape of the magnet can be designed to generate field lines that will focus the beam of electrons in a manner analogous to the focusing of photons by a refractive lens. The electron beam, however, forms a spiral because electrons travel around magnetic field lines. Magnetic lenses generate large aberrations; thus, we need a series of corrective magnetic lenses to obtain a resolution of about 0.2 nm. This resolution is a thousand times greater than the 200-nm resolution of light microscopy. 

2.9 Like a light microscope, an electron microscope can be focused at successive powers of magnification. At each level, the image rotates at an angle of several degrees. Given the geometry of the electron beam, as shown in why do you think the image rotates? 

The transmission electron microscope closely parallels the design of a bright-field microscope, including a source of electrons (instead of light), a magnetic condenser lens, a specimen, and an objective lens (Fig. 2.38). The light source is replaced by an electron source consisting of a highvoltage current applied to a tungsten filament, which gives off electrons when heated. The electron beam is focused onto the specimen by a magnetic condenser lens. The specimen image is then magnified by a magnetic objective lens. The projection lens, analogous to the ocular lens of a light microscope, focuses the image on a fluorescent screen. the specimen. Reflected electrons are then picked up by a detector (Fig. 2.39). 

The light source is replaced by an electron source consisting of a high-voltage current applied to a tungsten filament, which gives off electrons when heated. Each magnetic lens shown (condenser, objective, projection) actually represents a series of lenses. 

3. Reconstruct object in three dimensions. 

at finer details of resolution. In some cases, different preparation procedures have led to substantially different interpretations of subcellular structure. For example, an oval that appears hollow might be interpreted as a cell when in fact structure that is interpreted incorrectly is termed an artifact. Avoiding artifacts is an important concern in microscopy. 

How can electron microscopy achieve finer resolution and avoid artifacts due to staining? High-strength electron beams now permit low-temperature cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM), also known as electron cryomicroscopy. In cryo-EM, the specimen does not require staining, because the high-intensity electron beams can detect smaller signals (contrast in the specimen) than earlier instruments could. The specimen must, however, be flash-frozen—that is, suspended in water and frozen rapidly in a refrigerant of high heat capacity (ability to absorb heat). The rapid freezing avoids ice crystallization, leaving the water solvent in a glass-like amorphous phase. The specimen retains water content and thus closely resembles its living form, although it is still ultimately destroyed by electron bombardment. Another innovation made possible by cryo-EM is tomography, the acquisition of projected images from different angles of a transparent specimen (see the Current Research Highlight). Cryo-electron tomography, or electron cryotomography, avoids the need to physically tomography are combined digitally to visualize the entire scans are taken either at different angles or within different focal planes. Each different scan images slightly different parts of the object. The scans are summed computationally One use of cryo-electron tomography is to generate high-resolution models of virus particles. For a highly symmetrical virus, images of multiple particles can be averaged together. The digitally combined images can achieve high resolution, nearly comparable to that of X-ray crystallography. Wah Chiu at Baylor College of Medicine virus particles at high resolution. An example is rice dwarf particles that cannot be crystallized for X-ray diffraction analysis, the most common means of molecular visualization (see pages 71–73). Cryo-EM models of a virus are impressive, but can we bacterium. Such a model includes all the cell’s parts and their cytoplasmic connections—and reveals new structures never seen before. 

electron cryomicroscope. Chiu’s laboratory images virus structures using cryo-electron (pale colors) composed of 120 subunits. 

in Gram-negative bacteria. Four dark magnetosomes (particles of magnetite) appear in a chain, each surrounded by a vesicle of magnetosomes are colorized red, each surrounded by a membrane vesicle (green). The vesicles are organized within the cell by a series of protein axial filaments, colorized image of the magnetosomes viewed from the cell interior. This expansion reveals that the model shows how the magnetite particles are fixed in position by invaginated membranes and held in a line by axial filaments. Chapter 3 presents additional structures visualized by cryo-EM tomography, such as the flagellar motors of spirochete bacteria, and the carbon dioxide–fixing structures of marine cyanobacteria. Most surprisingly, cryo-EM reveals bacte137.4 rial microtubules—structures never seen before, which offer a promising new target for antibiotics. 

As the tip moves up or down, the cantilever/mirror is deflected. 

The sample is moved back and forth in the x-y plane. 

tip attached to a cantilever that moves over a sample. The tip interacts with the sample surface through atomic force. As the tip is pushed away, or pulled into a depression, the cantilever is deflected. The deflection is measured by a laser light beam focused onto the cantilever and reflected into a photodiode detector. coast of California. Two round bacteria and a helical bacterium can be seen (raised regions, green-white). 

is 100–200 μm long. The lever is deflected by the force between the tip and the sample surface. Deflection of the lever is measured by a laser beam reflected off a cantilever attached to the tip as the sample scans across. The measured deflections allow a computer to map the topography of cells in liquid medium with a resolution below 1 nm. seen (raised regions, green-white). The cells were observed assess the ecological contributions of marine bacteria that cannot be cultured. 

that are fundamentally “unseeable.” That is why we represent molecular structures in different ways that depend on the context—by electron density maps, as models defined by van der Waals radii, or as stick models. Proteins are frequently presented in a cartoon form that shows alpha helix and beta sheet secondary structures. For a molecule that can be crystallized, X-ray diffraction makes it possible to fix the position of each individual atom in the molecule. Atomic resolution is possible because the wavelengths of X-rays are much shorter than the wavelengths of visible light and are comparable to the size of atoms. X-ray diffraction is based on the principle of of an isolated molecule is bombarded by a beam of X-rays diffracted as they pass through the crystal, causing interference patterns. In the crystal, the diffraction pattern is generated by a symmetrical array of many sample molecules the narrower the interference pattern and the greater the resolution of atoms within the molecule. Diffraction patterns obtained from the passage of X-rays through a crystal a precise structural model for the molecule, detailing the position of every atom in the structure. 

whose structure was originally solved by Hodgkin. The corrin ring structure is built around an atom of cobalt (pink). Carbon atoms here are gray; oxygen, red; nitrogen, blue; phosphorus, yellow. Hydrogen atoms are omitted for clarity. 

The application of X-ray crystallography to complex was particularly supportive of women students and colleagues, including Rosalind Franklin (1920–1958), who Nobel laureate Dorothy Crowfoot Hodgkin (1910–1994). Chemistry for solving the crystal structures of penicillin first protein structures—that of the hormone insulin. Today, X-ray data undergo digital analysis to generate sophisticated molecular models, such as the one seen in of anthrax lethal factor, a toxin produced by Bacillus anthracis that kills the infected host cells. The model for anthrax lethal factor was encoded in a Protein atoms of the structure. The Protein Data Bank is a worldwide database of solved X-ray structures, freely available on the Internet. Visualization software is used to present the structure as a “ribbon” of amino acid residues, color-coded for secondary structure. In the red coils represent alpha helix structures, whereas the blue arrows represent beta sheets (for a review of protein structures, see Appendix 1). 

based on structural models deposited in the Protein Data Bank, as such as Jmol. 

ith just a few thousand genes in its genome, the bacterial cell continually and builds new ribosomes to make proteins. Flagella propel bacteria and archaea to new habitats. And the microbes secrete signals to contact fellow cells. Cellsurface proteins give us targets for new antibiotics or vaccines. Other features, such as flagellar motors, inspire us to build microscopic machines. 

Growing bacterium expands its nucleoid ahead of cell nucleoid (blue fluorophore). Completing cell division requires the Z-ring formed by polymerization of the protein FtsZ (red well ahead of cell division, forming two to four nucleoids. Norbert Hill in Petra Levin’s lab identified a nutrient-dependent regulator that delays FtsZ polymerization. By delaying Z-ring formation, the regulator allows the bacterial cell to grow larger before it divides. 

and chromosome segregation is akin to solving an extremely challenging brainteaser. Each time we identify a component of the signal transduction pathway coordinating cell division with cell growth or an elusive part of the cell division machinery, of knowing we have opened the door to yet another mystery! How do you think our view of bacterial cell division will be transformed in the future? 

Compact genome. Prokaryotic genomes are compact, maximize the production of cells from limited resources. 

Tightly coordinated functions. The cell’s parts work together in a highly coordinated mechanism, which may enable a high rate of reproduction. 

Thick, complex outer envelope. The envelope protects the cell from environmental stress and mediates exchange with the environment. 

Golgi complex are reviewed in eAppendix 2. The mitochondria and chloroplasts of eukaryotic cells evolved by endosymbiosis with engulfed bacteria (see Chapter 17). Diverse microbial eukaryotes, such as fungi and protists, are explored in Chapter 20. 

Now we embark on a tour of a typical Gram-negative bacterial cell, a common resident of your gut, Escherichia coli (Fig. 3.1). Along the way, we learn how our understanding of this model cell has emerged from microscopy, cell fractionation, and genetic analysis. 

Escherichia coli. Its general features apply to many kinds of bacteria, particularly the Gram-negative inhabits of your colon such as Proteobacteria and Bacteroidetes. Remember that we cannot literally “see” the molecules within a cell, but microscopy and subcellular analysis provide the basis for our model. 

additional “outer membrane.” The inner membrane is composed of phospholipids, transporter proteins, and other molecules. This membrane prevents cytoplasmic proteins from leaking out and maintains gradients of ions and nutrients. Between the inner and outer membranes lies the cell wall, a fortress-like structure composed of sugar chains linked covalently by peptides (peptidoglycan). The cell wall forms a single molecule that surrounds the cell. The wall material is flexible, but it limits expansion of the cytoplasm, keeping the cell membrane intact when water flows in. Like a balloon, the resulting turgor pressure makes the cell rigid. In a Gram-negative bacterium, the cell wall lies within the periplasm, a water-filled space containing nutrientbinding proteins and secretion machines. Outside the cell form a slippery layer that inhibits phagocytosis by macrophages (presented in Chapter 26). The inner membrane, cell wall, and outer membrane constitute the Gramnegative cell envelope. The bacterial envelope includes cell-surface proteins that bacterium colonize the human intestinal epithelium. The nitrogen-fixing symbiont Sinorhizobium has cell-surface proteins that help the bacteria to colonize legume plants for nitrogen fixation. Another common external structure is the flagellum (plural, flagella), a helical protein filament whose rotary motor propels the cell in search of a more such as Bacteroides and Prevotella species. Within the cell, the cell membrane and envelope provide an attachment point for one or more chromosomes. The chromosome is organized within the cytoplasm as a system of looped coils called the nucleoid (visualized by Unlike the round, compact nucleus of eukaryotic cells, the bacterial nucleoid is not enclosed by a membrane. In fact, ribosomes to start synthesizing polypeptide chains. As the polypeptides grow, protein complexes called chaperones help them fold into their functional conformations. The is presented in Chapters 7–10. How can we know how all the cell parts shown in interact and work together? Fluorescence as the cell grows. As we learned in Chapter 2, fluorescence can pinpoint a molecule or complex within a cell, such as the Z-ring where the cell divides (see the Current Research Highlight). But to visualize the cell’s interior as a whole requires higher resolution, as in electron microscopy. 

positively charged when the pH is near neutral. Polyamines ribosomes during translation. Macromolecules. Many cells have similar content of water and small molecules, but their specific character is defi ned by their macromolecules, especially their nucleic acids molecules can be isolated by size using agarose gel electrophoresis, in which the negatively charged molecules migrate in an electrical field (see eAppendix 3). The nucleic acid content of bacteria is relatively high, nearly 8% for microbes, the high nucleic acid content allows the cell to maximize reproduction of its chromosome while minimizing cell resources. The high proportion of nucleic acids actually makes bacterial cells inedible for humans, who lack the enzymes to digest the uric acid waste product of digested nucleotides. That is why we cannot eat most kinds of bacteria as a major part of our diet. Nevertheless, we do consume bacteria within vegetables, as all plants have bacteria growing within their transport tissues. 

genes to make different proteins, depending on environmental conditions such as temperature, nutrient levels, and entry into a host organism. Individual proteins are made in very different amounts, from 10 per cell to 10,000 per cell. The proteins expressed by a cell under given conditions are known collectively as a proteome. (We discuss the are found in the cell wall and outer membrane. The bacterial cell wall consists of peptidoglycan, an organic polymer of peptide-linked sugars that constitutes nearly 1% of the Peptidoglycan limits the volume of the enclosed cell, so as water rushes in, it generates turgor pressure. This investment of biomass in the cell wall shows the importance (for most species) of maintaining turgor pressure in dilute environments, where water would otherwise enter by osmosis, causing osmotic shock (see Appendix 1 and Section 3.2). 

Inner membrane 2. Lysozyme breaks down cell wall. 

3. Water dilution shocks outer membrane; periplasm leaks out. 

Cell fractionation also provides purified proteins that act as antigens for candidate vaccines. For example, a vaccine contains a highly immunogenic outer membrane protein. How can we disassemble a cell to isolate its parts? Early-twentieth-century microbiologists wondered how to separate cell parts, without all the molecules mixing together. The answer was ultracentrifugation, the separation of molecules subject to high g forces (explained in eAppendix 3). Mary Jane Osborn at the University of Connecticut Health Center discovered that the inner and outer membranes of Gram-negative bacteria have different densities, and thus can be separated by density gradient Cell fractionation requires techniques that lyse (break open) the cell. The lysis method must generate enough force to separate the membrane lipids (held together by method requires further specificity to separate “compartments” containing different sets of proteins: the inner and outer membranes, and the aqueous cytoplasm and groups disrupt the outer membrane (Fig. 3.2, step 1). The disrupted membrane allows sucrose to cross. Sucrose fi lls the periplasm, maintaining an osmotically stable solution. Next, lysozyme cleaves peptidoglycan and thus breaks down the cell wall (step 2). Lacking the turgid cell wall, the cell swells into a sphere called a spheroplast. The periplasm of the spheroplasts then undergoes osmotic shock, by transfer to distilled water (step 3). Water rushes in through the EDTA-weakened outer membrane, and the periplasm leaks out into the extracellular medium. Note that other means of cell disruption may work better for other kinds of cells. Mild-detergent lysis can dissolve membranes without denaturing proteins. Alternatively, sonication is a way to lyse a cell by intense ultrasonic vibrations that are above the range of human hearing. For especially tough cells, such as cyanobacteria, a “bead beater” with microscopic glass beads can tear the cells open. 

protein complexes that span the envelope from inner membrane to outer membrane (Fig. 3.1). How might we modify the cell fractionation procedure? 

information about processes that require an intact cell, such as cell division. How can we remove or alter a part of a cell without breaking it open? An approach that is complementary to cell fractionation is genetic analysis (discussed in detail in Chapters 7–12). In genetic analysis, we can mutate a strain so as to lose or alter a gene; then we select mutant strains for loss of a given function. The phenotype of the mutant cell may yield clues about the function of the altered part. 

without dividing; form Z-spirals. 

with no Z-ring; cytoplasm blebs out the side. 

cells containing mutations in the gene encoding FtsZ. In certain strains, the ftsZ gene has one base pair altered by site-directed mutagenesis (see Chapter 12) so as to replace extend into long filaments while failing to divide, and the 45. The position-45 mutant cells elongate while forming abnormal blebs of cytoplasm off the side of the cell where fission fails. These experiments reveal functional parts of the FtsZ structure and clues to the formation of the Z-ring. Different kinds of experimental methods may complement each other, to confirm or extend the conclusions from each. Another example is the analysis of the ribosome by cell fractionation, crystallography, and genetic analysis. Ribosome analysis is presented in eTopic 3.1. 

Bacterial cells are protected by a thick cell envelope. The envelope includes a cell membrane and a peptidoglycan cell and the cell membrane is called the inner membrane. Bacteria are composed of nucleic acids, proteins, phospholipids, and other organic and inorganic chemicals. Proteins in the cell vary, depending on the species and environmental conditions. 

Microscopy reveals cell structure. Transmission electron microscopy shows how cell parts fit within the cell as a whole. Fluorescence microscopy reveals the location and dynamics of individual components. Cell fractionation isolates cell parts for structural and biochemical analysis. The compartments of a Gram-negative cell can be separated by cell lysis and ultracentrifugation. Genetic analysis of mutants reveals functions of cell parts. Genetic analysis complements cell fractionation. 

How does a cell distinguish “itself” from what is outside? The structure that defines the existence of a cell is the cell membrane (Fig. 3.5). Overall, the membrane contains the cytoplasm within the external medium, mediating exchange between the two. The cell membrane consists of a phospholipid bilayer containing lipid-soluble proteins. It behaves as a two-dimensional fluid, within which proteins and lipids can diffuse. The proteins form about half the mass of the membrane and provide specific functions, such as nutrient transport. For review of elementary cell structure, see eAppendix 2. 

possesses a charged phosphoryl “head” that contacts the water interface, as well as a hydrophobic “tail” of fatty acids packed within the bilayer. Lipid biosynthesis is a key process that is vulnerable to antibiotics. For example, the bacterial enzyme enoyl reductase, which synthesizes fatty acids (discussed in Chapter 15) is the target of triclosan, a common antibacterial additive in detergents and cosmetics. 

links to two fatty acids and a phosphoryl polar head group, which at neutral pH is deprotonated (negatively charged) (Fig. 3.6). This kind of phospholipid is called a phosphatidate. The negatively charged head group of the phosphatidate can contain various organic groups, such as glycerol to polar head group has a side chain with positive charge. The positive charge commonly resides on an amine group, such Phospholipids with positive charge or with mixed charges are concentrated in portions of the membrane that interact In the bilayer, all phospholipids face each other tail to tail, keeping their hydrophobic side chains away from the water inside and outside the cell. The two layers of phospholipids in the bilayer are called leaflets. One leaflet of phospholipids faces the cell interior; the other faces the exterior. As a whole, the phospholipid bilayer imparts fluidity and gives the membrane a consistent thickness (about 8 nm). 

Structural support. Some membrane proteins anchor together different layers of the cell envelope (discussed in Section 3.3). Other proteins attach the membrane to the cytoskeleton, or form the base of structures extending out from the cell, such as flagella. 

Detection of environmental signals. In Vibrio cholerae, the causative agent of cholera, the membrane protein ToxR detects acidity and elevated temperature— signs that the bacteria is in the host’s digestive tract. The sequence, activating expression of cholera toxin. Secretion of virulence factors and communication signals. Membrane protein complexes export toxins and cell signals across the envelope. For example, symbiotic nitrogen-fixing rhizobia require membrane proteins NodI and NodJ to transport nodulation signals out to the host plant roots, inducing the plant to form root nodules containing the bacteria. Ion transport and energy storage. Transport proteins manage ion flux between the cell and the exterior. Ion transport generates gradients that store energy. 

An example of a bacterial membrane protein is the leucine transporter LeuT (Fig. 3.7). LeuT drives uptake of leucine, coupled to a gradient of sodium ions. The protein complex was purified for X-ray diffraction from Aquifex aeolicus, a thermophile whose heat-stable proteins form durable crystals. Remarkably, LeuT is homologous (shares common ancestry) with a human neuron protein that transports neurotransmitters. Thus, this bacterial protein serves as a model for study of neuron function. Proteins embedded in a membrane require a hydrophobic portion that is soluble within the membrane. Typically, several hydrophobic alpha helices thread back and forth through the membrane. Other peptide regions extend outside the membrane, containing charged and polar amino acids that interact favorably with water. shows the LeuT charge distribution. Hydrophobic amino acid residues (white) make the protein soluble in the membrane, while portions with negative charge (red) and positive charge (blue) lock the protein in. 

The cell membrane acts as a barrier to keep water-soluble proteins and other cell components within the cytoplasm. But how do nutrients from outside get into the cell—and how do secreted products such as toxins get out? Specific membrane proteins transport molecules across the membrane between the cytoplasm and the outside. Selective transport is essential for cell survival; it means the ability to acquire scarce nutrients, exclude waste, and transmit signals to neighbor cells. Passive diffusion. Small uncharged molecules, such as Some molecules, such as ethanol, also disrupt the membrane—an action that can make such molecules toxic to cells. By contrast, large, strongly polar molecules such as sugars, and charged molecules such as amino acids, generally cannot penetrate the hydrophobic interior of the membrane, and thus require transport by specific proteins. Water molecules permeate the membrane, but their rate of passage is increased by protein channels called aquaporins. 

usually exist in very different concentrations inside and outside the cell. An ion gradient (ratio of ion concentrations) across the cell membrane can store energy for nutrition or to drive the transport of other molecules. Inorganic ions require transport through specific transport proteins, or transporters. So, too, do organic molecules that carry a charge at cytoplasmic pH, such as amino acids and vitamins. Transport may be passive or active. In passive transport, molecules accumulate or dissipate along their concentration gradient. Active transport—that is, transport from lower to higher concentration—requires cells for active transport by cotransport of another substance down its gradient from higher to lower concentration, or by coupling transport to a chemical reaction (discussed in Chapter 4). 

Terpene-derived lipids of archaea. In archaea, the hydrocarbon chains are ether-linked to glycerol, and every fourth carbon has a methyl branch. In some archaea, the tails of the two facing lipids of the bilayer are fused, forming tetraethers; thus, the entire membrane consists of a monolayer. 

Interestingly, both hopanoids and cholesterol are synthesized from the same precursor molecules as the unique lipids of archaea (Fig. 3.13). It may be that hopanoids and cholesterol persist in bacteria and eukaryotes as derivatives of lipids that were once possessed by a common ancestor of all three domains. 

Archaea synthesize their membrane lipids from isoprene chains, to form terpenoids such as squalene. In bacteria and eukaryotes, squalene is converted to cholesterol; and in some bacteria, squalene cyclizes to form hopanes (hopanoids). 

The cell membrane consists of a phospholipid bilayer containing hydrophobic membrane proteins. Membrane proteins serve diverse functions, including transport, cell defense, and cell communication. Small uncharged molecules, such as oxygen, can penetrate the cell membrane by diffusion. Membrane-permeant weak acids and weak bases exist partly in an uncharged form that can diffuse across the concentration within the cell. Polar molecules and charged molecules require membrane proteins to mediate transport. Such facilitated transport can be active or Ion gradients generated by membrane pumps store energy for (up the concentration gradient) requires input of energy, whereas passive transport (down a gradient) does not. Diverse fatty acids are found in different microbial species and in microbes adapted to different environments. 

Archaeal membranes have ether-linked terpenoids, which confer increased stability at high temperature and extreme acidity. Some archaea have diglycerol tetraethers, which form a monolayer. 

structural support is the cell wall (see Fig. 3.1). Many species possess additional coverings, such as an outer membrane or an S-layer. Nevertheless, a few prokaryotes, such as the mycoplasmas, have a cell membrane with no outer layers, depending on host fluids for osmotic balance. Some archaea with only a cell membrane grow in extreme acid (pH zero); how they survive is unknown. 

D-Ala-D-Ala and blocks cross-bridge formation. 

Terminal D-alanine was released. 

lactate group of muramic acid forms an amide link with the amino terminus of a short peptide containing four to six amino acid residues. The peptide extension can form crossbridges connecting parallel strands of glycan. The peptide contains two amino acids in the unusual amino acid, m-diaminopimelic acid, has an extra amine group, which forms an amide link to a cross-bridged peptide. The amide link forms with the fourth amino acid of end of the chain. The cross-linked peptides of neighboring glycan strands form the cage of the sacculus. 

Amino acids have two forms that are mirror opposites, protein. The D-form amino acids, however, are used by microbes for many nonprotein structural molecules. 

and seal the cross-bridges. Many of these enzymes bind the antibiotic penicillin and are thus known as penicillinbinding proteins. Because peptidoglycan is unique to bacteria, enzymes of peptidoglycan biosynthesis make excellent the transpeptidase that cross-links the peptides is the target of penicillin. Vancomycin, a major defense against Clostridium difficile and drug-resistant staphylococci, prevents cross-bridge formation by binding the terminal D-AlaD-Ala dipeptide. Vancomycin binding prevents release of the terminal D-alanine. Unfortunately, the widespread use of such antibiotics selects for evolution of resistant strains. One of the most common agents of resistance is the enzyme beta-lactamase, which cleaves the lactam ring of penicillin, rendering it ineffective as an inhibitor of transpeptidase. In a different mechanism, strains resistant to vancomycin contain an altered enzyme that adds lactic acid to the end of the branch peptides in place of the terminal D-alanine. The altered peptide is no longer blocked by vancomycin. As new forms of drug resistance emerge, researchers continue to seek new antibiotics that target cell wall formation (discussed in Chapter 27). How does peptidoglycan grow, overall, throughout the elongating cell? Interestingly, different kinds of bacteria have evolved to organize their cell wall growth differently. Yves Brun and his student Erkin Kuru, at Indiana University, devised an ingenious way to reveal the growth pattern (Fig. 3.15). Kuru designed D-amino acids with fluorophores attached that the growing cell wall incorporates. 

teria synthesize new peptidoglycan in dispersed zones, at the septum only, or at the poles. Fluorescent D-amino acids are added for short periods (pulse labeling) to reveal the growth Brun at Indiana University, devised the fluorescent D-amino acids to probe cell wall growth. 

3.4 What other ways can you imagine that bacteria might mutate to become resistant to vancomycin? 

Most bacteria have additional envelope layers that provide structural support and protection from predators and host defenses (Fig. 3.16). Additional molecules are attached to the cell wall and cell membrane, and some thread through the layers. Here we present the envelope composition of three major kinds of bacteria, two of which (Firmicutes and Proteobacteria) are distinguished by the Gram stain. The third, Mycobacteria, is distinguished by the acid-fast stain (discussed in Chapter 2). 

Because these are D-amino acids and not L-amino acids, ribosome-directed translation does not use them. Thus, the fluorophores label only cell wall, not proteins. Kuru found that in zones dispersed throughout the cell. Gram-positive cocci, however, such as Streptococcus and Staphylococcus, synthesize cell wall only at the midpoint (or septum), where the cell is about to fission (discussed in the next section). Still other bacteria, such as the actinomycete Streptomyces, form new cell wall only at the poles. 

Firmicutes (Gram-positive) have a thick cell wall with 3–20 layers of peptidoglycan, interpenetrated by teichoic acids. The phylum Firmicutes consists of Gram-positive species such as Bacillus thuringiensis and Streptococcus pyogenes, the cause of strep throat. 

Proteobacteria (Gram-negative) have a thin cell wall with one or two layers of peptidoglycan, enclosed by an outer membrane. The phylum Proteobacteria consists of Gram-negative species such as Escherichia coli and nitrogen-fixing Sinorhizobium meliloti. 

the Gram-positive cell wall consist of glycerol or ribitol phosphodiester chains. 

Chapter 18). Archaea have yet other diverse kinds of envelopes that cannot be distinguished by Gram stain (see Chapter 19). 

negatively charged cross-threads of teichoic acids, as well as the overall thickness of the Gram-positive cell wall, help retain the Gram stain. How does the cell wall attach extracellular structures? Gram-positive bacteria have a type of enzyme called “sortase” that forms a peptide bond from a cell wall cross-bridge to a protein extending from the cell. Proteins attached by sortases can help the cell acquire nutrients, or help the cell adhere to a substrate. Sortases are now used in the protein engineering industry. 

3.5 highlights the similarities and differences between the cell envelopes of Gram-negative and Grampositive bacteria. What do you think are the advantages and limitations of a cell’s having one layer of peptidoglycan (Gram-negative) versus several layers (Gram-positive)? 

Inner membrane (cell membrane) bacterium found on the surface of beets and carrots. The S-layer is a crystalline sheet of thick subunits consisting of protein or glycoprotein (proteins with attached sugars). Each subunit contains a pore large enough to admit a wide range of molecules (Fig. 3.18). As modeled by cryo-EM tomography (see Chapter 2), the S-layer proteins are arranged in a highly ordered array, either hexagonally or tetragonally. The S-layer is rigid, but it also flexes and allows substances to pass through it in either direction. S-layers help pathogens such as Bacillus anthracis bind and attack host cells. An S-layer contributes to biofi lm formation (the periodontal bacterium Tannerella forsythia) and swimming (the aquatic cyanobacterium Synechococcus species). The functions of the S-layer are hard to study in the laboratory because the S-layer is often lost by bacteria after repeated subculturing. Traits commonly diminish in the absence of selective pressure for genes encoding them— a process called reductive evolution (discussed in Chapter 17). For example, the mycoplasmas are close relatives of Gram-positive bacteria that have permanently lost their cell walls, as well as the S-layer. Mycoplasmas have no need for cell walls, because they are parasites living in host environments, such as the human lung, where they are protected from osmotic shock. Capsule. Another common extracellular structure is the capsule, a slippery layer of loosely bound polysaccharides. The capsule of pathogens such as Staphylococcus aureus can prevent phagocytosis by white blood cells, thereby enabling the pathogen to persist in the blood. 

Exceptionally complex cell envelopes are found in actiIn mycobacteria, the peptidoglycan is linked to chains of nomycetes, a large and diverse family of soil bacteria that galactose, called galactans. The galactans are attached to produce antibiotics and other industrially useful prodarabinans, polymers of the five-carbon sugar arabinose. ucts (discussed in Chapter 18). The most complex enveThe arabinan-galactan polymers are known as arabinogalopes known are those of actinomycete-related bacteria, lactans. Arabinogalactan biosynthesis is inhibited by two the mycobacteria. Mycobacteria include the famous pathomajor classes of anti-tuberculosis drugs: ethambutol and gens Mycobacterium tuberculosis (the cause of tuberculosis) the benzothiazinones. and Mycobacterium leprae (the cause of leprosy). The mycoThe ends of the arabinan chains form ester links to bacterial envelope includes features of both Gram-positive mycolic acids (uncharged mycolates). Mycolic acids provide and Gram-negative cells, as well as structures unique to the basis for acid-fast staining, in which cells retain the dye mycobacteria (Fig. 3.22). carbolfuchsin, an important diagnostic test for mycobacteria and actinomycetes (described in Chapter 28). Mycolic acids contain a hydroxy acid backbone with two hydrocarbon chains—one comparable in length to typical membrane lipPhenolic ids (about 20 carbons), the other about threefold longer. The long chain includes ketones, methoxyl groups, and The capsule consists cyclopropane rings. Hundreds of different forms are of glycolipids and known. The mycolic acids form a bilayer interleaved sugar mycolates. with sugar mycolates—a kind of outer membrane, analogous to the Gram-negative outer membrane. This mycolate layer even contains porins homologous to Gram-negative beta barrel porins such as OmpA. Other mycolate-embedded proteins include virulence factors such The outer ends of the sugar mycolates are interleaved phenolic glycolipids, which include phenol groups linked to sugar chains. The extreme hydrophobicity of the phenol derivatives generates a waxy surface that prevents phagocytosis by macrophages. Overall, the thick, waxy envelope excludes many antibiotics and offers exceptional protection from host defenses, enabling the pathogens of tuberculosis and leprosy to colonize their hosts over long Mycolic acids periods. However, the thick envelope also retards (attached to Cell wall to culture in the laboratory. 

complex cell wall includes a peptidoglycan layer linked to a chain of galactose polymer (galactan) and arabinose polymer (arabinan). Arabinan forms ester links to mycolic acids, which form an outer bilayer with phenolic glycolipids. 

In eukaryotes, cell shape has long been known to be maintained by a cytoskeleton of protein microtubules and filaments (reviewed in eAppendix 2). But what determines the shape of bacteria? We saw earlier that bacterial shape is in part maintained by the cell wall and the resulting turgor pressure. But research over the past decade shows that bacteria also possess protein cytoskeletal components—and remarkably, some of them are homologous to eukaryotic cytoskeletal proteins. For example, the cell division protein FtsZ is a homolog of the eukaryotic protein tubulin (the subunit of eukaryotic microtubules). 

possess a third shape-determining protein, CreS (crescentin), which polymerizes along the inner curve of the crescent. Crescentin protein fused to green fluorescent protein (CreS-GFP) localizes to the inner (red fluorescence) localizes to the membrane around the cell. 

elongating strands of cell wall. If the rod shape is curved (called a vibrio, or crescent shape), the third cytoskeletal protein, crescentin, polymerizes along the inner curve of the by a membrane-specific fluorophore. These cytoskeletal proteins, and their variants that have evolved in other species, work together within cells to generate the shapes of bacteria. 

The cell wall maintains turgor pressure. The cell wall is porous, but its network of covalent bonds generates turgor pressure that protects the cell from osmotic shock. The Gram-positive cell envelope has multiple layers of peptidoglycan, threaded by teichoic acids. The S-layer of proteins is highly porous but can prevent phagocytosis and protect cells in extreme environments. In archaea, the S-layer serves the structural function of a cell wall. 

Gram-positive and Gram-negative cells. The arabinogalactan layer adds thickness to the cell wall. The mycolate outer membrane and phenolic glycolipids limit uptake of nutrients and antibiotics. The bacterial cytoskeleton includes proteins that regulate cell size, play a role in determining the rod shape of bacilli, and generate curvature in vibrios. 

a filamentous nucleoid region that extends through the cytoplasm. In contrast, the nucleus of the eukaryotic cell, only a fraction of which is visible in the figure, is many times larger than the entire bacterial cell, and the chromosomes it contains are separated from the cytoplasm by the nuclear membrane. 

In bacteria and archaea, the genome typically consists of a single circular chromosome, but some species have a linear chromosome or multiple chromosomes. In this chapter we focus on the simple case of a single circular chromosome. 

In biology, the word “domain” is used in several different ways, each referring to a defined portion of a larger entity. 

Origin of and migrates. 

Two replisomes continues bidirectionally. 

proteins. Membrane protein maturation and secretion are discussed in Chapter 8. 

of new replisomes have formed. In a fast-growing cell, the new origin sites begin a second round of replication, even before termination of the previous round. Note that the contents of the cytoplasm and envelope cell to generate progeny equivalent to the parent. In a rodshaped cell, the cell envelope and cell wall must elongate in a process coordinated by cytoskeletal proteins so as to maintain progeny of even girth and length. As discussed earlier, the girth and length of the elongating cell depend on shape-determining proteins such as FtsZ and MreB. 

into two daughter cells. Bacteria do not undergo mitosis relates to cell division; the molecular details of the process are discussed in Chapter 7. Replication begins at the origin of replication is called a replisome. The replisome actually includes two strand,” the other for the “lagging strand.” The lag time is short compared with the overall time of replication; thus, helix into two progeny helices almost simultaneously. 

were called fts for “fi lamentation temperature sensitive” because their mutation is temperature sensitive. The temperature-sensitive cells divide normally at a “permissive” temperature but fail to septate at the “restrictive” temperature, forming long fi laments. Temperaturesensitive mutants offer the researcher a way to grow and study bacteria that have severe defects in cell growth. 

in a ring all around the cell equator, as new cell wall grows inward. The wall material must consist of two separable partitions. When the partitions are complete, the two progeny cells peel apart. The facing halves of each cell consist of entirely new cell wall. The spatial orientation of septation has a key role in determining the shape and arrangement of cocci. If the cell always septates in parallel planes, as in Streptococcus species, cells form chains (Fig. 3.30). If, however, the cell septates in random orientations, or if cells reassociate loosely after septation, they form compact hexagonal arrays similar to the grape clusters portrayed in classical paintings—hence the Greek-derived term staphylococci (staphyle means “bunch of grapes”). Such clusters are found in colonies of Staphylococcus aureus. If subsequent septation occurs at right angles to the previous division, the cells may form tetrads and even cubical octads called “sarcinae” (singular, sarcina). Tetrads are formed by Micrococcus tetragenus, a cause of pulmonary infections (Fig. 3.31). 

envelope at the origin of replication, on domains are supercoiled and bound to DNA-binding proteins. 

to make proteins. Proteins are folded by chaperones and in some cases secreted at the cell membrane. Membrane-inserted proteins are translated at the membrane. The coupling of transcription, translation, and membrane insertion expands the nucleoid into distal parts of the cell. Cell expansion and septation are coordinated with (forming a chain of cells) or at right angles to the previous septation (forming a tetrad). 

Are bacterial cells symmetrical? Some bacteria have different structures at either pole, and their cell division generates two different cell types. But even superficially symmetrical age—a phenomenon called polar aging. Polar aging has surprising consequences for the interactions of bacteria with their environment and for antibiotic resistance. 

Flagellum is lost; stalk grows. 

PodJ moves to opposite pole with TipN. 

TipN concentrates at both new poles. 

Flagellum grows at pole with PodJ. 

TipN localizes to septum. 

Cell development involves many such proteins working together. shows how TipN interacts with two other polar proteins: the f lagellar marker PodJ, and the stalk marker DivJ. Each young cell (swarmer cell at top of cycle) has a new pole containing TipN. PodJ migrates to the pole with TipN. The stalk marker DivJ is produced at the pole where PodJ was previously. These redistributions of proteins cause the f lagellated swarmer cell to lose its f lagellum, replacing it with a stalk as the cell settles in a favorable environment. As the stalked cell grows, TipN delocalizes around the cell; then it localizes again at the middle, where the cell septates and divides. Once division is complete, TipN concentrates at both new poles. As PodJ moves to the new pole, that pole grows a f lagellum. Overall, throughout the cycle a series of polar proteins localize and delocalize to define the polar functions. Thought Question 3.8 presents data from an experiment that allows the function of the TipN protein of Caulobacter to be visualized by microscopy. Can you propose an experiment with mutant strains of Caulobacter to test the hypothesis that one of the proteins shown in is required for one of the cell changes shown? 

New pole is now old. 

New poles are now old. 

The poles of a bacterial cell may differ in form and function. Caulobacter crescentus has one plain pole, and one pole that has either a flagellum The two bacterial poles differ in age. One pole arises from the septum of the parental cell, whereas the other pole arises from a parental pole. yield progeny with a mixture of polar ages. Cells with a very old pole may cease replication and die. Polar aging is increased by stress. Environmental stress, such as an antibiotic or low pH, causes protein aggregates to collect at the cell’s older In actinomycetes and mycobacteria, cells extend at the poles, which alternate between fast and slow extension. Mycobacterial cells can thus reverse polar aging. 

Instead, each cell extends only at its old pole (2 h). Once growth from the old poles is complete, the cell divides (5 h) and the “new poles” start to elongate. In other words, each cell alternates between elongating from an old pole and then elongating from the opposite pole. The process of alternating pole extension yields classes of cell arising from the rapidly extended pole is called an “accelerator.” The daughter cell left behind at the alternate pole (composed mainly of old material) is called an “alternator.” The alternator cell delays a generation and then extends its older pole. The alternator grows more slowly than the accelerator. Differing in both growth rate and size, the alternator and accelerator cells were expected to show distinctly different patterns of metabolism. These metabolic states are assigned age classes: age 1 and age 2, respectively. In the next generation, division of the alternator cell again yields cells of the classes age 1 and age 2. But division of the accelerator cell yields a superaccelerator that extends even faster than the parent; this metabolic class is called age 3. 

the three age classes. Subsequent cell divisions of age 3 cells yield mixed data, Fortune reports; at some point, an unknown mechanism resets the growth rate to that of the ancestral How do these different cell types respond to antibiotics? Fortune compared the survival rates of alternator and accelerator cells. Alternator cells showed greater resistance to the antibiotics cycloserine and meropenem, which inhibit peptidoglycan synthesis. This makes sense because alternator cells form relatively small amounts of cell wall, compared to the rapidly extending accelerator cells. On the other hand, accelerator cells were more resistant to rifampicin, which inhibits Overall, we see that the “senior cells” from mycobacterial cell division play distinctive roles in generating antibiotic resis- of Microcystis, a cyanobacterium that forms toxic algal blooms in lakes polluted by agricultural runoff. Microcystis shows typical gas vesicles, which are protein vacuoles that trap and collect gases such as hydrogen or carbon dioxide produced by the cell’s metabolism. Each vesicle is a tube with two conical ends. The tubes pack in hexagonal arrays. 

tance. And the data scatter in suggests that other factors besides polar age remain to be discovered. No doubt, the mycobacterial cell cycle has further surprises in store for medical researchers developing therapies to cure and curb the spread of tuberculosis. 

Vijay Ambravaneswaran, Daniel Irimia, et al. 2012. Asymmetry and aging of mycobacterial cells lead to variable growth and antibiotic susceptibility. Science 335:100–103. 

phototroph Prochlorococcus envelope lie the photosynthetic double membranes called thylakoids. Carboxysomes are polyhedral, protein-covered bodies packed with the Rubisco hexagonal arrays provide buoyancy, enabling the phototroph to remain at the surface of the water, exposed to light. 

produce them industrially. Similar storage granules are also produced by nonphototrophic soil bacteria. Another type of storage device is sulfur—granules Instead of disposing of the sulfur, the bacteria store it in granules, either within the cytoplasm (purple phototrophs) or as “globules” attached to the outside of the cell. Sulfur-reducing bacteria also make extracellular sulfur globules (Fig. 3.37). The sulfur may be usable as an oxidant when reduced substrates become available. And the presence of potentially toxic sulfur granules may help cells avoid predation. 

also called fimbria (plural, fimbriae), which is constructed of straight filaments of protein monomers called pilin. For example, the sexually transmitted pathogen Neisseria gonorrhoeae uses pili to attach to the mucous membranes of the reproductive tract (Fig. 3.38). In Gram-negative enteric bacteria, pili of a different kind, also called the sex pili, attach a “male” donor cell to a “female” recipient cell conjugation. The genetic consequences of conjugation are discussed in Chapter 9. 

In a favorable habitat, such as a running stream full of fresh nutrients or the epithelial surface of a host, it is advantageous for a cell to adhere to a substrate. Adherence, the ability to attach to a substrate, requires specific structures. 

Intercellular nanotubes. Bacillus subtilis bacteria with intercellular connections called nanotubes, which pass material from one cell to the next. 

Chapters 4 and 10). Structures that connect the cells’ cytoplasm include intercellular nanotubes. Nanotubes are extensions of cell envelopes that connect the cytoplasm or periplasm between two different cells. shows how nanotubes interconnect cells of Bacillus subtilis. Nanotubes can transmit materials from one cell to another—even between cells of different species. Unfortunately, viruses can generate nanotubes in their host cells in order to transmit progeny viruses to a new cell without exposure to the immune system. 

Gessenbach Creek in Germany—orange because of metal pollution. 

collect in a bundle behind a swimming cell. Under dark-field microscopy, the cell body appears overexposed, about five times as large as the actual cell. 

image is based on digital reconstruction, in which electron micrographs of purified basal bodies were rotationally through the MotA-MotB complex drives motor rotation. 

fused to flagellar motor protein MotB or to FliG. Bright green dots (white arrows) indicate GFP-protein complexed with a flagellar motor. The investigates the structure and function of the flagellar motor. 

appear to extend from the motor positions that contain either MotB or FliG. Further experiments dissect the roles of key amino acid residues in the function of these proteins. 

Magnetotactic bacteria are anaerobes or microaerophiles (require low oxygen), which prefer the lower part of the water column, where oxygen concentration is lowest. In the northern latitudes, where Earth’s magnetic field lines point downward, bacteria that are magnetotactic swim “downward” toward magnetic north. Thought Question 3.9 How would a magnetotactic species have to behave if Chemotaxis. How do cells decide where to swim? Most flagellated cells have an elaborate sensory system for taxis, the ability to swim toward favorable environments (attractant signals, such as nutrients) and away from inferior environments (repellent signals, such as waste products). Taxis to specific chemicals is called chemotaxis. For chemotaxis, the attractants and repellents are detected by a polar array of chemoreceptors. Chemoreceptors act like a “nose,” telling the bacterium when it is swimming toward a source of attractant such as a sugar or an amino acid. Another form of chemotaxis is magnetotaxis, the ability to sense and respond to magnetism. Found in pond water, magnetotactic bacteria orient themselves along the Earth’s lines of magnetic field. Magnetotactic bacteria can be collected from the environment by placing a magnet in a jar of pond water; bacteria orienting by the field lines collect nearby. The bacteria sense the magnetic field by means of magnetosomes, microscopic membrane-embedded crystals of the magnetic mineral magnetite, Fe3O4 (shown in the previous chapter, Fig. 2.44). The magnetosomes orient bacterial swimming toward the bottom of the pond. 

Chemotaxis requires a mechanism for the rotary flagella to propel the cell toward attractants or away from repellents. This When a cell is swimming toward an attractant chemical, the swim smoothly for a long stretch. When the cell veers away from the attractant, receptors send a signal that allows one the twist of the helix. This switch in the direction of rotation disrupts the bundle of flagella, causing the cell to tumble briefly and end up pointed in a random direction. The cell then swims off in the new direction. The resulting pattern of movement generates a “biased random walk” in which How do bacteria connect their flagellar switching mechanism to the signal reception of their chemoreceptors? The signal transduction mechanism is explained in Chapter 10. 

monly used for genetic research lack flagella. Why do you think this is the case? How can a researcher maintain a motile strain? 

here do bacteria find food, and how do they grow? Bacteria struggle to survive in natural habitats because they constantly compete for food. Over eons, however, evolution has enabled bacteria to find new nutritional niches that require the microbes to consume strange foods (mothballs, for instance), harness energy from light, or survive boiling temperatures around deep-sea thermal vents. In the process, single-celled organisms developed ways to chemically “talk” to each other and form intricate multicellular communities called biofilms. The one process that links all of these activities is growth. 

Evolution in aging colonies. Bacteria in old colonies struggle to survive because nutrients dwindle and toxic products rise. Ivan Matic and Claude Saint-Ruf found aging colonies to be has numerous mutant islands expressing different patterns of two fluorescent proteins (green and red). Inset: An island with dead cells (blue) in the center surrounded by growing cells (green) and dormant cells (red). The patterns suggest that each island evolves independently and that death of the first mutant cells provides nutrients for their descendants. 

How have studies on aging colonies altered our view of bacterial diversity? The capacity of microbes to colonize practically all environmental niches on Earth fascinates us. Our work demonstrates that microhabitats within structured environments are important for shaping this diversity. For instance, environmental parameters of microhabitats in a bacterial colony continuously change as a consequence of bacterial activity. The disparate selective pressures that result favor the emergence and coexistence of diverse variants that could evolve to inhabit new environmental niches. In a homogeneous environment, by contrast, natural selection reduces diversity by eliminating all but the fittest variants. 

Our study illustrates how novel metabolic capabilities can emerge in bacteria, transforming them, for example, into more successful host invaders. Our work may also explain how heritable antibiotic tolerance develops even in the absence of antimicrobial agents. Learning how drug tolerance evolves in structured environments may influence how we use antibiotics to treat bacterial infections. 

Like all living things, microorganisms need sources of carcommunities that bacterial cells form while they grow and bon and energy to grow. As those resources are depleted, how some species differentiate into unique forms able to surorganisms can do one of the following: they can die (most vive starvation or explore for new sources of food—all so they do), evolve to better use what little resource remains, or cancan grow again. nibalize other, less fortunate members of the community. All three of these possible outcomes were observed within the single colony described in the Current Research Highlight. What is the evidence that cells taken from the growth islands in aging colonies have actually evolved? Claude Bacterial cells look simple but are remarkably complex and efficient replication machines. One cell of Escherichia coli, numerous variants from islands in aging colonies. She then for example, can divide to form two cells every 20–30 mintested how well these variant cells competed with their utes. At a rate of 30 minutes per division, one cell could parental strains for growth in reconstructed aging colonies. potentially multiply to over 1 × 1014 cells in 24 hours—that Equal numbers of parental and variant cells were mixed, is, 100 trillion organisms! Although these 100 trillion cells spotted onto solid growth media (agar), and incubated for would weigh only about 1 gram altogether, the mass of cells would explode to 1014 grams (that is, 107 tons) after another panel) that two parents labeled with different fluorescent 24 hours (two days total) of replicating every 30 minutes. proteins grew equally well on agar when mixed. However, the lower panel clearly shows that a variant strain (green) has outcompeted its parent (red) in the reconstructed aging colony. The results show that evolution in aging colonies Nutrient Supplies Limit Microbial Growth will generate mutants that better utilize dwindling nutriOne factor limiting growth is the finite supply of nutrients or the end products of metabolism. ents. Microbes, in fact, often live where nutrients are scarce. Understanding how bacteria Parental (red)/Parental (green) mixed colony ultimately, cell number enables us to control their growth and even manipulate them to make useful products. Yeast, for example, consume glucose and break it down to ethanol and carbon dioxide gas. These end products are mere waste to the yeast, but extremely important to humans who enjoy beer. Chapter 4 provides a broad perspective of microbial growth, intro1 mm ducing topics that will be expanded Parental (red)/variant (green) mixed colony on in later chapters. We start by discussing the nutrients bacteria need to grow and the ways nutrients are used. For example, how do different bacteria obtain carbon and nitrogen, where do they get their energy, and what mechanisms do they use to gather the nutrients they need? (The details of metabolism emerge in Chapters 13, 14, and 15.) Next we explain how scientists use our knowledge of microbial nutrition to cul1 mm ture bacteria in the laboratory and growing in the world fail to grow onto growth agar. Two parental strains labeled with different fluorescent proteins can be seen in in the lab? We end by describing the the top panel; the bottom panel shows a parental strain (red) mixed with a variant strain (green). 

Essential nutrients are those compounds that a microbe must have but cannot make. The organism needs to find and import these nutrients from the immediate environment. When an essential nutrient becomes depleted, microbes cannot grow. How organisms cope with these periods of starvation until nutrients are restored will be discussed later. All microorganisms require a minimum set of macronutrients, nutrients needed in large quantities (as discussed in Chapter 3). Six macronutrients—carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus, hydrogen, oxygen, and sulfur—make up the carbohydrates, lipids, nucleic acids, and proteins of the cell. Four other macronutrients are cations that serve or act as regulatory signaling molecules (Ca2+). All cells also require very small amounts of certain trace elements, called micronutrients. These include cobalt, copper, manganese, molybdenum, nickel, and zinc, which are ubiquitous trace contaminants on glassware and in water. As a result, these elements are not added to laboratory media unless heroic measures have been taken to first remove the elements from the medium. Micronutrients are required by cells as essential components of enzymes or cofactors. Cobalt, for example, is and membrane components from this very simple blend of chemical elements and compounds. For many other microbes, this basic set of nutrients is insufficient. Borrelia burgdorferi, for example, the cause of Lyme disease, requires an extensive mixture of complex organic supplements to grow. 

die or are eaten, these organic compounds can be used as carbon sources by heterotrophs. Autotrophs are classified as photoautotrophs or chemolithoautotrophs by how they obtain energy. Photoautotrophs use light energy to photoautotrophs and chemolithoautotrophs carry out the the carbon cycle between autotrophs and heterotrophs (Fig. 4.2). In addition, many microorganisms (for example, phototrophic soil bacteria) can use both heterotrophy and autotrophy to gain carbon. Thought Question 4.1 In a mixed ecosystem of autotrophs and heterotrophs, what happens if the autotroph begins to outgrow the heterotroph and makes excess organic carbon? 

The following prefixes for “-trophy” terms help distinguish different forms of biomass-building and energy-yielding metabolism. Carbon source for biomass: Hetero-: Preformed organic molecules are acquired from outside, broken down for carbon, and the carbon reassembled to make biomass. 

Organo-: Organic molecules donate electrons. 

Autotroph (autotrophy). Autotrophs build biomass by gain energy through one of two general metabolic routes that either use or ignore light. Photoautotrophs generate energy through light absorption by the Chemolithoautotrophs produce energy from oxidizing inorganic molecules such as iron, sulfur, or nitrogen. 

Heterotroph (heterotrophy). Heterotrophs break down organic compounds from other organisms to gain energy and to harvest carbon for building their own biomass. Heterotrophic metabolism can be divided into two classes, also based on whether light is involved. Photoheterotroph (photoheterotrophy). Photoheterotrophs obtain energy from the catabolism of organic compounds and through light absorption. Organic compounds are broken down and used to build biomass. 

Inset: Endolithic cyanobacteria, and the endospore-forming heterotroph Paenibacillus wynnii. grow within rock. 

Chemoheterotroph (chemoheterotrophy or organotrophy). Chemoheterotrophs obtain energy and carbon for biomass solely from organic compounds. Chemoheterotrophy is also called chemoorganotrophy or, commonly, just heterotrophy. The survival and metabolism of any one group of organisms depend on the survival and metabolism of other groups of organisms. For example, the cyanobacteria, a type of photosynthetic microorganism that originated 2.5–3.5 billion years ago, produce most of the oxygen that we breathe. Cyanobacteria also depend on heterotrophic bacteria to consume the molecular oxygen that the cyanobacteria produce, since molecular oxygen is toxic to cyanobacteria. may resemble that of ancient Earth is the polar desert Mars Oasis, on Alexander Island, Antarctica (Fig. 4.3). In this harsh habitat, cyanobacteria grow in soil and even as “endoliths” within rock. In the soil we find heterotrophs such as nitrogen from the atmosphere. The bacteria can make endospores (see Section 4.6), which survive during long periods of dormancy, such as the Antarctic winter. Researchers set up experiments to test the effect of heating the soil, as a simulation of climate change, on the ecosystem. Today, cyanobacteria form the base of Earth’s marine food chain. The autotrophic cyanobacteria fix carbon in the ocean and are eaten by heterotrophic protists. The protists are then devoured by fish, and the fish produce eat the fish. 

Fo rotor is driven by proton motive force. 

synthase is a complex of many different proteins. The discussed in detail in Chapters 13 and 14. The idea that a living organism could contain rotating parts was controversial when such parts were first discovered in bacterial flagella (discussed in Section 3.6). The discovery of rotary biomolecules has inspired advances in nanotechnology, the engineering of microscopic devices. For example, a “biomolecular motor” was devised using an design may be used to build microscopic robots that enter the bloodstream to perform microsurgery. 

rhizobia (about 0.9 µm × 3 µm) are shown clustered on the surface of the root, they will soon invade the root and begin a symbiotic the rhizobia invade the plant root, symbiosis between plant and microbe produces nodules. 

Nitrogen-fixing bacteria may be free-living in soil or water, or they may form symbiotic associations with plants intimate association with a second organism. For example, Rhizobium, Sinorhizobium, and Bradyrhizobium species are nitrogen-fixing symbionts of leguminous plants such as soybeans, chickpeas, and clover (Fig. 4.5). Although symbionts are the most widely known nitrogen-fixing bacteria, the majority of nitrogen in soil and marine environments is fixed by free-living bacteria and archaea. Once fixed, how does nitrogen get back into the atmosphere? As with the carbon cycle, various groups of organisms collaborate to recycle ammonium ions and nitrate One group of bacteria gains energy by converting, or oxidizing, ammonia to form nitrate in a process called nitrification (Nitrosomonas, Alcaligenes, and Nitrobacter). Nitrification is a form of lithotrophy. Other heterotrophic for certain electron transport chains. Denitrifying bacteria send an amount of nitrogen into the atmosphere that roughly balances the amount removed by nitrogen fixation. Like the carbon cycle, the nitrogen cycle illustrates how nature manages to replenish planet Earth. For the environmental significance of nitrogen metabolism, see Chapter 22. 

Microorganisms require certain essential macro- and micronutrients to grow. photosynthesis or through lithotrophy, and make organic compounds as biomass. Heterotrophs consume the organic compounds made by autotrophs to gain carbon. Energy gained by autotrophy or chemotrophy is stored either as proton motive force or chemical energy Nitrogen fixers (only bacteria and archaea) incorporate nitrogen into biomass and contribute organic nitrogen to the rest of the ecosystem. Chemotrophic nitrifying bacteria gain energy by into nitrate and nitrite. Heterotrophic denitrifying organisms use nitrate and nitrite as electron acceptors to make nitrogen gas. 

1. Glycerol enters the GlpF channel. 

change in GlpF opens the channel to the cytoplasm, and glycerol enters the cell. 

In passive transport, transport solutes move down the concentration gradient. 

viewed from the external side of the membrane, consists of four channels that span the cell membrane. Each channel (blue and yellow) can transport two glycerol through GlpF. The protein facilitates the movement of the compound from outside the cell (where the concentration of glycerol is high) to inside the cell (where the concentration of glycerol is low). 

concentration, the cell would remain starved of most nutrients. To solve this dilemma, most organisms have evolved efficient transport systems that concentrate nutrients inside the cell relative to outside. However, moving molecules against a concentration gradient requires some form of energy. In contrast to environments where nutrients are available but exist at low concentrations (for example, aqueous environments), certain habitats have plenty of nutrients but those nutrients are locked in a form that cannot be transported into the cell. Starch, a large, complex carbohydrate, is but one example. Many microbes unlock these nutrient “vaults” by secreting digestive enzymes that break down complex carbohydrates or other molecules into smaller compounds that are easier to transport. The amazing mechanisms that cells use to extrude these large digestive proteins through the membrane and into their surrounding environment are discussed in Chapter 8. 

Although most transport systems use cellular energy to bring compounds into the cell, a few do not. Facilitated diffusion uses the concentration gradient of a compound to move that compound across the membrane from a compartment of higher concentration to a compartment of lower concentration. The best these passive systems can do is to equalize the internal and external concentrations of a solute; facilitated transport cannot move a molecule against its gradient. Facilitated diffusion systems are used for compounds that are either too large or too polar to diffuse on their own. 

The most important facilitated diffusion transporters are those of the aquaporin family that transport water and small polar molecules such as glycerol (which is used for energy and for building phospholipids). Glycerol transport called GlpF. The structure of a glycerol channel is shown in face of the membrane. The complex is a tetramer of four channels, each of which transports a glycerol. In the membrane, GlpF reversibly (and randomly) assumes two conformations. One form exposes the glycerol-binding site to the external environment, whereas the second form exposes this site to the cytoplasm. When the concentration of glycerol is greater outside than inside the cell, the form with the binding site exposed to the exterior is more likely to find and bind glycerol. After binding glycerol, GlpF changes shape, closing itself to the exterior and released (diffuses) into the cytoplasm (influx). Of course, this form of GlpF could also bind a glycerol molecule in the cytoplasm and release it outside the cell. Thus, once the cytoplasmic concentration of glycerol equals the concentration outside the cell, bound glycerol can be released to either compartment. However, facilitated diffusion normally promotes glycerol influx, because the cell consumes the compound as it enters the cytoplasm, keeping cytoplasmic concentrations of glycerol low. 

1. Energy is released as one substrate (red) moves down its concentration gradient. 2. This energy moves a second substrate (blue) against its gradient and into the cell. 

1. Antiporter binds the cytoplasmic side of the membrane. 

be electrogenic because an unequal distribution of charge results (for example, symport of a neutral lactose molecule An example of electroneutral coupled transport, in which there is no net transfer of charge, is that of the Na+/ of Na+ with the import of a proton (antiport). Because molecules of like charges are merely exchanged, there is no net movement of charge. Sodium exchange is important for all organisms and is particularly critical for organisms living in high-salt habitats (see Section 5.4). Thought Questions 4.2 In what situation would antiport and symport be passive rather than active transport? 4.3 What kind of transporter, other than an antiporter, could produce electroneutral coupled transport? 

(solute) attaches to the binding sites. The transport protein then changes shape to open that site to the low-concentration side of the membrane, and the ion leaves. When and where the second (cotransported) solute binds depends on whether the transport protein is an antiporter or a symporter. With all this ion traffic across the membrane going on, a careful accounting must be kept of how many ions are inside the cell relative to outside. The cell must recirculate ions back and forth across the membrane to maintain certain gradients if the organism is to survive. Because key ATPproducing systems require an electrochemical gradient across the membrane, it is especially important to keep the interior of the cell negatively charged relative to the exterior. However, because the movement of many compounds is coupled to the import of positive ions, the electrochemical gradient will eventually dissipate, or depolarize, unless positive ions are also exported. Depolarization must be avoided, because a depolarized cell loses membrane integrity and cannot carry out the transport functions needed balance by using the electron transport chain to move protons out of the cell and by using antiporters to exchange negatively and positively charged ions as needed. While symport and antiport systems directly link the transport of different ions, the movement of one ion can also be linked indirectly to movement of another molecule. For example, proton concentrations are typically greater outside the cell than inside. The inwardly directed proton gradient is called proton motive force. Proton motive force can impel the exit of Na+ through the Na+/H+ antiporter. The resulting Na+ gradient can then drive the symport of amino acids into the cell. In this case, Na+ moves back into the cell down its gradient, and the energy released is tied to the import of an amino acid against its gradient. 

2. The ATPase activity of one component (yellow) powers the opening of the channel (green) and movement of the solute into the cell. 

1. The siderophore called enterochelin is secreted and binds Fe3+. 

Buchanan examines the molecular structure and assembly of various transport proteins in Gram-negative bacteria. 

2. The complex is transported to the periplasm through an outer membrane protein (FepA). 

4. The enterocherlin-Fe3+ complex enters the cell. 

to move the substrate into the periplasm. Because substrate-binding proteins have a high affinity for their cognate (matched) solutes, their use increases the efficiency of transport when concentrations of solute are low. Once united with its solute, the binding protein binds to the periplasmic face of the channel protein and releases the solute, which now moves to a site on the channel protein. This interaction triggers a structural (or conformational) change in the channel protein (the green “membrane transporter” in Fig. 4.9) that is telegraphed to the nucleotide-binding proteins on the cytoplasmic side (yellow). On receiving return conformational change through the channel, signaling the channel to open its cytoplasmic side and allow the solute to enter the cell. 

an intermediate in glycolysis, to attach a phosphate to specific sugars during their transport into the cell (Fig. 4.11 ). Glucose, example, is converted durP ing transport to glucose 6-phosCOOH phate. The system has a modular ent substrates. Protein elements that initiate phosphotransfer unique to a given carbohydrate Extracellular fluid nitol during transport. Because phosphorylated during transport, (such as glucose or mannitol). The substrate is then phosphorylated during transport, making it different from the external sugar. As a result, the sugar is always traveling down its concentration gradient into the glucose itself never accumulates in the cytoplasm. As a result, the structures of these proteins is of great interest. Learning travels down its concentration gradient into the cell. More their structural and functional vulnerabilities could lead to the development of new antibiotics that stop iron transport. we will see how this physiological system impacts the genetic Susan Buchanan from the National Institutes of Health is control of many other systems. working to solve the structures of several iron and heme called endocytosis, which often precedes nutrient transport Group Translocation Avoids across membranes. Endocytosis is discussed in eTopic 4.2 “Uphill” Battles and eAppendix 2. The uptake transporters that we have just considered increase concentrations of solute inside the cell relative to To Summarize the outside. They move nutrients “uphill” against a concentration gradient. An entirely different system, known as Transport systems move nutrients across phospholipid group translocation, cleverly accomplishes the same result bilayer membranes. but without really moving a substance uphill. Group trans Facilitated diffusion helps solutes move across a memlocation alters the substrate during transport by attachbrane from a region of high concentration to one of ing a new group (for example, phosphate) to it. Because lower concentration. the modified nutrient inside the cell is chemically different from the related compound outside, the parent solute Antiport and symport are coupled transport systems in entering the cell is always moving down its concentration gradient, regardless of how much solute has already been Na+) from a region of high concentration to one of low transported. Note that this process uses energy to chemiconcentration is harnessed and used to move a solute location systems both involve active transport, but group move solutes “uphill,” against their concentration gradients. Siderophores are secreted to bind ferric iron (Fe ) and characterized group translocation system present in many transport it into the cell, where it is reduced to the more along common elements of the 2. Substrates are transformed by phosphorylation during transport. 

How do we capture bacteria and study them? Microbes in nature usually exist in complex, intertwined multispecies communities. For detailed studies of a single species, however, cells of the species are usually grown in pure culture. This section will describe how that is done. But after 120 years of trying to grow microbes in the laboratory, we have succeeded in culturing less than 1% of the microorganisms around us. The vast majority of the microbial world has yet to be tamed. At the end of this section we will discuss some new, innovative methods that enable us to culture at least some of these “unculturable” microbes. 

For those organisms that can be cultured, we have access to a variety of culturing techniques that can be used for different purposes. Bacterial culture media may be either liquid or move about freely, is useful for studying the growth characteristics of a single strain of a single species (that is, a pure culture). Liquid media are also convenient for examining growth kinetics and microbial biochemistry at different phases of growth. Solid media, usually gelled with agar, are useful for trying to separate mixtures of different organisms as they are found in the natural environment or in clinical specimens. 

colonies, wrinkled bacterial colonies, and fungus separated by dilution on an agar plate. As time passed, the fungal colony overgrew adjacent bacterial colonies. 

Hold the loop flat against the agar and streak across surface. 

Solid media are basically liquid media to which a solidifying agent has been added. The most versatile and widely used solidifying agent is agar (for the development of agar medium, see Section 1.3). Derived from seaweed, agar medium poured into shallow, covered petri dishes cools and hardens to provide a large, flat surface on which a mixture of microorganisms can be streaked to separate individual cells. Each cell will divide and grow to form a distinct, visible colony of cells (Fig. 4.12). As shown in a drop of liquid culture is collected with an inoculating loop and streaked across the agar plate surface in a pattern called dilution streaking. Organisms fall off the loop as it moves along the agar surface. 

Group translocation systems use energy to chemically modify the solute during transport. 

Reflame loop before changing direction of streaking. 

the plate in three or four areas, with the loop flamed between areas to kill bacteria still clinging to it. Dragging the loop across the agar diminishes the number of organisms clinging to the loop until only culture obtained by dilution streaking. 

Toward the end of the streak, few bacteria remain on the loop, so individual cells will land and stick to different places on the agar surface. If the medium, whether artificial (for example, laboratory medium) or natural (for example, crab carapace) contains the proper nutrients and growth factors, a single cell will multiply into many millions of offspring, or one strain of a species can be obtained by touching a single colony with a sterile inoculating loop and inserting that loop into fresh liquid medium. It is important to note that the “one cell equals one colony” paradigm does not hold for all bacteria. Organisms such as Streptococcus and Staphylococcus usually do not exist as single cells, but grow as chains or clusters of several cells. Thus, a cluster of ten Staphylococcus cells will form only one colony on Another way to isolate pure colonies is the spread plate technique. Starting from a liquid culture of bacteria, a series of tenfold dilutions is made, and a small amount of each dilution is placed directly on the surface of separate agar plates (Fig. 4.15). The sample is spread over the surface of the plate with an alcohol-sterilized, bent glass rod. The early dilutions, those containing the most bacteria, will produce confluent growth that covers the entire agar surface. Later dilutions, containing fewer and fewer organisms, yield individual colonies. As we will see later, spread plates not only enable us to isolate pure cultures but also can be used to enumerate the number of viable bacteria in present in the original liquid culture. 

be added to a basic complex medium. With these additions, the complex medium is called an enriched medium. Complex media provide many of the chemical building blocks that a cell would otherwise have to synthesize on its own. For example, instead of making proteins that synthesize tryptophan, all the cell needs is a membrane transport system to harvest prefabricated tryptophan from the medium. Likewise, fastidious organisms that require blood in their media may reclaim the heme released from red blood cells as their own, using it as an “enzyme prosthetic group,” a group critical to enzyme function (for example, the heme group in cytochromes). All of this saves the scavenging cell a tremendous amount of energy, and as a result, bacteria tend to grow fastest in complex media. The metabolism of a microbe growing in a complex medium is hard to characterize. How would you know if the bacterium grew only in complex media? Questions like this can be asked of organisms able to grow in fully defined synthetic media. In preparing a synthetic medium, we start with water and then add various salts, carbon, that’s needed. Other organisms, such as Shigella species or ingredients to satisfy requirements imposed by the absence of specific metabolic pathways (growth factors are discussed shortly). However, newer molecular tools, such as whole-genome sequencing, can reveal missing biosynthetic pathways and help predict which nutrients are needed to grow a particular species in a synthetic medium. Thought Question 4.4 What would be the phenotype (growth characteristic) of a cell that lacks the trp genes (genes required for the synthesis of tryptophan)? What would be the phenotype of a cell missing the lac genes (genes whose products catabolize the carbohydrate lactose)? 

Microorganisms are remarkably diverse with respect to their metabolic capabilities and resistance to certain toxic agents. These differences are exploited in selective media, which favor the growth of one organism over another, and in differential media, which expose biochemical differences between two species that grow equally well. For example, Gram-negative bacteria, with their outer membrane, are much more resistant than Gram-positive bacteria to detergents like bile salts and certain dyes, such as crystal violet is considered selective because it favors the growth of Gram-negative over Gram-positive bacteria. On the other hand, a differential medium is needed to distinguish between organisms that differ not in their ability to grow, but in a particular biochemical function they possess. 

Lactoseof diarrhea, are both Gram-negafermenting (Lac– ) tose. Both organisms will grow on solid media containing a nonfermentable carbon source like peptone, a dye called “neutral red,” and lactose. lactose and produces acidic end products. These products lower the pH surrounding the colony, the neutral-red dye enters the cells, and the colony of on the nonfermentable peptides but cannot ferment lactose. Consequently, acidic end products are not produced, white, their natural color. In this culture medium both selective and differexample, growth in differential media ential. Only Gram-negative bacteria grow on easily distinguishes colonies of lactose lactose MacConkey (selective). Only a species capable of fermenting lactose produces pink fermenters from nonfermenters. colonies (differential), because only fermenters Several media used in clinical micro- can take up the neutral red and peptones that biology are both selective and differen- are also in the medium. Gram-negative nonfertial. MacConkey medium, for example, menters appear as uncolored colonies. contains bile salts and crystal violet to prevent the growth of Gram-positive bacteria and allow the growth of Gram-negative bacteria (Fig. 4.16). The medium also includes lactose, neutral red, and peptones to differentiate lactose fermenters (Lac+, red colonies) from nonfermenters (Lac–, uncolored colonies). This medium is often used to identify bacteria that cause diarrheal disease because most normal microbiota that grow on this medium are lactose fermenters, whereas two important pathogens, Salmonella and Shigella, are lactose nonfermenters. 

4.6 The addition of sheep’s blood to agar produces a very rich medium called blood agar. Do you think blood agar is a can lyse red blood cells. 

grow in natural environments, many bacterial species rely on factors produced by other species within their niche. The microbe shown, factor from another species is included. 

Host cell screen for the presence of zekii growing within the cytoplasm of a chicken ucts from environmental sam- dotted line). The rickettsias are green (FITClabeled antibody, arrow), the host cell nucleus is blue (Hoechst stain), and the mitochondria are red of similar genes from known, (Texas Red MitoTracker). The bacterium grows culturable organisms reveals only in the cytoplasm, not in the nucleus. 

There is a quiet panic among infectious disease doctors, who worry that we will soon run out of effective antibiotics to treat deadly infections. Since antibiotics were introduced over 70 years ago, bacterial pathogens have continually evolved to resist their effects. Scientists, for their part, have struggled to find new antibiotics to replace the old, ineffective ones. Chapter 27 will discuss this “arms race” in more detail. The classic approach for finding new antibiotics is to screen bacteria and fungi snatched from exotic environments such as the Amazon for secreted antimicrobial compounds. This method worked for decades, but over the past 20 years was needed if we humans are to maintain dominance over we can detect can be cultured in the laboratory. This means we have missed capturing the antibiotic potential of over 99% of living microbes. These “unculturable” organisms are present in soil, water, and even the human body. Why do the microbes grow there but not in the lab? They grow in their natural environments because of interspecies cooperation. In this environmental “buddy system,” one species provides a growth factor to another species that cannot make its own. Can we find a way to tame such uncooperative organisms and screen them for new antibiotics? Kim Lewis (Northeastern University, Boston) and colleagues have devised an elegant method to do just that. To harvest previously unculturable soil microbes, samples prepared from soil were diluted such that one bacterial cell was delivered into each channel of a multichannel iChip microbe could grow. Both sides of the device were covered with semipermeable membranes and placed back into the of the unculturable microbes to form colonies. Once a colony formed, the previously uncultured organism became “domesticated,” able to grow on agar medium without further assistance. The mechanism of domestication is not yet The scientists made extracts from 10,000 iChip isolates and tested each one for antibiotic activity against Staphylococcus aureus, an important pathogen that can cause infections ranging from boils to sepsis. One extract was highly effective. The Gram-negative organism that produced this antibiotic was sequenced and named Eleftheria terrae (Fig. 2). The structure of the antibiotic, teixobactin, is shown enzymes instead of a ribosome (nonribosomal peptide synthesis is described in Special Topic 15.1). The cellular target of teixobactin is peptidoglycan synthesis in Gram-positive bacteria (the peptide cannot penetrate the Gram-negative outer membrane). The new antibiotic kills bacteria by binding to the lipid carrier molecule, bactoprenol, that ferries the peptidoglycan subunits N-acetylglucosamine and N-acetylmuramic acid across the bacterial membrane (described in Chapter 3). As a result, growing cells lyse because they cannot make new cell wall. Chapter 27 describes the details of peptidoglycan synthesis and the antibiotics that target steps in this process. 

Brian Conlon. 

1. Slide with shallow wells and inscribed grid (~400 squares, 0.0025 mm2 each). 

2. Coverslip is placed over slide. 

3. Bacterial suspension added to wells seeps under the coverslip to fill the shallow space of known volume over the grid. 

4. Bacterial cells in each square are counted under a microscope. 

etched on the surface of the slide. The organisms in several squares are counted, and their numbers are averaged. Knowing the dimensions of the grid and the height of the coverslip over the slide makes it possible to calculate the number of organisms in a milliliter. 

Growing culturable bacteria in laboratory media is important for studying their physiology and genetics, but knowing how many bacteria are present in the medium is critical for interpreting results. You might also ask how we determine whether a lake is contaminated with fecal bacteria or our peanut butter contains Salmonella. In addition to finding organisms in these cases, we have to count how many there are to determine the extent of contamination. Counting or quantifying microorganisms is surprisingly difficult because each of the available techniques measures a different physical or biochemical aspect of growth. Thus, a cell density value (given as cells per milliliter) derived from one technique will not necessarily agree with the value obtained by a different method. Here are some commonly used methods for counting microbes. 

bacterial culture is placed on a special microscope slide called a hemocytometer (or, more specifically for bacteria, a PetroffHausser counting chamber) (Fig. 4.19). Etched on the surface of the slide is a grid of precise dimensions, and placing a coverslip over the grid forms a space of precise volume. The number of organisms counted within that volume is used to calculate the concentration of cells in the original culture. 

BacLight Bacterial Viability Kit. Dead bacterial cells fluoresce orange or yellow because propidium (red) can enter the cells and intercalate the enters the cell. The faint green smears are the outlines of cheek cells. 

data, showing the size distribution of cells (x-axis) with respect to the level of fluorescence (y-axis). The larger cells may be cells that are about to divide. 

directly on an agar surface (as in Fig. 4.15) or added to pour plate technique), where the agar cools further and solidifies. Because many bacteria resist short exposures to that temperature, individual cells retain the ability to form colonies on, and in, the pour plate. After colonies form, they are counted, and the original cell number is calculated. For example, if 100 colonies are observed in a pour plate made with 100 microliters (µl) of a 10 –3 dilution of a culture, then there were 106 organisms per milliliter in the original culture. illustrates these types of Although viable counts are widely used in research, this method is problematic for measuring cell number. One issue is that colony counting does not reflect cell size or growth stage. Even more problematic, colony counts usually underestimate the number of living cells in a culture. Cells damaged for one reason or another can remain metabolically active and alive but may be too compromised to divide. Because these cells will not form colonies on an agar plate, they will not be counted as living. Comparing a viable count with a direct count obtained from a live/dead stain can expose the presence of these damaged cells. Another challenge is any organism that grows in chains, such as Streptococcus, because each colony originates from a group of cells, not a single cell. Consequently, counting colonies underestimates actual cell number. For this reason, viable counts are reported as colony-forming units (CFUs) rather than cells. Biochemical assays. In contrast to methods that visualize individual cells, assays of cell biomass, protein content, or metabolic rate measure the overall size of a population of cells. The most straightforward but timeconsuming biochemical approach to monitoring population growth is to measure the dry weight of a culture. Cells are collected by centrifugation, washed, dried in an oven, and weighed. Because bacterial cells weigh very little, a large volume of culture must be harvested to obtain measurements, making this technique quite increases in protein levels, which correlate with increases in cell number. Protein levels are more easily measured with relatively sensitive assays. Optical density measures growth in real time. The phe- nomenon of light scattering was introduced in Chapter 2. Recall that the presence of bacteria in a tube of medium can be detected by how cloudy the medium appears as the cells scatter light. The decrease in intensity of a light beam due to the scattering of light by a suspension of particles is measured as optical density. 

The optical density of light scattered by bacteria is a very useful tool for estimating population size. The method is quick and easy, but because light scattering is a complex function of cell number and cell volume, optical density provides only an approximate result that must be corrected using a standard curve. Typically, a standard curve is obtained that plots viable counts for cultures versus optical densities as measured by a spectrophotometer. Thereafter, the optical density of a growing culture is measured, and the standard curve is used to estimate cell number at any given point during growth. One problem with using optical density to estimate cell numbers is that a cell’s volume can vary depending on its growth stage, altering its light-scattering properties. Thus, the cell number estimated by the standard curve may deviate from the true number. Another problem is that dead cells also scatter light. Clearly, using optical density to estimate viable count can be misleading, especially when measuring populations in stationary phase. 

Microbes in nature usually exist in complex, multispecies communities, but for detailed studies they must be grown separately in pure culture. Bacteria can be cultured on solid or liquid media. Defined or synthetic media contain only chemical components that are known. Minimal defined media contain only the defined nutrients essential for growth of a given organism. Complex, or rich, media contain many nutrients. Other media exploit physiological differences between organisms and can be defined as selective, differential, or both (for example, MacConkey medium). Microbes can evolve to become unculturable or to require specific growth factors depending on the nutrient richness of their natural ecological niche. Obligate intracellular bacteria lose metabolic pathways provided by their hosts and develop requirements for growth factors supplied by their hosts. Microorganisms in culture may be counted directly under a microscope, with or without staining, or by use Microorganisms can be counted indirectly by viable counts, measurement of dry weight, protein levels, or optical density. of replicating. 

ny virus particles from one host cell infected by one virus. How would you mathematically represent the exponential growth of the virus? What practical factors might limit such growth? 

The process of reproduction has implications for growth not only of the individual, but also of populations. If we assume that growth is unbounded, what happens to the population? The unlimited growth of any population obeys a simple law: The growth rate, or rate of increase in cell numbers or biomass, is proportional to the population size at a given time. Such a growth rate is called “exponential” because it generates an exponential curve, a curve whose slope increases continually. How does binary fission of cells generate an exponential curve? If each cell produces two cells per generation, then the population size at any given time is proportional to 2n, where the exponent n represents the number of generations (that is, cell divisions in which offspring replace parents) that have taken place between two time points. Thus, cell number rises exponentially. Many microbes, however, have replication cycles based on numbers other than 2. For example, some cyanobacteria form cell aggregates that divide by multiple fissions, releasing dozens of daughter cells. The cyanobacterium enlarges without dividing, and then suddenly divides many times without separating. The cell mass breaks open to release hundreds of progeny cells. 

the length of time from one generation to the next. In an environment with unlimited resources, bacteria divide at a constant interval called the generation time. The length of that interval varies with respect to many parameters, including the bacterial species, type of medium, temperature, and pH. The generation time for cells in culture is also known as the doubling time, because the population of cells doubles into a complex medium will divide every 20 minutes. After 1 hour of growth (three generations), that one cell will have become eight (1 to 2, 2 to 4, 4 to 8). Because cell number occur if cell number rose by a fixed amount after every generation (for example, 1 to 2, 2 to 3, 3 to 4). Why do we care about generation time? As noted already, generation time is important when we’re trying to understand how rapidly a pathogen can cause disease symptoms. In biotechnology, how fast a producing organism grows will affect how quickly a commercially useful by-product can be made. Let’s review how we calculate generation time. a single cell after three generations (n = 3) will produce 1 cell × 23 = 8 cells The number of generations that an exponential culture undergoes in a given time period can be calculated if number of cells at the end of the period (Nt) are known. 

1. Bacteria are preparing their cell machinery for growth. 2. Growth approximates an exponential curve (straight line, on a logarithmic scale). 

3. Cells stop growing and shut down their growth machinery while turning on stress responses to help retain viability. 

ocean. In each instance, the mathematics of exponential growth applies, at least until the community reaches a density at which different species begin to compete or nutrients become scarce. 

4.9 Suppose you ingest 20 cells of Salmonella enterica in a peanut butter cookie. They all survive the stomach and enter the intestine. Suppose further that the sum total of subsequent bacterial replication and death (caused by the host) produces an average generation time of 2 hours and you will feel sick when there are 1,000,000 bacteria. How much time will elapse before you feel sick? 4.10 Suppose one cell of the nitrogen fixer Sinorhizobium meliloti colonizes a plant root. After 5 days (120 hours), there the bacterial doubling time? 

The mathematics of exponential growth is relatively straightforward, but remember that microbes grow differently in pure culture (very rare in nature) than they do in mixed communities, where neighboring cells produce all kinds of substances that may feed or poison other microbes. In mixed communities, the microbes may grow planktonically (f loating in liquid), as in the open ocean, or as a biofilm on solid matter suspended in that replicate its chromosome and about 20 minutes to prepare for another round of replication. Yet the organism enjoys medium. How is this possible? Hint: How might the cell overlap the two processes? 

The length of the lag phase also varies with changes in temperature, pH, and salt concentration, as well as nutrient richness. For example, transferring cells from one complex medium to a fresh complex medium results in a very short lag phase, whereas cells grown in a complex medium and then plunged into a minimal defi ned medium experience a protracted lag phase. During lag phase in the latter case, cells must synthesize all the amino acids, nucleotides, and other metabolites previously supplied by the complex medium. 

and cell wall synthesis come into balance with the rest of metabolism. In contrast, nutritional upshift means that the cell will start making more energy than it needs at its current growth rate, in which case cell metabolism will again be out of balance with cell division. The same fail-safe mechanisms used during downshift will, during upshift, kick macromolecular synthesis into a higher gear, once again establishing balanced growth. Nutritional upshift causes cells to reenter log phase, but with a shorter generation time. 

After 15 hours in stationary phase, a chemical inducer molecule was added to observe what percentage of cells could still synthesize a new, green fluorescent protein (time 0). At least 90% of cells produced the new protein, meaning these cells are alive Eitam Rotem and lab manager Irene Ronin, viewing fluorescent bacteria growing and dying. 

toxic chemicals present in the environment. Cells begin to die, and the culture enters the death phase. Like the growth rate, the death rate—the rate at which cells die— is logarithmic. In death phase, the number of cells that die in a given time period is proportional to the number that existed at the beginning of the time period. Thus, the death rate is a negative exponential function. The death rate can be expressed as a half-life, the time over which a population declines by half. Determining microbial death rates is critical to the study of food preservation and to the development of antibiotics (further discussed in Chapters 5, 16, and 27). Although death curves are basically logarithmic, exact death rates are difficult to define because mutations arise that promote survival, and some cells grow by cannibalizing others. Consequently, the death phase is extremely prolonged. In fact, a portion of the cells will often survive for months, years, or even decades. Note that the nice, smooth exponential growth microbes growing in natural environments or in complex laboratory media containing multiple carbon and energy sources. Some bacterial species produce odd-looking growth curves in complex media as the population depletes one carbon source and must switch physiology to instead, it smoothly transitions through a series of metabolic states. 

become more resistant to heat, osmotic pressure, pH changes, and other stresses that they might encounter while waiting for a new supply of nutrients. 

4.13 What can happen to the growth curve when a culture medium contains two carbon sources, if one is a preferred carbon source of growth-limiting concentration and the second is a nonpreferred source? 

extremophile that grows using sulfur as an energy source. (a) Draw the approximate growth curves that you would expect to see, extending from log phase to stationary phase, if four cultures with different starting numbers of bacteria were grown in the same concentration of sulfur. Use 4 × 108 as the starting cell densities. Maximum growth yield is 109 cells per milliliter. (b) Draw a second graph showing how the curves would change if the initial population density was constant but the concentration of sulfur varied. 

(x-axis) increases, the generation time decreases and the mass of the culture increases. When the rate of dilution exceeds the division rate, cells are washed from the vessel faster than they can be replaced by division, and the cell mass decreases. The y-axis varies depending on the curve, as labeled. 

cultures are used in industry to optimize the production of antibiotics, beer, and other microbial products. In research, continuous culture is used to examine what happens to metabolic flux (essentially the rate at which molecules move through metabolic pathways) before and after a biochemical step is altered, and to conduct long-term studies of bacterial evolution. media required to maintain a 500-ml culture chamber over a period of days or months. To solve this problem, microfluidic principles have been used to miniaturize the process onto a 5-cm computer-controlled lab chip. One milliliter of culture moves along three chambers that monitor oxygen, optical density, and pH. Culture conditions are maintained or changed by a computer that controls delivery of media and chemicals from onchip reservoirs. The heightened ability to control culture parameters in small volumes can be used to characterize genetic switches, environmental shock responses, directed evolution, co-metabolism, and the dynamics of mixed-species cultures. 

Continuous culture can be used to sustain a population of bacteria at a specified growth rate and cell density. 

Effect of an antibiofilm peptide on a Pseudomonas biofilm. Confo cal images of 2-day-old Pseudomonas biofilms (top and two side views) after 23 hours of no intracellular signaling molecule (p)ppGpp. Cells were stained with live/dead stain in which live cells fluoresce green and dead cells stain red. Most cells from the treated biofilm were dead master’s student Pat Taylor. 

cyanobacterial biofilms are common in thermal springs. Suspended particles called “marine snow” are found in oceans and appear to be floating biofilms comprising many unidentified organisms (discussed in Chapter 21). The particles seem to be capable of methanogenesis, nitrogen fixation, and sulfide production, indicating that the architecture of biofilms enables anaerobic metabolism to occur in an otherwise aerobic environment. 

Biofilm development involves the adherence of cells to a substrate, the formation of microcolonies, and, ultimately, the formation of complex channeled communities that generate new planktonic cells. 

Can bacteria change shape? Many bacteria faced with environmental stress undergo complex molecular reprogramming that includes changes in cell structure. Some species, structure, such as the formation of smaller cells or thicker cell surfaces. However, select species, such as Caulobacter crescentus, undergo elaborate cell differentiation processes. Caulobacter cells convert from the swimming form to the holdfast form before cell division (see Section 3.5). Each cell cycle then produces one sessile cell attached to its substrate by a holdfast, while its sister cell swims off in search of another habitat. Eukaryotic microbes also have highly complex life cycles. For example, Dictyostelium discoideum is a seemingly unremarkable ameba that grows as separate, independent cells. 

The cells (approx. 3 µm long) are stained with crystal violet. The cells are blue, whereas the spores are stain in which spores appear blue-green is shown in of Connecticut figured out how proteins regulate the stages of endospore formation. 

extends into an axial filament. cell releases spore. 

separates forespore pumped through septum until each compartment gets a chromosome. 

Spore coat is synthesized, and calcium is incorporated into the spore coat. 

engulfs forespore, surrounding it with a second membrane. 

When challenged by adverse conditions such as starvation, to form elaborate multicellular structures. The developmental cycle of this organism may be compared to that of other eukaryotic microbes that are human parasites (discussed in Chapter 20). 

Some autotrophic cyanobacteria, such as Anabaena, not only carry out photosynthesis but also “fix” atmospheric nitrogen to make ammonia. This is surprising because nitrogenase, the enzyme required to fix nitrogen, is very sensitive to oxygen present in air and produced as a by-product of photosynthesis. So one might expect that photosynthesis and nitrogen fixation would be two mutually exclusive physiological activities. Anabaena solved this regulated genetic program converts every tenth photosynthetic, vegetative cell to a heterocyst. As part of the differentiation process, heterocysts make nitrogenase, produce three additional cell walls, and form a specialized envelope that provides a barrier to atmospheric 20 µm compounds to the adjacent vegetative cells, which, in return, send carbon sugars to the heterocyst (see eTopic 2.1). The precise spacing of heterocysts relies on the ratio of inhibitors relative to activators in different cells in the chain. Inhibitors predominate in vegetative cells, whereas cells fated to become heterocysts contain higher levels of an activator. 

cell’s water content). But, as discovered by Peter Setlow and colleagues, spores are also packed with small acid-soluble light and various toxic chemicals. years, and spores have been known to last thousands of years. Once proper nutrient conditions arise, another genetic program, called germination, is triggered to wake the dormant cell, dissolve the spore coat, and release a viable vegetative cell. While sporulation is an effective survival strategy, bacteria that sporulate actually go out of their way not to sporulate—even to the point of cannibalism. During nutrient limitation, these bacteria will secrete proteins that can kill their siblings and then use the released nutrients to prevent starvation and, thus, sporulation. When (and only when) that strategy fails, they sporulate. 

the figure contain a cyanobacterial gene to which the gene for green formed heterocysts are expressing the fused gene, which makes the cell fluoresce bright green. 

1. Under favorable conditions, one or two germ tubes emerge from a spore and produce a substrate mycelium. 

30 hours 2a. After 48–72 hours, bld genes cause production of aerial hyphae (i.e., aerial mycelia). 

2b. The tips of the hyphae form a spiral compartment containing multiple copies of the genome. Aerial mycelia 3. When growth stops, the compartment segments (which requires the whi genes). Each segment changes shape and its wall thickens to become a desiccation-resistant spore. 

changes, its cell wall thickens, and deposits are made in the spore that increase resistance to desiccation. These organisms are of tremendous interest, both for their ability to make antibiotics and for their fascinating developmental programs. 

Microbial development involves complex changes in cell forms. Endospore development by Bacillus and Clostridium species is a multistage process that includes asymmetrical cell division to make a forespore and a mother cell, forespore engulfment by the mother cell, deposition of coat proteins around the forespore, and steps that increase chemical and heat resistance of the endospore. Heterocyst development enables cyanobacteria to fix nitrogen anaerobically while maintaining oxygenic Multicellular fruiting bodies in Myxococcus and mycelia in actinomycetes develop in response to starvation, dispersing dormant cells to new environments. 

4.16 How might Streptomyces and Actinomyces species avoid “committing suicide” when they make their antibiotics? 

Bacteria, as simple as they seem, perform incredibly complex and highly orchestrated processes to achieve growth. They coordinate the gathering of food with the synthesis of biomass and then adjust those processes as nutrients change in the local environment, or when they are challenged by stress. Most, if not all, bacteria also undergo elegant developmental processes ranging from biofilms and swarming, to sporulation or heterocyst formation. As with metabolic adaptations, developmental programs are launched in response to environmental pressures such as starvation, desiccation, changes in temperature, and even crowding. The environmental influence over these microbial processes impacts the composition and interspecies collaboration among water and soil ecosystems, as well as within the microbial communities that inhabit the human body. In Chapter 5 we build on these concepts and explore the remarkable ways that microbes respond to environmental stress and change. 

Manipulating your neighbor. Can one bacterial species manipulate differentiation of another? Elizabeth Shank and student Matthew Powers explored this question by searching for that manipulate the development of “niche-mates.” Microbiome composition could be radically changed by such interactions. 

Some hot-springs bacteria can double in as little as 10 minutes, whereas deep-sea-sediment microbes may take as long as 100 years. What determines these differences in growth rate? Nutrition is one factor, but niche-specific physical parameters such as temperature, pH, and osmolarity are equally important. In Chapter 5 we explore the limits of microbial growth and show how this knowledge helps us control the microbial world. 

How might tinkering with sporulation affect a microbial ecosystem? Cross-species interactions between Bacillus subtilis and Pseudomonas protegens could allow them to cocolonize plant roots by partitioning growing cells of each species in different regions of the root. Alternatively, harsh conditions. Altering growth or survival of one member of a microbial community can also have ripple effects on other members of the ecosystem. 

Microbes encounter numerous environmental stresses during their existence. Some are physical, some are chemical, and some are imposed by their competitors, as illustrated in the Current Research Highlight. Although a species’ physiology is geared to work within only a narrow range of physical parameters, in nature the environment can change quickly and dramatically. Many marine microbes, for instance, move within seconds from deep-sea cold to the searing heat of a thermal vent. How do these organisms survive? Most species have stopgap measures called stress responses that temporarily protect the organism from brief forays into potentially lethal environments. But some organisms evolve to thrive, not just survive, in extreme environments. How do these so-called extremophiles grow under conditions that would kill most living things? In addition to environmental threats, microbes in nature wage wars among themselves by secreting antimicrobial compounds. Why doesn’t the toxin-producing microbe kill itself? Is it somehow immune to its own toxin? Knowledge about how microbes cope with their environments, and each other, is exploited by humans to prevent the growth of bacteria in foods, destroy disease-causing microbes, and develop new microbe-based industries. We begin this chapter by describing how physical and chemical changes in the environment impact the growth of different groups of microbes. We also explore how microorganisms adapt to different environments in ways both transient (involving temporary expression of genes) and permanent (modifications of the gene pool). The permanent genetic changes have led to biological diversity. Finally, we examine the different ways humans try to limit the growth of microorganisms to protect plants, animals, and ourselves. As you proceed through this chapter, you will encounter two recurring themes: that different groups of microbes live in vastly different environments, and that microbes can respond in diverse ways when confronted by conditions outside their niche, or comfort zone. Chapter 21 builds on this information to discuss how communities of microbes interact with their environment, and presents current research methods that are used to study microbial ecology. 

from these optimal conditions cause the protein to fold a little differently and become less active. While not all enzymes within a cell boast the same physical optima, these optima must at least be similar and matched to the organism’s environment for the organism to function effectively. As you might guess from the preceding discussion, microbes are commonly classified by their environmental niche. Table 5.1 summarizes these environmental classes. 

In general, microbes that grow at higher temperatures can for any one species the relationship between growth temperature and the growth rate constant k (the number of generations per hour; see Section 4.4) obeys the Arrhenius equation for simple chemical reactions (eTopic 5.1). At higher temperatures, growth rates fall because enzymes denature. 

At lower temperatures, growth rates fall because of decreases in membrane fluidity and enzymatic activity. 

The general result of the Arrhenius equation is that growth chemical reactions. At the upper and lower limits of the growth range, however, the Arrhenius effect breaks down. Critical proteins denature at high temperatures, whereas lower temperatures decrease membrane fluidity and limit the conformational mobility of enzymes, thereby lowering their activity. As a result, growth stops at temperature extremes. The typical temperature growth range for most bacteria spans the but some organisms have a much narrower tolerance. Even within a species, we can find mutants that are more sensitive to one extreme or the other (heat sensitive or cold sensitive). These mutations often define key molecular components of stress responses, such as the heat-shock proteins (discussed in Chapter 10). Thermodynamic principles limit a cell’s growth to a narrow temperature range. For example, heat increases molecular movement within proteins. Too much or too little diversity exists among microbes because different groups have evolved to grow within very different thermal ranges. its proteins have evolved to tolerate that range. Outside that range, proteins will denature or function too slowly while some fungi can grow at temperatures as high as vents deep in the ocean. Vent water temperature can rise water in a liquid state. 

the same temperature optimum? If they did, wouldn’t they grow even more rapidly? 

by many species of psychrophilic microorganisms, most of them samples from the ecosystem at Schirmacher Oasis (location as marked). Genome sequences from the captured microbes, like those Novel compounds made by members of the polar microbiome are screened for anticancer and antimicrobial potential. 

by Tetsuo Yamamori and Takashi Yura in 1982, has since been documented in all living organisms examined thus far. 

Bioreactor used to grow thermophilic microorganisms. Dr. Robert Kelly and students stand next to a 20-liter bioreactor that they use for the engineering analysis of biofuel-producing microbes. Left to right: Aaron Hawkins, Andrew Loder, Hong Lian, Kelly, and Yejun Han. 

linkages to glycerol phosphate. More on thermophiles can be found in Chapter 19. How can we “see” the genome sequences of organisms that will not grow at usual laboratory temperatures? And of uncultured hyperthermophiles can be amplified by the which the organisms are found. Genomic comparison with organism under study may possess specific metabolic pathways and regulatory responses. The ability to peek at the genome of hyperthermophiles led Robert Kelly and colleagues at North Carolina State University to mix genes and enzymes from different species (Fig. 5.4). Their lab liquid fuels. 

As insurance against extinction, most microorganisms possess elegant genetic programs that remodel their physiology into one that can temporarily survive inhospitable conditions. Rapid temperature changes experienced during growth activate batches of stress response genes, resulting in the heat-shock response (discussed in Chapter 10). The protein products of these heatactivated genes include chaperones that maintain protein 5.2 If microbes lack a nervous system, how can they sense a temperature change? 

Pacific Ocean, just east of the Mariana Islands. The Mariana Trench is 2,500 km (1,554 miles) long and 70 km (44 miles) wide. Near its southwestern extremity, about 340 km (210 miles) southwest of Guam, lies the deepest point on Earth. This point, referred to as the Challenger Deep, plunges to a depth of 11,035 meters (nearly 7 miles). The pressure there (110 MPa) is over 1,000 times higher Shewanella violacea. 

organisms grow up to a certain pressure, but die at higher pressures. 

organisms die as pressure increases. 

The Arrhenius equation applies to the growth of microorganisms: within a specific growth temperature Membrane fluidity varies with the composition of lipids in a membrane, which in turn dictates the temperature and pressure at which an organism can grow. Mesophiles, psychrophiles, and thermophiles are groups of organisms that grow at moderate, low, and high temperatures, respectively. The heat-shock response produces a series of protective proteins in organisms exposed to temperatures near the upper edge of their growth range. Barophiles (piezophiles) can grow at pressures up to 1,000 atm but fail to grow at low pressures. Growth at high pressure requires specially designed membranes and protein structures. 

5.3 What could be a relatively simple way to grow barophiles in the laboratory? 

is typically measured as the ratio of the solution’s vapor pressure relative to that sealed chamber, and the amount of water vapor is determined at equilibrium. If the air above the sample is 97% saturated relative to the moisture present over pure water, the relative humidity is 97% and the water activity is 0.97. Most bacteria growing on land or in freshwater habitats require water activity to be greater than 0.91 (the water activity of seawater). Fungi can tolerate water activity levels as low as 0.86. 

Hydrophobic amino acid residues speed water through pore. 

through which water molecules move. Complementary halves of the channel are formed by adjacent protein monomers. 

Osmolarity is a measure of the number of solute molecules in a solution and is inversely related to aw. The more particles there are in a solution, the greater the osmolarity and the lower the water activity. Osmolarity is also important for a cell because of the cell’s semipermeable plasma membrane. This membrane allows the osmolarity inside the cell to be different from the osmolarity outside. The principles of physical chemistry dictate that a solute present at different concentrations in two chambers separated by a semipermeable membrane will tend to equilibrate. But if the semipermeable membrane does not allow solutes to move through the membrane, then osmolarity will equilibrate by water moving between the chambers. For a cell in a hypertonic medium, where the external osmolarity is higher than the internal, water will leave the cell in an attempt to equalize osmolarity across the membrane. In contrast, suspending a cell in a hypotonic medium (one of lower osmolarity than the cell) will cause an influx of water (see eAppendix 2). Water does not move across cell membranes primarily by simple diffusion. Instead, special membrane water channels formed by proteins called aquaporins enable water to traverse the membrane much faster than by unmediated diffusion. Rapid movement of water helps protect cells against osmotic stress (Fig. 5.7). However, too much water moving in or out of a cell is detrimental. Cells may ultimately explode or implode, depending on the direction the water moves. Even bacteria with a rigid cell wall suffer. They may not explode like a human cell, but the forces placed on the cell wall are great. 

5.4 How might the concept of water availability be used by the food industry to control spoilage? 

Some species of archaea and bacteria have evolved to require high salt (NaCl) concentration in order to grow. halophilic archaea can grow at an aw of 0.75 and actually grow. For comparison, seawater is about 3.5% NaCl. All cells, even halophiles, prefer to keep a relatively low intracellular Na+ concentration, because some solutes are moved into the cell by symport with Na+. To achieve a low internal Na+ concentration, halophilic microbes use special ion pumps to excrete sodium and replace it with other cations, such as potassium, which is a compatible solute. In fact, the proteins and cell components (for example, ribosomes) of halophiles require remarkably high intracellular potassium levels to maintain their structure. Halophilic archaea are presented in Chapter 19. 

Water activity (aw) is a measure of how much water in a solution is available for a microbe to use. Osmolarity is a measure of the number of solute molecules in a solution and is inversely related to aw. 

Aquaporins are membrane channel proteins that allow water to move quickly across membranes to equalize internal and external pressures. Compatible solutes are used to minimize pressure differences across the cell membrane. Mechanosensitive channels can leak solutes out of the cell when internal pressure rises. Halophilic organisms require high salt concentrations to grow. 

As with salt and temperature, the concentration of hydrogen ions (H+)—actually, hydronium ions (H3O+)—also has a direct effect on the cell’s macromolecular structures. Extreme concentrations of either hydronium or hydroxide too much acid or base is harmful to cells. Despite this sensitivity to pH extremes, living cells tolerate a greater range pH range from 2 to 10, a 10-million-fold difference (but grows only between pH 4.5 and 9). For a brief review of pH, refer to eAppendix 1. 

that then acidifies the internal pH (eTopic 5.3 describes how). An example of organic acid stress involves the lactic acid produced and secreted by lactobacilli during the formation of yogurt. The buildup of lactic acid limits bacterial growth, leaving yogurt with plenty of food value. The food industry has taken advantage of this phenomenon by preemptively adding citric acid or sorbic acid to certain foods. This practice controls microbial growth under pH conditions that do not destroy the f lavor or quality of the food. provides the pH values of various everyday items. Food microbiology is discussed further in Chapter 16. 

Cells have evolved to live under different pH conditions not by drastically changing the pH optima of their enzymes, but by using novel pH homeostasis strategies that maintain intracellular pH between pH 5 and pH 8, even when the cell is immersed in pH environments well above or below that range. 

Three classes of organisms are differentiated by the pH of their growth range: neutralophiles, acidophiles, and alkaliphiles (see Fig. 5.9). Neutralophiles, which generally grow between pH 5 adjust their metabolism to maintain an internal pH slightly above neutrality, which is where their enzymes work best. They maintain this pH even in the presence of moderately acidic or basic external environments (Fig. 5.11). Other neutralophiles allow their internal pH to f luctuate with external pH but usually maintain a pH difference (ΔpH) of about 0.5 pH unit across the membrane at the upper and lower limits of growth pH. The ΔpH value is an important component of the transmembrane proton potential, a source of energy for the cell (see Chapter 14). 

The older term “neutrophile” used for this group of organisms is similar to the descriptor for a specific type of white blood cell (“neutrophil,” discussed in Chapter 23). To avoid confusion, the term “neutrophil” should be reserved for the white blood cell and the term “neutralophile” used to designate microbes with growth optima near neutral pH (pH 7). 

Cytoplasmic pH as a function of the external pH among acidophiles, neutralophiles, and alkaliphiles. 

They require an inwardly directed sodium gradient to rotate flagella and transport nutrient solutes. The Na+/H+ antiporter is also used to keep internal pH lower than external pH. 

help maintain internal pH below external pH. 

4. Na+-driven export Na+. 

7. Bacterial cytoplasm is negatively charged relative to the exterior. 

6. Na motive forces drive symport of some substrates. 

5. Na+ motive force powers motility. 

to maintain an internal pH near pH 7.8 in the face of different external pH stresses. Proton pumping through cytochromes also establishes a proton gradient, which drives flagellar rotation and solute transport. 

negatively charged relative to the exterior. 

When cells are placed in pH conditions below their optimum, protons can enter the cell and lower internal pH to lethal levels. Microbes can prevent the unwanted influx of Acid and alkaline stress responses result when a given species is placed under pH conditions that slow its can counter proton influx by transporting a variety of catgrowth. The cell increases the levels of proteins designed to mediate pH homeostasis and protect cell constituents. extremely alkaline conditions, the cells can use the Na+/ recruit protons into the cell in exchange for expelling Na+. Many microorganisms can grow in the presence of molecuSome organisms can also change the pH of the medium using various amino acid decarboxylases and deaminases. acceptor in the electron transport system (ETS)—also known as the electron transport chain (ETC)—a series of at low pH, but produces these acids while trying to grow membrane proteins (for instance, cytochromes) that can under alkaline conditions. Helicobacter pylori, the causative help convert energy trapped in nutrients to a biologically agent of gastric ulcers, employs an exquisitely potent urease to generate massive amounts of ammonia, which neutralis called aerobic respiration (see Chapter 14). izes the acid pH environment. These acid stress and alkaline stress protection systems are usually not made or at least do Oxygen Has Benefits and Risks not become active until the cell encounters an extreme pH. Electrons pulled from various energy sources (for example, Many, if not all, microbes also possess an emergency glucose) possess intrinsic energy that electron transport global response system referred to as acid tolerance or acid systems incrementally extract. Once the cell has drained resistance. In a process analogous to the heat-shock response, as much energy as possible from an electron, that elecbacterial physiology undergoes a major molecular reprotron must be passed to a final (terminal) electron accepgramming in response to hydrogen ion stress. The levels of a large number of proteins increase, while the levels of othin the medium. This clears the way for another electron ers decrease. Many of the genes and proteins involved in the to be passed down the chain (Fig. 5.17). The electron acid stress response overlap with other stress response systems, including the heat-shock response. These physiological 3. Electron transport responses include modifications in membrane lipid composisystems extract energy from the electrons and tion, enhanced pH homeostasis, and numersystem use that energy to pump ous other changes with unclear purpose. Some pathogens, such as Salmonella, sense a – 2 e move the electrons to series change in external pH as part of the signal 2 e– 2 e of membrane proteins called indicating that the bacterium has entered a electron transport systems. host cell environment (see eTopic 5.5). 

Hydrogen ion concentration affects protein structure and function. Thus, enzymes have pH optima, minima, and maxima. 

Microbes use pH homeostasis mechanisms to keep their internal pH near neutral when in acidic or alkaline media. 

Adding weak acids to certain foods undermines bacterial pH homeostasis mechanisms, thereby preventing food spoilage and killing potential pathogens. 

more positive charges outside the cell than inside, resulting in an electrochemical for the next electron. This net process is called respiration. 

Found on skin; cause boils produces a transmembrane electrochemical gradient, a kind of “biobattery” called the proton motive force (details are discussed in Section 14.2). The overall process of electron transport and proton motive force generation is called respiration if the electron donor is from an organic source and lithotrophy if the source is inorganic (discussed in Chapters 13 and 14). Despite its importance for aerobic respiration, oxygen and its breakdown products are dangerously reactive—a serious problem for all cells. As a result, different species have evolved to either tolerate or avoid oxygen altogether. Table 5.2 gives examples of microbes that grow at different levels of oxygen. 

because they are vulnerable to reactive oxygen molecules by their own metabolism. Other anaerobes have enzymes the use of alternative (non-oxygen) electron acceptors that the organism needs to make energy. Anaerobes will grow at the bottom of the tube shown in As we will discuss later, some bacteria previously considered strict anaerobes are not so strict. 

Anaerobic microbes fall into several categories. Some anaerobes actually do respire by means of electron transport systems, but instead of using oxygen, they rely on alternative anaerobic respiration and produce energy. Anaerobes of another ilk do not possess cytochromes, cannot respire, and so must rely on carbohydrate fermentation for energy Facultative organisms are microbes that can live with or without oxygen and grow throughout the tube shown in enzymes that destroy toxic oxygen by-products, but they have both fermentative and respiratory potential. Whether a member of this group uses aerobic respiration, anaerobic respiration, or fermentation depends on the availability of oxygen and the amount of carbohydrate present. Aerotolerant anaerobes use only fermentation to provide energy but contain superoxide dismutase and catalase (or peroxidase) to anaerobes to grow in air (containing oxygen) while retaining a fermentation-based (anaerobic) metabolism. Aerotolerant anaerobes will grow throughout the tube in Microorganisms that possess decreased levels of superoxide dismutase and/or catalase will be microaerophilic, meaning they will grow only at low oxygen concentrations. Some organisms previously considered anaerobes (for example, Bacteroides fragilis) are really transiently occur spontaneously to produce superoxide and hydroxyl radicals, Catalase and peroxidase detoxify hydrogen peroxide. 

aerotolerant. These “anaerobes” tolerate oxygen because they possess low levels of ROS-protective enzymes and can even use very low levels of oxygen as terminal electron The fundamental composition of all cells reflects their evolutionary origin as anaerobes. Lipids, nucleic acids, and amino acids are all highly reduced—which is why our bodies are combustible. We never would have evolved that way if molecular oxygen had been present from the beginning. Even today, the majority of all microbes are anaerobic, growing buried in the soil, within our anaerobic digestive tract, or within biofilms on our teeth. 

5.6 If anaerobes cannot live in oxygen, how do they incorporate oxygen into their cellular components? 5.7 How can anaerobes grow in the human mouth, where there is so much oxygen? 

Catalyst in lid mediates reaction. 

5.8 What evidence led people to think about looking for anaerobes? Hint: Look up “Spallanzani,” “Pasteur,” and “spontaneous generation” on the Internet. 

Oxygen is a benefit to aerobes, organisms that can use it as a terminal electron acceptor to extract energy from Oxygen is toxic to all cells—for example, anaerobes— Anaerobic metabolism can be either fermentative or respiratory. Anaerobic respiration requires the organism to possess cytochromes that can transfer electrons to terminal electron acceptors other than oxygen. Fermentative Aerotolerant anaerobes grow in either the presence or the absence of oxygen, but use fermentation as their primary, if not only, means of gathering energy. These them to grow in oxygen. Facultative anaerobes grow with or without oxygen and a terminal electron acceptor. 

It is intuitively obvious that limiting the availability of a carbon source or other essential nutrient will limit growth. Less obvious are the dramatic molecular events that cascade through a starving cell. Optimizing growth rate when nutrient levels are suboptimal is an important aim of freeliving bacteria, given that intestinal, soil, and marine environments rarely offer excess nutrients. 

Numerous gene systems are affected when nutrients decline (see Sections 10.2 and 10.3). Growth rate slows, and daughter cells become smaller and begin to experience what is called a “starvation” response, in which the microbe senses a dire situation developing but still strives to find new nourishment. The resulting metabolic slowdown generates increased concentrations of critically gene expression. The highly soluble nature of these small molecules means they can quickly diffuse throughout the cell, promoting a fast response. During this metabolic retooling, transport systems for potential nutrients are produced even if the matching substrates are unavailable. Cells begin to make and store glycogen, presumably as an internal emergency store in case no other nutrient is found. Some organisms growing on nutrient-limited agar plates can even form colonies with intricate geometrical shapes that help the population cope, in some unknown way, with nutrient stress (Fig. 5.21). As nutrient conditions worsen, the organism prepares for famine by activating many different stress survival genes. 

1. Antitoxin neutralizes toxin activity. Cell lives. 

2. Cell dies, releases nutrients. 

5. Cell dies, releases nutrients. 

Bacterial stress responses have traditionally been studied by exposing organisms to individual stresses. Escherichia coli, for example, synthesizes a specific set of proteins when exposed to high temperature and a different set of proteins when exposed to high salt. Some proteins, however, may be highly expressed under both conditions, but each stress response also includes proteins unique to that stress. In the world outside of the laboratory, by contrast, environmental situations can be quite complex, involving multiple, not just single, stresses. An organism could simultaneously undergo carbon starvation in a high-salt, is thought to play an important role in bacterial survival during stress. MazE antitoxin is continually degraded by ClpAP and must be replenished to neutralize MazF toxin. Other toxin-antitoxin systems are found in other bacterial species. Stresses such as starvation, oxidative stress, or antibiotics can activate this system. Mycobacterium tuberculosis, the cause of tuberculosis. Her lab explores how these toxin-antitoxin systems contribute to the latency of this pathogen. 

invades human macrophage cells and survives in phagocytic vacuoles, where numerous stresses, such as low pH, oxidative stress, and nutrient limitations, are simultaneously imposed on the bacteria. Comparing the proteins synthesized by Salmonella growing in this compartment with the proteins synthesized under single stresses in the laboratory revealed an unexpected response pattern. Although many stress-related proteins were induced in the intracellular environment, no one set of stress-induced proteins was induced in its entirety. Furthermore, several bacterial proteins were induced by growth only within the macrophage phagolysosome, suggesting the presence of unknown intracellular stresses. Thus, caution is advised when trying to predict cell responses to real-world situations based solely on controlled laboratory studies that alter only single parameters. 

Native fish species can disappear, to be replaced by species more tolerant of the new conditions. The concept of limiting nutrients in ecosystems is covered further in Chapter 21. Climate change caused by human activity is another process that will gradually alter microbial ecosystems. Put Georgia Institute of Technology, and Jizhong Zhou from the University of Oklahoma recently completed a ten-year an infrared light, the team warmed a patch of Oklahoma soil. They then used DNA-based techniques to catalog the microbial genera present (Fig. 5.24). Some taxonomic groups of organisms became more dominant (Actinobacteria), while others became less abundant (Proteobacteria and Acidobacteria). What future effects these kinds of changes will have on the carbon and nitrogen cycles, as well as on farm productivity, remain to be seen. 

Heated: Soil was heated 2ºC above ambient temperature. 

bloom (bright blue-green color) in Lake Erie caused by excessive phosphorous eutrophication. 

Two patches of Oklahoma soil were monitored for microbial taxa over ten years. The two rings illustrate the average abundances of alpine and meadow soils. 

Disinfection is the killing, or removal, of diseaseproducing organisms from inanimate surfaces; it does not necessarily result in sterilization. Pathogens are killed, but other microbes may survive. 

Antisepsis is similar to disinfection, but it applies to removing pathogens from the surface of living tissues, like the skin. Antiseptic chemicals are usually not as toxic as disinfectants, which frequently damage living tissues. 

Sanitation is closely related to disinfection. It consists of reducing the microbial population to safe levels and usually involves both cleaning and disinfecting an object. 

nitrogen (microbe B)—what would happen if excess nitrogen was added to the mixed culture? What about both excess phosphate and excess nitrogen? 

Starvation is a stress that can elicit a molecular response in many microbes. Enzymes are produced to increase the efficiency of nutrient gathering and to protect cell macromolecules from damage. The starvation response is usually triggered by the accumulation of small signaling molecules, such as cyclic Human activities can cause eutrophication, which damages delicately balanced ecosystems by introducing nutrients that can allow one member of the ecosystem to flourish at the expense of other species. 

Physical, Chemical, and Biological Control of Microbes primary goal of our health care system is to control or kill microbes that can potentially harm us. Within the recent past, infectious disease was an imminent and constant threat to most of the human population. The average family in the United States prior to 1900 had four or five children, but parents could expect half of them to succumb to deadly infectious diseases. What today would be a simple infected cut, in years past held a serious risk of death, and a trip to the surgeon was tantamount to playing Russian roulette with an unsterilized scalpel. Improvements in sanitation procedures and antiseptics and the advent of antibiotics have, to a large degree, curtailed the incidence and lethal effects of many infectious diseases. Success in this endeavor has played a major role in extending life expectancy and in contributing to the population explosion. 

Sterilization is the process by which all living cells, spores, and viruses are destroyed on an object. 

Antimicrobials can also be classified on the basis of the specific groups of microbes destroyed, leading to the terms “microbicide,” “bactericide,” “algicide,” “fungicide,” and “virucide.” These agents can be classified further as either “-static” (inhibiting growth) or “-cidal” (killing cells). For example, antibacterial agents may be bacteriostatic or bactericidal. Chemical substances are germicidal if they kill pathogens (and many nonpathogens), but germicidal agents do not necessarily kill spores. Although these descriptions emphasize the killing of pathogens, it is important to note that antimicrobial agents can also kill or prevent the growth of nonpathogens. Many public health standards are based on total numbers of microorganisms on an object, regardless of pathogenic potential. For example, to gain public health certification, the restaurants we frequent must demonstrate low numbers of bacteria (pathogenic or not) in their food preparation areas. 

5.10 Bacteriostatic antibiotics do not kill bacteria; they only inhibit their growth. Why are they nevertheless effective at treating bacterial infections? Hint: Is the human body a quiet bystander during an infection? 

survivors were measured by viable count. The D-value is the time required to kill 90% of cells (that is, the time it takes for the viable cell count to drop by one log10 unit). 

a little over 1 minute. The food industry uses D-value and several other parameters to evaluate the efficiency of killing (see Section 16.5). 

proteins and thousands of molecules of each one. Not all proteins and not all genes in a chromosome are damaged by an agent at the same time. Damage accumulates. Only when enough molecules of an essential protein or a gene encoding that protein are damaged will the cell die. Cells that die first are those that accumulate lethal hits early. Members of the population that die later have, by random chance, absorbed more hits on nonessential proteins or genes, sparing the essential ones. Why, if 90% of a population is killed in 1 minute, isn’t the remaining 10% killed in the next minute? It seems logical that all should have perished. Yet after the second minute, 1% of the original population remains alive. This phenomenon can also be explained by the random-hit concept. Although fewer viable cells remain after 1 minute, each has the same random chance of having a lethal hit as when the treatment began. Thus, death rate is an exponential function, much like radioactive decay is an exponential cells. It is a mistake to assume that all cells in a population are identical. At any given time, for instance, one cell may express a protein that another cell has just stopped expressing (for example, superoxide dismutase). In that instant, the first cell might contain a bit more of that protein. If the protein is essential or confers a level of stress protection (such as against superoxide), the cell with more of that protein can absorb more punishment before it dies. The presence of lucky individuals expressing the right repertoire of proteins might also explain why death curves commonly level off after a certain point. 

Sterile solution collected in a sterile container. 

sizes of 0.2 μm can remove microbial cells, but not viruses, from solutions. Samples from 1 milliliter to several liters can be drawn through a membrane fi lter by vacuum or can be forced through it using a syringe (Fig. 5.27). Filter sterilization avoids the use of heat, which can damage certain materials. Strictly speaking, though, the solutions are not really sterile, because these fi lters do not trap viruses. Air can also be sterilized by filtration. This process particulate material 0.3 μm in size or larger. Biosafety cabinets are critical to protect individuals working with not just trapped; they are attacked by the antimicrobials and lysed. 

Liquid nitrogen freezes cells so quickly that ice crystals do not have time to form. 

Syringe with fluid attached here. 

Green = filtered air primary function of this enzyme filter is to kill airborne microorganisms caught on the surface of the filter, thus protecting against secondary contamination by microorganisms in air filtration systems. The photo shows lysed bacteria (Bacillus subtilis). The cell walls have been hydrolyzed by enzymatic action, and cell membranes are broken as a result of osmotic pressure pushing outward against the membrane. 

What properties account for this microbe’s amazing homologous recombination (see Section 9.5). Each cell of irradiated and broken into thousands of fragments, overlapping intact fragments can be found and spliced together by Michael Daly at the Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences in Maryland, involves the intracellular accumulation of large amounts of manganese that can remove highly damaging free radicals generated by to particularly toxic forms of mercury and inserted into to withstand the ionizing radiation and convert toxic waste into forms that could be removed safely. Fortunately, there is little need to worry about its becoming a superpathogen, because the organism does not cause disease and is susceptible to antibiotics. 

Corrosiveness. The disinfectant should not corrode the surface or, in the case of an antiseptic, damage skin. 

Stability, odor, and surface tension. The chemical should be stable during storage, possess a neutral or pleasant odor, and have a low surface tension so that it can penetrate cracks and crevices. 

Lister in 1867 to reduce the incidence of surgical infections, is no longer used as a disinfectant, because of its toxicity, but its derivatives, such as cresols and orthophenylphenol, are still in use. The household product Lysol is a mixture of phenolics. Phenolics are useful disinfectants because they denature proteins, are effective in the presence of organic material, and remain active on surfaces long after application. Although phenol is no longer used as a disinfectant, its potency makes it the benchmark against which other disinfectants are measured. The phenol coefficient test consists of inoculating a fixed number of bacteria—for example, Salmonella enterica or Staphylococcus aureus—into dilutions of the test agent. At timed intervals, samples are withdrawn from each dilution and inoculated into fresh broth (which contains no disinfectant). The phenol coefficient is based on the highest dilution (lowest concentration) of a disinfectant that will kill all the bacteria in a test after 10 minutes of exposure but leaves survivors after only 5 minutes of exposure. This concentration is known as the maximum effective dilution. Dividing the reciprocal of the maximum effective dilution for the test agent (for example, ethanol) by the reciprocal of the maximum effective dilution for phenol gives the phenol coefficient (Table 5.3). 

on a dirty surface will bind to any inert organic material present, lowering the agent’s effectiveness against microbes. It is not always possible to clean a surface prior to disinfection (as in a blood spill), but the presence of organic material must be factored into estimates of how long to disinfect a surface or object. 

The kinds of organisms present. Ideally, the agent should be effective against a broad range of pathogens. 

Ethanol, iodine, chlorine, and surfactants (for example, detergents) are all used to reduce or eliminate microbial content from commercial products (Fig. 5.30). The first three are compounds that damage proteins, lipids, and carrier forms an iodophor, a compound that is watersoluble, stable, nonstaining, and capable of releasing iodine slowly to avoid skin irritation. Wescodyne and Betadine (trade names) are iodophors used, respectively, for the surgical preparation of skin and for wounds. Chlorine is another highly reactive disinfectant with universal application. It is recommended for general laboratory and hospital Detergents can also be antimicrobial agents. The hydrophobic and hydrophilic ends of detergent molecules (the coexistence of which makes the molecules amphipathic) will emulsify fat into water. Cationic (positively charged) but not anionic (negatively charged) detergents are useful as disinfectants because the positive charges can gain access to the negatively charged bacterial cell and disrupt membranes. Anionic detergents are not antimicrobial but do help in the mechanical removal of bacteria from Low-molecular-weight aldehydes such as formaldehyde them useful disinfectants. 

Pseudomonas aeruginosa expressing green fluorescent protein from monospecies biofilms. 

Antibiotics as made in nature are chemical compounds synthesized by one microbe to either kill or stop the growth of other competing microbial species. Antimicrobial compounds that kill other cells are called bactericidal, whereas compounds that merely stop growth are called bacteriostatic. Chapter 27 describes the various antibiotic modes of action. When purified and administered to patients suffering from an infectious disease, antibiotics can produce seemingly miraculous recoveries. 

oxygen species are involved). Companies are incorporating metallic copper into objects such as handrails, door releases, and hospital bed rails. 

Mold excretes penicillin, inhibiting growth of bacteria. 

through the intake of probiotics. In general, a probiotic is a food or supplement that contains live microorganisms and improves intestinal microbial balance. Newborn baby chicks, for instance, are fed a microbial cocktail of normal gut microbes designed to quickly colonize the intestinal tract and prevent colonization by Salmonella, a frequent contaminant of factory-farmed chicken. In another example, Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium have been used to prevent and treat diarrhea in children. Russian biologist Ilya Mechnikov, winner of the 1908 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine, was the first to suggest that a high concentration of lactobacilli in the gut microbiome is important for health and longevity in humans. Yogurt is a probiotic that contains Lactobacillus acidophilus and a number of other lactobacilli. It is often recommended as a way to restore a normal balance to gut microbiota (for example, after the microbiota has been disturbed by antibiotic treatment), and it appears useful in the treatment of some forms of inflammatory bowel Phage therapy, another biocontrol method, was first described in 1907 by Félix d’Herelle at France’s Pasteur Institute, long before antibiotics were discovered. Bacteriophages are viruses that prey on bacteria (discussed in Section 6.1). Each bacterial species is susceptible to a limited number of specific phages. Because a phage infection often causes bacterial lysis, it was considered feasible to treat infectious diseases with a phage targeted to the pathogen. At one time, doctors used phages as medical treatment for illnesses ranging from cholera to typhoid fever. In some cases, a liquid containing the phage was poured into an open wound. In other cases, phages were given orally, introduced via aerosol, or injected. Sometimes the treatments worked; sometimes they did not. When antibiotics came into the mainstream, phage therapy largely faded. Now that strains of bacteria that are resistant to standard antibiotics are on the rise, the idea of phage therapy has enjoyed renewed interest from the worldwide medical community (Special Topic 5.1). instance, is a pathogen that can contaminate hamburger and cause bloody diarrhea. The phage product contains several different phages and is sprayed onto the hides of cattle 1–4 hours before slaughter. Cattle carcasses are steam-pasteurized and acid-washed to diminish bacterial treatments will be infected and killed by the phage, reducing the consumer’s risk of disease. Using multiple phages in each preparation nearly eliminates the risk that phage resistance will develop in the pathogen. 

Two-week-old biofilm of Enterococcus faecalis 7 days (bottom). Confocal fluorescence microscopy. 

depicted in the dentinal tubules surrounding the root canal (red arrow). Note that the root canal is stained nonspecifically, even in the absence of bacteria. 

Viruses infect a host cell and use the cell’s machinery to form progeny virions. In ecosystems, viruses cycle nutrients, control host populations, and promote host diversity. Viruses may kill their host cells, or they may copy themselves into their evolved into many portions of our genome. And now, researchers engineer viruses to attack tumors, and to conduct gene therapy. 

Chlorovirus infects chlorella algae. This giant marine virus has genes for metabolic enzymes and tRNA—surprising for a virus. In Michael Rossmann’s laboratory, Xinzheng Zhang virus factories that make about a thousand progeny virions. 

What exciting discovery has your microscopy revealed about this virus of algae? 

Using cryo-electron microscopy, we were able to capture several essential steps of how the chlorovirus enters the host cells. The infection starts when the spike on the unique vertex of the virus recognizes the cellular receptors. The virus then digests the cell wall by its encoded enzyme. Meanwhile, the virus undergoes uncoating around the unique vertex. Without the cell wall and the virus capsid shell, the viral membrane can fuse with the cellular membrane to release the viral genome into the host cell. It is amazing that the virus can accomplish such a comprehensive job. What is the importance of algal viruses in the natural Phytoplankton (marine algae) play an important role in Earth’s carbon cycle. In natural environments, viruses such as algal viruses help control the population of phytoplankton. Algal viruses are important in ecosystems for controlling algal blooms. 

overgrow, they can generate a bloom that covers thousands water are the reflected light from billions of calcite plates, or “coccoliths,” that coat each algal cell. Yet within a few days, this gigantic bloom is dissipated by viruses. Throughout the ocean, viruses play a decisive role in controlling algal blooms. Consumer organisms apparently cannot grow fast enough to control such blooms, but viruses spread rapidly through the popuA. lation. By lysing the algae as they grow, viruses return algal carbon and minerals to the surface water before the algae starve to death and their bodies sink. When biomass sinks, its minerals become unavailable for phototrophs and their consumers. Thus, viruses are major players in the cycling of All cellular organisms are infected by viruses. In humans, 1 µm 250 nm most of our own viruses go unnoC. ticed, and some actually contribute to our health. But the viruses we hear about are those that cause In research, viruses provided both tools and model systems for our discovery of the fundamental principles of molecular biology. The first genes mapped, the first regulatory switches defined, and the first genomes sequenced were all those of viruses. Vectors for gene cloning and gene therapy continue to be derived from viruses (see Chapter 12). Our understanding of viruses, particularly bacterial viruses, called bacteriophages, provides a background for the molecular biology we will encounter in Part 2 of this book (Chapters 7–12). And remarkably, we now engineer human viruses to deliver gene therapy and kill cancers (discussed in Chapter 11). In Chapter 6 we introduce the themes of virus structure and the ways that host cells for controlled by viruses. 

their own reproduction. The molecular biology of viral infection and replication is explored further in Chapter 11. Viral disease pathology and epidemiology are discussed in Chapters 25–27. 

Membranous replication complexes surround the nucleus of an infected liver cell in tissue culture. The virus expresses replication bacteriologist Frederick William Twort (1877–1950) and by French microbiologist Félix d’Herelle (1873–1949). To actually reveal what went on in the host cell, Ernst Ruska (1906–1988) used the newly invented electron microscope (discussed in Chapter 2). The electron micrographs in show startling views of progeny virions infecting cells. However, they fail to complex. The micrograph in shows a cell from cell nucleus is surrounded by replication complexes composed of viral proteins and host-derived membranes (pinkorange fluorescence). Within each replication complex, fluoresce against the dark background. The complexes move around within the cell, as tracked by video recording. It can be argued that the viral replication complexes themselves behave like intracellular parasites. 

How were integrated viral genomes discovered? In the showed evidence of phage gene expression from within host genomes. Bacteriophage lambda is discussed at length in Chapter 11. Early in the twentieth century, American cancer researcher Peyton Rous (1879–1970) discovered that some avian viruses cause tumors. The tumor generation results from integration of a viral genome. For this discovery, Rous won the 1966 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine. But the biggest surprise emerged from decades of study of the genomes of host organisms. Many host cell traits turn out to be expressed by integrated viral genomes, or prophages, that actually confer benefits on their host. For example, Nostoc cyanobacteria possess a prophage that encodes nitrogenase, an enzyme for nitrogen fixation. Many human pathogens, such as Staphylococcus aureus, contain prophages encoding toxins. Human genomes show evidence of much genetic material arising from viral genomes that integrated As much as half of the human genome may have arisen from essential for early development of human embryos. 

Virion, or virus particle. The virion is an inert particle consisting of nucleic acid enclosed by a protein capsid. Some viruses package enzymes and possess a lipid energy conversion. 

types of viral genomes may integrate within a host chromosome and replicate as part of the host. Integration may be permanent; alternatively, the viral genome may be reactivated to start assembling virions. 

Virus as a subcellular organism. The virion, or virus particle, consists of a nucleic acid genome contained by a protein synthesize progeny virions. Alternatively, infection may lead to integration of the viral genome within the host cell genome. Integration may last indefinitely, or else may lead to production of virions. 

The size and complexity of giant viruses argue that these viruses evolved by reductive evolution of an intracellular parasitic bacterium. Similar arguments are made for large viruses such as the smallpox and herpes viruses. On the arose from parts of a cell. For example, the key retroviral shows homology to telomerase, a host cell enzyme that maintains chromosome ends. Viral origins are discussed further in eTopic 6.1. 

While viruses are the tiniest of biological entities, they play starring roles in ecosystems. Acute viruses (which rapidly kill their hosts) act as predators or parasites to limit host population density. They also recycle nutrients from their host bodies. An increase in host population density increases the rate of transmission of viral pathogens. As the host population declines, viruses are less likely to find a new host before they lose infectivity, while many of the remaining hosts have undergone selection for resistance. Thus, viruses can limit host density without causing extinction of the host. In a community of multiple host species, the overall effect of viruses is to increase host diversity. Each viral species has a limited host range and requires a critical population density to sustain the chain of infection. In marine phytoplankton, a virus limits its host species to a population density far lower than what is sustainable by the available resources, such as light for photosynthesis. The resources then support other species resistant to the given virus (but susceptible to other ones). Thus, overall, marine viruses prevent the dominance of any one species and foster the evolution of many distinct host species. The continual threat of marine viral epidemics explains the great diversity of phytoplankton ranging from silica-shelled diatoms to toxin-producing dinoflagellates. Persistent viruses (viruses that don’t immediately kill the host) may benefit the host population overall. Most important, viruses transfer genes across species, conferring traits such as the ability to metabolize new food sources. Humans harbor many obscure herpes and cold-type viruses that stimulate normal development of the immune system. In natural mammal populations, a persistent virus can act as a bioweapon that kills off competitor populations susceptible to the virus. An example is the koala retrovirus, KoRV, which has become endogenous (persistent) in many koala populations of Australia. When KoRV is transmitted to koalas that lack the retrovirus, it kills most of those newly infected—except for the few in which the virus persists. In these infected animals, the immune system controls the virus but cannot eradicate it. 

Integrated viral genomes can evolve complex symbiotic interactions with multiple hosts, combining mutualism and parasitism. An example is the relationship of polydnaviruses, wasps, and caterpillars (Fig. 6.5). Parasitoid wasps lay their eggs inside a living insect caterpillar, where the larvae must hatch and feed without stimulating the caterpillar’s defense. The wasp genome contains an integrated genome (or provirus) of a virus called polydnavirus. The polydnavirus forms its own genomes and virions only within the wasp ovary. When the wasp deposits her eggs inside the host caterpillar, she also deposits her mutualistic virions. The virions express proteins that prevent the caterpillar cells from undergoing encapsulation, a process that would otherwise wall off the wasp eggs and kill them. In marine ecosystems, viruses play a significant role in the cycling of food molecules (Fig. 6.6). In ocean food webs, phytoplankton is consumed by grazers, and grazers are eaten by higher trophic consumers (discussed in Chapter 21). But at each level, some of the carbon fixed as biomass sinks to the ocean floor. There, benthic microbes metabolize so slowly that most carbon is effectively removed from the carbon cycle. At the same time, viral infection and lysis convert the bodies of phytoplankton, grazers, and carnivores into detritus consisting of small organic particles and soluble molecules. The viral detritus gets taken up by heterotrophs, and minerals are absorbed by autotrophs. This uptake of viral detritus is called the viral shunt. The viral shunt returns some organic matter to microbial consumers in the upper region of the ocean (dislevels cussed in Chapter 21). Some carbon is thus diverted from the ocean sink and instead plays a significant part also plays a major part in cycling phosphorus in the oceans. 

lar. When a female wasp deposits her eggs inside the caterpillar, she also deposits her symbiogenic polydnavirus virions. The virions express wasp genes in the caterpillar, where they prevent the encapsulation process that would otherwise wall off the wasp egg and kill it. 

cules from marine phytoplankton and bacteria back to metabolism, avoiding loss by sedimentation. 

algal bloom. If some of the algae are genetically resistant, will they grow up again and dominate the producer community? 

and protease inhibitors. The molecular biology behind anti-HIV drugs is discussed in Chapters 11 and 27. 

6.2 Search for some specific viruses on the Internet. Which viruses do you think have a narrow host range, and which have a broad host range? 

Viruses can exist as a virion (inert virus particle), as the intracellular assembly of virion components, or as a viral All classes of organisms are infected by viruses. Usually the hosts are limited to a particular host range of closely related strains or species. Acute virus infection limits host population density. Virus-associated mortality may increase the genetic diversity of host species. Persistent viruses remain in hosts, where they may evolve traits that confer positive benefits in a virus-host Marine viruses infect most phytoplankton, releasing their minerals in the upper water, where they are available for other phototrophs. Viral activity substantially impacts the global carbon balance. Viruses transfer genes between host genomes. Viral gene transfer is a major source of cell genome evolution. 

of both. The papillomavirus virion, for example, consists solely of a capsid containing a genome. Some viruses, such as the tailed bacteriophages, have an elaborate delivery device to transfer the viral genome into the host cell. Other viruses possess a membrane envelope. The protein capsid of an enveloped virus is called a core particle. of viral structure and drugs is presented in Chapter 11. 

6.3 What will happen if a virus particle remains intact within a host cell and fails to release its genome? 

of repeating protein units generated by a small number of genes and encoded by a short chromosomal sequence. The smaller the viral genome, the more genome copies can be synthesized from the host cell’s limited supply of nucleotides. Nevertheless, some symmetrical viruses, such as herpes virus and mimivirus, have much larger genomes. Large genomes offer a greater range of functions for viral components. 

in an icosahedral (20-sided) capsid. An icosahedral capsid takes the form of a polyhedron with 20 identical triangular faces. In the capsid, each triangle can be composed of three identical but asymmetrical protein units. An icosahedral capsid is found in the herpes simplex virus generating very different complex shapes for different viral species. But no matter what the pattern of subunits in the triangular unit, the structure overall shows the rotational faces, fivefold symmetry around an axis through opposite points, and twofold symmetry around an axis through opposite edges. 

6.4 For a viral capsid, what is the advantage of an icosahedron, as shown in instead of some other polyhedron? 

The space between the capsid and the envelope contains “tegument” proteins, such as enzymes that interact with the host cell to depress its defense responses. Tegument proteins are expressed during infection of a host cell, and then get packaged in the virion. Both viral and host proteins may be packaged as tegument. The mature envelope bristles with glycoprotein spike proteins that attach it to the capsid. The spike proteins enable the virus to attach and infect the next host cell. Further details of herpes structure and function are presented in Section 11.5. 

Distinguish the viral envelope (phospholipid membrane derived from a host cell membrane) from the bacterial cell envelope (protective layers outside the bacterial cell membrane). The bacterial envelope is discussed in Chapter 3. 

related primates; the virus caused a major epidemic in 2014 freudenreichii, a key fermenting agent for Swiss cheese. Another filamentous phage, CTXϕ, integrates its sequence into the genome of Vibrio cholerae, where it carries the deadly toxin genes required for cholera. On the other hand, filamentous phages have been used in nanotechnology to nucleate the growth of crystalline “nanowires” for electronic devices. consists of a relatively simple capsid of protein monomers. 

laid down in a spiral array. Such a tube can be imagined as a plaRNA genome nar array of subunits that coils around such that each row connects to the row above, generating a spiral. The length of the helical capsid may extend up to 50 times its width, generating a 2.3 nm flexible filament. Unlike an icosahedral capmonomer sid, which usually has a fixed size, a helical capsid can vary in length to accommodate different lengths of nucleic acid. FurHelical thermore, some viruses package several genome segments into separate helical capsids. For example, influenza virus packages several different genome segments into separate heli18 nm cal packages of different sizes, membrane envelope. Separate chromosome packaging enables tive, but the process enables rapid evolution of new strains the filament, short tail fibers mediate specific attachment (discussed further in Chapter 11). 

the capsid or in the tegument between the core envelope and the outer membrane, which is coated with surface tubules of protein. Large asymmetrical viruses contain so many enzymes that they appear to have evolved from degenerate cells. Vaccinia virus offers opportunities for new applications, such as conversion to vaccines for other viruses, and engineering to combat tumors. For example, students in vaccinia that will make the virus safer for immunocompromised patients. The switch involves a recombinant tetracycline repressor gene, whose product confers resistance to tetracycline. Repressor controls and engineering are discussed in Chapters 10 and 12. 

virion includes an outer membrane and a core envelope membrane vaccinia virus in tissue culture, to develop advanced vaccines and cancer treatments. 

many kinds of fruits and vegetables, entering the plant cell through a damaged cell wall. For example, citrus viroids cause economic losses in the citrus industry. The potato spindle tuber viroid (Fig. 6.13) consists unpaired loops. This unusual circularized form avoids progeny copies of the viroid, which encodes no products other than itself. Viroids can cause as much host destruction as “true viruses,” and some authors, particularly in plant pathology, classify them as “viruses without capsids.” Some viroids have catalytic ability, comparable to catalyzing a reaction is called a ribozyme (discussed in medical research, such as cleaving human mRNA involved in cancer. Can an infectious agent propagate without a genome of to consist solely of protein. These agents, known as prions, are thought to be aberrant proteins arising from the host cell. Prions gained notoriety when they were implicated in brain infections such as Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, a variant form of which is known as “mad cow” disease because it may be transmitted through defective proteins in beef from diseased cattle. Other diseases believed to be caused by prion transmission include scrapie, a disease of sheep; and kuru, a degenerative brain disease that was found in a tribe of people who customarily consumed the brains of deceased relatives. 

prion, compared to the abnormal conformation. The abnormal form “recruits” normally folded proteins and changes their conformation into the abnormal showing “spongiform” holes typical of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. 

of existing molecules without synthesizing entirely new infective molecules. aberrant protein. More rarely, the cascade of protein misfolding can start with the spontaneous misfolding of an endogenous host protein. The chance of spontaneous misfolding is greatly increased in individuals who inherit certain alleles encoding the protein; thus, Creutzfeld-Jakob disease can be inherited genetically from one person with one mutant allele. 

The capsid or core particle packages the viral genome and delivers it into the host cell. 

Filamentous (helical) capsids have uniform width, generating a flexible filamentous virion. packaged by nucleocapsid proteins. The packaged genome (or core particle) and tegument or accessory proteins are enclosed within phospholipid membrane derived from the host cell. The envelope includes virusspecific spike proteins. 

Prions are infectious proteins that induce a cell’s native proteins to fold incorrectly and impair cell function. 

that as tundra melts during inevitable climate change, the melting permafrost will release human pathogens from long-dead hosts such as buried victims of smallpox. Giant viruses are intriguing because their genomes specify so many enzymes with housekeeping cell functions, such as nutrient trans- 650,000 port, mRNA translation, and even cell motility (Fig. 6.18). Such large cell-like genomes suggest the likelihood that a virus evolved from a parasitic cell. 

How do we classify the bewildering diver- 850,000 sity of viruses? Today we classify organisms Gene categories Amino acid transport and metabolism by the relatedness of their gene sequences. Nucleotide transport and metabolism The definition of a virus species, however, Translation of mRNA to protein is problematic, given the small size and high mutability of viral genomes and the ability of Membrane and envelope biogenesis different viruses to recombine their genome segMotility ments within an infected host cell. Furthermore, Protein modification, turnover, chaperones Secondary metabolites not all viruses are monophyletic—that is, descended Other or unknown from a common ancestor. In fact, different classes of viruses appear to have evolved from different sources—for example, from parasitic cells or from host cell components giant virus specifies numerous enzymes with cell functions. genome composition, virion structure, and host range. For purposes of study and communication, a working different hosts can show surprising similarities in genetclassification system has been devised by the International ics and structure. For example, both rabies virus and potato yellow dwarf virus are enveloped, bullet-shaped classification system is based on several criteria: viruses of the rhabdovirus family. Genome composition. The nucleic acid of the viral genome can vary remarkably with respect to physical Note: In nomenclature, families of viruses are designated by Latin names with the suffix “-viridae”: for example, Papillomavirisingle- or double-stranded, it may be linear or circular, dae. Nevertheless, the common forms of such family names are also used—for example, “papillomaviruses.” Within a family, a virus and it may be whole or segmented (that is, divided into species is simply capitalized, as in “Papillomavirus.” separate “chromosomes”). Genomes are classified by the Baltimore method (discussed next). 

Capsid symmetry. The protein capsid or core particle may be helical or icosahedral, with various levels of symmetry. 

Envelope. The presence of a host-derived envelope, and the envelope structure if present, are characteristic of related viruses. 

Size of the virus particle. Related viruses generally share the same size range; for example, enteroviruses such as poliovirus are only 30 nm across (about the size of a ribosome), whereas poxviruses are 200–400 nm, as large as a small bacterium. 

Given the wide variety of viral structures, how do we determine their relatedness? In general, viruses of the same evidence of shared ancestry with each other than with 1971, David Baltimore proposed that the primary distinctions among classes of viruses be the genome composition awarded the 1975 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for discovering how tumor viruses cause cancer. 

Requires plant host reverse transcriptase to make dsDNA. 

Uses its own or host for replication. 

Packages its own reverse transcriptase to make dsDNA. 

Baltimore (left), with a graduate student at the California Institute of Technology. Baltimore won the 1975 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for his work on retroviruses; co-winners were Renato Dulbecco and Howard Temin. 

Requires RNA-dependent a template for mRNA and genome replication. 

Their genes can be transcribed directly by a standard used can be that of the host cell, or it can be encoded by the viral genome. 

such as poliovirus, the coronaviruses, and the flaviviruses as influenza virus have genomes that consist of template, genomes are often segmented; that is, they consist of multiple separate linear chromosomes—a key factor in the evolution of killer strains of influenza (see Section 11.2). where it directs the expression of the viral genes. virus (a hepadnavirus) first copies its double-stranded packaged in the original virion. In contrast, plant pararetroviruses, such as cauliflower mosaic virus (CaMV, a cell. Many plant genomes include a gene for reverse transcriptase. Cauliflower mosaic virus is of enormous agricultural significance for its use as a vector to construct pesticide-resistant food crops. 

One promising approach is that of proteomics, analysis of the proteome, the proteins encoded by genomes (discussed in Chapter 10). Proteins are identified through biochemical analysis of virus particles and through bioinformatic analysis of protein sequences encoded in the genomes. Proteomic analysis is useful for distantly related viruses because protein sequences often show relatedness that is obscured in the nucleic acid sequence by silent mutations (discussed in Chapter 9). Even if only a few proteins are shared by any two viruses, statistical comparison of all proteins in a set of viral species reveals underlying degrees of relatedness. An example of virus classification based on pro(ssDNA) riophages proposed by Forest Rohwer and Rob Edwards (Fig. 6.21). Unlike earlier trees based on a single common Gramgene sequence, the proteomic tree is based on the statistinegative cal comparison of phage protein sequences predicted by The proteomic analysis predicts major evolutionary categories of phage species that share common host bacteria. For example, phages that infect GramE. coli negative hosts will show more genetic commonality with each other than with phages that infect Gram-positive hosts. Shared hosts have a signifiGramcant impact on phage evolution because coinfecting a host enables phages to exchange genes. 

Giant viruses have 200–2,000 genes and may have evolved from intracellular parasitic cells. Smaller viral genomes comprise fewer than ten genes. Such viruses might have evolved from cell parts. 

Classification of viruses includes genome composition, virion structure, and host range. The Baltimore virus classification emphasizes the Phylogeny of closely related viruses can be calculated by comparing all related pairs of genes from the viral genomes. Proteomic classification of distantly related viruses includes information from all viral proteins. Statistical analysis reveals common descent of viruses infecting a common host. 

Viruses display a remarkable diversity of ways to replicate within a host cell. Here, we discuss the key modes of bacteriophage replication, and their consequences for host cells. We focus on the best-known bacteriophages, those of the mammalian intestinal community. Gut bacteriophages, or “coliphages,” are part of a microbial community that modulates human digestion, the immune system, and mental health. Historically, bacteriophages have provided some of the most fundamental insights in molecular biology. In 1952, Alfred Hershey and Martha Chase showed that the transmission cell led to the production of progeny bacteriophages, thus confirming In 1950, André Lwoff and Antoinette Gutman showed that a phage genome could integrate itself within a bacterial genome—the first recognition that genes could enter and leave a cell’s genome. Other fundamental concepts of the genetic unit and the basis of gene transcription came from experiments on bacteriophages, as discussed in Chapters 7–9. 

Phages bind Salmonella receptors. Various kinds of host molecules can membrane proteins and complexes (OmpF and TolC), and flagellar proteins. 

Cell synthesizes capsid proteins. 

Phage recombines by re-joining the ends of its genome and enters the lytic cycle. 

Cell replicates phage into capsids. 

inserted, the phage capsid remains outside, attached to the cell surface. The empty capsid is termed a “ghost” because of its pale appearance in an electron micrograph. 

Assembly of phages. Phage components must be expressed and assembled. Components usually “self-assemble”; that is, the joining of their parts is favored thermodynamically. 

Exit and transmission. Progeny phages must exit the host cell, and then reach new host cells to infect. 

(to a virus) of the slow-release strategy, compared with the strategy of a temperate phage, which alternates between lysis and lysogeny? 

release. In the slow-release replication cycle, a filamentous phage produces phage particles without lysing the cell. The host continues to reproduce itself, but more slowly than uninfected cells do because many of its resources are being used to make phages. 

Phages assemble and exit without lysis. 

Regina Redman. Redman and Roossinck identified a mysterious virus in a fungus, Curvularia protuberata, which grows associated with a panic grass, Dichanthelium lanuginosum, in as an “endophyte” within the vasculature of the grass—a highly common form of symbiosis (discussed in Chapter 21). What is remarkable about this fungus-plant pair is that each partner confers thermal tolerance (heat resistance) on the other (Fig. 1). Together, the plant and fungus grow at temperatures as high as 65°C—which commonly occur in the vicinity of Yellowstone’s thermal springs. Separately, the fungus and of their species. 

Many prophages and endogenous viruses function as part of their host cell. Table 6.2 shows examples of prophages that express virulence genes for pathogenic bacteria—a benefit to the pathogen, enabling it to better colonize the causes the paralysis associated with botulism (and is also the basis of the Botox cosmetic treatment.) In Corynebacterium diphtheriae, the cause of diphtheria, the diphtheria toxin is expressed by beta phage. Other virulence factors (proteins that enhance disease) expressed by prophages include envelope proteins that help defend the bacterium from the immune system. 

at high temperature. Remarkably, the virus-infected fungus could also confer thermal tolerance on tomato plants specific thermotolerance property on various plant species— including plants important for agriculture. Redman has now joined the Symbiogenics agricultural research firm, to extend her work using endophytic fungi to protect commercial rice plants from heat and salt stress. The viral components of these fungus-plant mutualisms are as yet unknown, but they offer exciting prospects for sustaining agriculture during climate change. 

reactive oxygen ions produced by the plant’s stress response to high temperature. Can you propose an experiment to test this hypothesis? plant: Three-way symbiosis required for thermal tolerance. Science 315:513–515. Chris Greer, Luis Espino, et al. 2011. Increased fitness of rice plants to abiotic stress via habitat adapted symbiosis: One 6:e14823. 

The virus-host relationship often evolves in response to environmental stress. The role of virus-host mutualism in stressed plants offers exciting possibilities for agriculture (see Special Topic 6.1). 

In natural environments, viruses commonly outnumber cellular microbes by tenfold or more. So how have host cells evolved to defend themselves? Several remarkable resistance mechanisms have evolved. Their molecular basis is explained in greater detail in Chapters 7 and 9. 

Genetic resistance. All bacteria acquire random mutations in their genomes as they reproduce (see Chapters 7 and 9). When attacked by bacteriophages, bacterial populations undergo natural selection; mutants that happen to be harder to infect will survive. Bacteria resist phage infection by expressing a gene that encodes an altered host receptor protein, which fails to bind the viral coat protein. Alternatively, a different cellular protein evolves to block phage binding to the receptor. An evolutionary “arms race” ensues, in which phages may evolve enzymes that cleave the host defense molecules. 

possess an adaptive defense against viruses that is analogous to an immune system. (Adaptive immunity of humans is presented in Chapter 24.) The bacterial adaptive defense phages that could infect the cell. The sequences are called clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats sequences (Fig. 6.25). 

Now the adapted host cell “remembers” infection by the specific phage—along with many other previous phages from previous infections that had inserted other spacers. The next time the adapted host cell is attacked by the same (crRNA) containing one spacer from the original bacterial system, see Chapter 9. 

Phage may stimulate the immune system. Intestinal lumen contains bacteria and phages. Host population distribution changes. 

Lysogenized bacteria have enhanced traits. 

Lysogenized bacteria express virulence such as toxins. 

Bacteriophages enter the intestine, where they infect intestinal bacteria. Most intestinal bacteria carry prophages. Phages also modulate the immune system. 

Phages may limit the bacterial numbers to levels that the human immune system can tolerate. Lysogenized bacteria may use quorum sensing to detect host cell populations and “decide” whether to start a lytic cycle. 

Phage particles may modulate immune system activity by suppressing T-cell activation and tumor formation (T-cells are discussed in Chapter 24). 

Pseudomonas aeruginosa may be eroded by phage infection. 

The positive potential of bacteriophages has led researchers to investigate the engineering of phages for phage therapy. An idea dating back to the early twentieth century, phage therapy was eclipsed by the rise of antibiotics. Today, as we face growing antibiotic resistance in pathogens, we are taking another look at therapeutic uses of bacteriophages (Chapters 5 and 11). 

Host cell-surface receptors mediate the attachment of bacteriophages to a cell and confer host specificity. 

cell, where it utilizes host gene expression machinery to produce progeny virions. 

Lysogeny. Some bacteriophages can insert their genome into that of the host cell, which then replicates the phage initiate a lytic cycle. 

Gene transfer. Genes are transferred by phage processes of transduction and lysogeny. 

The gut bacteriophage community includes phages that infect, lyse, or lysogenize bacterial hosts. Gut phages impact bacterial community structure, transfer genes among bacteria, and modulate the human gut immune system. 

For greater molecular detail of selected viruses, see Chapter 11. 

Like bacteriophages, animal viruses evolve by the fitness advantage of binding specific receptor proteins on their The host receptors play a key role in determining the host range, the group of host species permitting infection. Within a host, receptor molecules can also determine the viral tropism, or ability to infect a particular tissue type within a host. Some viruses, such as Ebola virus, exhibit broad tropism, infecting many kinds of host tissues, whereas others, such as papillomavirus, show tropism for only one type (in the case of papillomavirus, the epithelial tissues). Tropism may depend on the virus’s ability to interact with the cytoplasm, or it may require the presence of an appropriate host cell receptor protein that can bind the viral surface attachment protein. For example, poliovirus infects only a specific class of human cells that display normally infected by polio, but when transgenic mice were then be infected. Tissue-specific receptors determine the host tropism requires a receptor protein with a sialic acid sugar chain the lower respiratory tract. That is why avian influenza effectively, allowing rapid transmission between humans. The molecular basis of influenza infection is discussed further in Chapter 11. 

tance to rhinovirus infection? Is such evolution likely? Why or why not? 

Lysosome fuses with and acidifies endosome. 

Viral envelope fuses with endosome membrane. 

packing, as well as host transcription factors available in the nucleus. 

2. Keratinocytes differentiate; virus replication is activated. 

genome may transform cells into cancer. 

Only shedding epithelial cells release virions. 

virus, enters the cytoplasm, where the protein coat disintegrates. The viral and transcription by host polymerases. 

Viral replication is largely inhibited until the basal cells transcription by host polymerases. The mRNA transcripts then exit the nuclear pores, as do host mRNAs, for translation in the cytoplasm. The translated capsid proteins, however, return to the nucleus for assembly of the virion. the exception of poxviruses, which replicate entirely in the an alternative pathway of integrating its genome into that of the host (analogous to phage lysogeny). The integrated genome can transform host cells into cancer cells. Cells are transformed to cancer through increased expression of viral oncogenes (cancer-causing genes; see eTopic 26.1). The oncogenes inhibit the expression of host tumor suppressor than others. The most common strains are preventable by the Gardasil vaccine. the virus to replicate entirely in the cytoplasm, without any the cell membrane into the cytoplasm—much as a bacteriophage inserts its genome into a cell (Fig. 6.30). The role of endocytosis is debated; poliovirus requires no endocytosis, but the rhinovirus genome may require endocytosis and low-pH induction. translated by host ribosomes to make RNA-dependent then serves as a template for other viral mRNAs, as well are synthesized within virus-induced vesicles or replication complexes formed from the endoplasmic reticulum. Capsid proteins are synthesized by host ribosomes, and the capsids self-assemble in the cytoplasm. Virions then assemble at the cell membrane and are released by subverting lysosomes, which attempt to digest them. For greater detail of the poliovirus replication cycle, see eTopic 11.3. 

Virion binds receptor protein. 

Uncoating of envelope releases capsid. 

Translation yields viral proteins. 

dsDNA integrates into host genome. 

The reverse transcriptase has a high error rate, generating slightly different versions of the virus—some of which can evade host defenses and antiviral drugs. The viral mRNA reenters the cytoplasm for translation to produce coat proteins, reverse transcriptase, and envelope proteins. The and bud out. Alternatively, a retrovirus may transmit from cell to cell through cytoplasmic nanotubes (introduced in Chapter 3), which avoid viral destruction by the immune At a certain point, infected cells can suddenly begin to generate large numbers of virions, destroying the immune system. The cause of accelerated reproduction is poorly understood, although it involves cytokines released under replication is activated via protein regulators encoded by the Chapter 11. 

caused by oncogenic viruses, such as Epstein-Barr virus in eTopic 11.4.) When these viruses infect a cell, instead of destroying it the virus may transform the cell to divide and grow out of control. For a virus, the advantage of cancer transformation is that it expands the population of infected cells that produce virus particles, or that replicate a viral genome hidden within a host chromosome. How do oncogenic viruses cause cancer? Several different mechanisms enable different types of viruses to transform normal host cells to proliferate abnormally and form tumors. 

(FeLV) may carry an oncogene, which can transform the host cells. Usually an oncogene encodes an abnormal form of a host protein that controls cell proliferation. human papillomavirus, can integrate their genome into a host chromosome. The integrated viral genome expresses proteins that stimulate host cell division and may ultimately lead to growth of tumors. 

Contact with damaged tissues. Viruses such as tobacco mosaic virus appear to require nonspecific entry into broken cells. 

Transmission by an animal vector. Insects and nematodes transmit many kinds of plant viruses. For example, the geminiviruses are inoculated into cells by planteating insects such as aphids, beetles, and grasshoppers. 

Transmission through seed. Some plant viruses enter the seed and infect the next generation. 

cytoplasm (Fig. 6.34). The CaMV genome moves from the cytoplasm to the cell nucleus through a nuclear pore. Within the nucleus, two promoters on reverse transcriptase, present in plant genomes. After virions are assembled in the cytoplasm, virus-encoded proteins, called movement proteins, help transfer the virions through plasmodesmata into an adjacent cell. commonly used in gene transfer vectors for plant biotechnology because transcription of the gene (such as one that confers pesticide resistance on the host) linked to the viral promoter is very efficient. In the field, 10% of cruciferous vegetables are typically infected with caulif lower mosaic virus. Some critics of gene technology fear that the prevalence of the CaMV promoter in transgenic crops may lead to the evolution of new dsDNA genome is transmitted through aphid bite. 

Virions travel through plasmodesma to uninfected cell. 

Viral gene are translated. 

How do animals and plants defend themselves from virus infection? Since viruses are ubiquitous, a wide range of defense mechanisms have evolved. Defenses important for humans are part of our immune system, presented in Chapters 23 and 24. 

cleared. The basis of this resistance is a defective allele encoding a T-lymphocyte cell-surface protein that acts as discussed further in Chapter 11. 

Immune system. The immune system of humans and other animals possesses extensive cellular machinery to thwart viral proteins expressed in the cell membrane of an infected cell are recognized by specific antibodies that stimulate immune cells to destroy the infected cell and halt its viral production. The antibodies recognize a specific virus strain, such as a strain of influenza virus to which the individual has been exposed previously. For example, during the 2009 flu epidemic, many individuals over the age of 50 had some protection arising from exposure to a similar strain in an earlier epidemic (see Chapter 24). 

nism by which mRNA molecules expressed by a viral genome are recognized by a host protein-RNA complex that shuts is now known to be widespread among all eukaryotes and interference are now being engineered for use in gene therapy to halt gene expression in cancer and in inherited diseases. 

Oncogenic viruses transform the host cell to become cancerous. Mechanisms of oncogenesis by different types of viruses include insertion of an oncogene into the host genome, integration of the entire viral genome, and expression of viral proteins that interfere with host cell cycle regulation. 

Plant viruses enter host cells by transmission through a wounded cell surface or an animal vector. Plant viruses travel to adjacent cells through plasmodesmata. 

Where does a “new virus” come from? Most human pathogens come from other humans, or from related animals called vectors. Certain human-infecting viruses persist in the wild, such as rabies virus and West Nile virus. Their persistence requires broad host ranges; rabies infects many different mammals, whereas West Nile virus infects birds as well as humans and horses. Understanding the epidemiology of rabies or of West Nile encephalitis requires understanding the behavior and seasonal migration patterns of caused by a coronavirus previously unknown to science. The coronavirus was eventually traced genetically to viruses found in bats and in civet cats marketed for food, in the area of Guangdong, China, where the human outbreak began. Other emerging viruses arise as variants of endemic milder pathogens. Viruses long associated with a host, such as the common-cold viruses (rhinoviruses), tend to have evolved a moderate disease state that provides ample from an animal host, however, may cause a more acute syndrome with higher mortality. The best-known cases are the exceptionally virulent emerging strains of influenza, which generally result from intracellular recombination of human strains with strains from pigs or ducks (discussed in Chapter 11). For example, in 2013 the avian influenza strain patterns of insect vectors and animal hosts can generate new epidemics of a pathogen in regions where the virus could not spread before. Such changes in distribution can be brought about by many factors, including global climate change (eTopic 6.2 and Chapter 28). 

enter the host cell by endocytosis. The viral genome requires uncoating for gene expression. 

virus culture is the need to grow the virus within a host cell. Therefore, any virus culture system must be a double culture of host cells plus viruses. Culturing viruses of multicellular animals and plants involves additional complications, as viruses show tropism for particular tissues or organs. Viruses may replicate in tissue culture, but the tissue culture does not show all the properties of an organ within a living organism. Therefore, a virus propagated in tissue culture will evolve to lose some of the virulence factors needed to infect an animal. 

After initial infection of a liquid culture of host cells, the titer of virus drops near zero as all virions attach to the host. During the eclipse period, progeny phages are being assembled within the cell. As cells lyse (the rise period), virions are released until they reach the final are virtually undetectable in the growth medium. This short period after infection is called the eclipse period. For some species, it is possible to distinguish between the eclipse period and a latent period, the time during which the inserted phage genome directs production of progeny virions. The virions accumulate within the cell but have not yet emerged in the medium. In animal viruses, the latent period is less distinct because large numbers of virions usually generate progeny through budding out of the host cell (Fig. 6.36). 

The “latent period” of a lytic virus is the period between initial phage-host contact and the first appearance of progeny phage. This must be distinguished from the “latent infection” of a virus that maintains its genome within a host cell without reproducing virions. 

One-step growth curve for a virus. The titer of extracellular virus drops to near zero during the latent period, as all virions adsorb to the host. Then progeny virions begin to emerge by budding out from the infected cell. For an animal virus, the growth curve may take hours to level off; the “burst” event is not defined as clearly as for phages. 

suspension of virus particles, called a lysate. In the case of bacteriophages, a lysate of phage particles can be extremely stable, remaining infective at room temperature for many years. Eukaryotic viruses, however, tend to be less stable and need to be maintained in culture or deep freeze. 

curve, whereas cellular reproduction generates an exponential growth curve? Could you design an experiment in which viruses generate an exponential curve? Under what conditions does the growth of cellular microbes give rise to a step curve? 

At 8 hours, infected cells have detached from the culture dish. By 24 hours, cells have lysed or in some cases clumped with other cells. 

of the devastating childhood disease poliomyelitis, was poliomyelitis research.… Tissue-culture methods have provided virologists with a simple in vitro method for testing a multitude of chemical and antibiotic agents.” Since then, tissue culture has remained the most effective way to study the molecular biology of animal and plant viruses and to develop vaccines and antiviral agents. Some viruses can be grown in a tissue culture of cells growing confluently on a surface. The cells must be immortalized—that is, genetically altered—to continue cell division indefinitely. The fluid bathing the tissue layer is sampled for virus concentration. As in the case of bacteriophage batch culture, we can define an eclipse period, a latent period before appearance of the first progeny virions in the culture fluid, and a rise period. In tissue culture, the time course of animal virus replication is usually much longer (hours or days) than that of bacteriophages (typically less than an hour under optimal conditions). The burst size of animal viruses, however, is typically several orders of magnitude larger than that of phages. The reason for the larger burst size is probably that the volume of a host cell is much larger than that of a bacterial host, thus providing a larger supply of materials to build virions. Thought Question 6.11 What kinds of questions about viruses can be addressed in tissue culture, and what questions require infection of an animal model? 

1. Add phages to bacteria. 

Phage stock 2. Add phage-infected bacteria to molten top agar. Molten top 3. Pour immediately onto the agar plate. 

Plaques offer a convenient way to isolate result from a phage vector carrying the gene encoding the enzyme beta-galactosidase. This enzyme converts a colorless compound into a blue dye. When the indip ccator gene is interrupted by an inserted rrecombinant gene, the phage produces white plaques, which indicate the successful and Assay of Animal Anima Viruses 4. Rotate to spread evenly. Agar solidifies. 

Each plaque contains about 106 phages from one parent. 

is inoculated with a low proportion of phage particles (multiplicity of infection is approximately 0.1). Each plaque arises from a single infected bacterium that bursts, its phage particles diffusing to infect neighboring cells. 

blue product (blue plaques). White plaques are produced by phage particles whose genome is recombinant (contains a cloned gene interrupting the gene for betagalactosidase). 

genome is all of the genetic information that defines an organism. For a bacterial species, this can include its chromosome, plasmids, and viruses. Today, information stored in almost any genome can be revealed and modified through new the dividing bacterial cell. 

Do bacterial plasmids and chromosomes mix? Plasmids are remain separated in the cell? Rodrigo Reyes-Lamothe and proteins and examined their locations. Plasmids consistently localized in nucleoid-free regions at the cell poles (shown), How the nucleoid excludes plasmids is unclear. Source: Reyes-Lamothe et al. 2014. Nucleic Acids Res. 42:1042–1051. 

replication is an essential cellular process whose machinery is evolutionarily distinct from ours. 

This segregation makes sense if the organism is to replicate of its genome. Compartmentalizing bacterial chromosomes and plasmids is one form of genome organization. Are there others? The question of bacterial chromosome organization was first raised in the mid-twentieth century after one of our intestinal bacteria became the focus of efforts to understand genes and genetics. In one remarkable experiment, a cell microscopy. What spewed out of this single cell was a strand Scientists wondered how this enormous molecule could fit into a single cell, and how an enzyme could duplicate that manage to do this in under 20 minutes, the doubling time of the organism? Over half a century later, those questions continue to intrigue us. In this chapter we discuss the structure and organization of prokaryotic genomes, as well as the mechanisms for their replication. We examine how microbial enzymes and becomes protein. Transcription converts a “readable” form called “reads” the information Transcription and translation are discussed in Chapter 8. The remainFIGURE 7.1  Marcelo ing chapters of Part 2 disTolmasky of McGill University cuss gene recombination collaborated with Rodrigo and transmission (ChapReyes-Lamothe in discovering ter 9), the regulation of that plasmids and chromogene expression (Chapsomes occupy separate spaces ter 10), the specialized in a bacterial cell. 

genetic mechanisms of viruses (Chapter 11), and the various molecular techniques and technologies that spawned the field of synthetic biology (Chapter 12). 

Where do genetic traits come from, and how are they passed from one generation to the next? The ability of plants and animals to transfer genetic traits was known information. Early researchers understood the Mendelian model of gene inheritance and how it dictated the passage of traits from parent to offspring in eukaryotes—a gene transmission mechanism known as vertical gene transfer. Bacteria, however, appeared to operate differently, because in addition to vertical gene transfer, bacteria showed horizontal gene transfer, the movement of genetic information from one cell into another. The study of horizontal gene transfer in bacteria ultimately led to the discovery of horizontal transfer throughout animals and plants. Relative to bacteria, however, animals and plants horizontally longer generation times. Mechanisms of horizontal gene transfer are discussed in Chapter 9. 

Frederick Griffith (1879–1941) discovered that he could kill mice with live but seemingly harmless (avirulent) Streptococcus pneumoniae, but only if he coinjected the mice with dead cells from a virulent strain of the bacteria. Something from the dead bacteria transformed the innocuous live bacteria into killers. This form of horizontal gene transfer, called transformation, led to the discovery in 1944 that genetic information is embedded in Section 1.6). Another example of transformation is the toxic shock gene that can be moved horizontally among strains of Staphylococcus aureus. As a result of these and many other experiments, we now appreciate that chromosomes are made of contiguous packets of information, called genes. Genes are units of information composed of a sequence at the level of introductory biology, see eAppendix 1.) on the other hand, regulates the expression of a structural proteins that can activate or inactivate that promoter. As noted previously, the entire genetic complement of genome. Our primary goal in Chapter 7 is to convey how more fully in Chapters 8 and 10. 

Thus, even though the bacterial chromosome could not be seen, conjugation allowed genes to be mapped relative to each other according to time of transfer. For example, a donor strain that can synthesize the amino acids alanine and proline can directly transfer the encoding genes to a recipient cell defective in those genes. The transfer process is nonspecific, so any gene can be transferred in this way. Completion of transfer also requires recombination, acid synthesis enables the formerly defective recipient to form colonies on minimal media lacking either amino acid. Because chromosome transfer takes time and starts from a fixed point, not all genes are transferred simultaneously. It Because eukaryotic chromosomes are linear, scientists initially expected that bacterial chromosomes would be linear too. However, the early genetic maps drawn from conjugation experiments just would not fit together in a manner consistent with a linear model—for the simple reason that study at the time, is circular. We now know that most bacteria and archaea have circular chromosomes. Some species, however, have linear chromosomes, or even a mix of linear and circular chromosomes. Examples include the Lyme disease agent Borrelia burgdorferi, and the plant tumor agent Agrobacterium tumefaciens (Table 7.1). The size range of genomes across the phylogenetic tree, from viruses to humans, is enormous. Generally speaking, the simpler the organism, the smaller its genome. At some independence and lives only if it has parasitized another organism. For examples, see the evolution of mitochondria and chloroplasts (Section 17.6) and obligate intracellular pathogens (Chapter 23). 

Chromosomes of bacteria and archaea can be circular or linear, as can plasmids. genes and regulatory sequences. 

Do microbial genomes differ in structure or functional organization? New techniques for constructing physical maps of genomes and determining the sequences of whole genomes have revealed tremendous diversity in the size and organization of prokaryotic genomes. 

Bacterial and archaeal chromosomes range in size from approximately 130 to 14,000 kilobase pairs (kb). For comparison, eukaryotic chromosomes range from 2,900 kb (Microsporidia) to over 100,000,000 kb (flowering plants). The human genome is over 3,000,000 kb. 

noncoding regions include enhancer sequences needed expanses that separate enhancers. Enhancer sequences can and sometimes within, a gene needed to activate the gene’s expression. Most of the noncoding spacers appear to be remnants of genes lost over the course of evolution and pieces of defunct viral genomes. Noncoding regions, however, may provide raw material for future evolution. In contrast to many eukaryotes, bacteria and archaea that resemble the introns of eukaryotes. 

by color coding, whether a gene is specific to Salmonella or is present in Salmonella and seven other species in the family and inward indicate GC-rich and AT-rich areas, respectively). 

are controlled by a single regulatory sequence located in from the operon contains all the information from all the genes in that operon and is called “polycistronic.” On a functional level, a collection of genes and operons at different positions on the chromosome form a regulon when they have a unified biochemical purpose (such as amino acid biosynthesis) and are regulated by the same regulatory protein of these functional genetic units are discussed in Chapter 10. 

This gene is transcribed to form the regulatory protein. 

In bacteria, the names of genes are given as a threeletter abbreviation of the encoded enzyme’s name (for example, the gene dam encodes deoxyadenosine methylase) or the function of related genes (for example, genes designated proA, proB, and proC encode enzymes involved in proline biosynthesis). Bacterial gene names are written in Italics with lowercase letters. For example, the genes involved in catabolizing lactose are the lac genes. If several genes are involved in the pathway, a fourth letter, capitalized, is used. Thus, the three genes lacZ, lacY, and lacA are all associated with lactose catabolism. When speaking of a gene product, a nonItalic (roman) font is used, and the first letter is capitalized. Thus, lacZ is the gene and LacZ is the protein product of that gene. 

segment containing a single gene producing a monocistronic message (which codes for one protein) and an operon of three containing genes and operons coordinately controlled by a single regulatory protein. 

molecules isolated from different genes when they are mixed together at very high concentrations of salt? Hint: High salt concentrations favor bonding between hydrophobic groups. 

diphtheriae, the cause of diphtheria. The DtxR dimer (pair signals to the bacteria that they are in an environment outside a human host. Gene regulation is discussed further in Chapter 10. of a sequence. More energy is required to break the three a higher denaturing temperature than does similar-sized change around a single chromosome. is exploited in a number of molecular techniques (see the discussion of the polymerase chain reaction in Section 7.6). Note, however, that bacteria and archaea growing at The role of DNA-binding proteins in microbial survival is the subject of considerable research. 

Compacted into a Nucleoid one strand, or over 9 million, counting both strands. This is a huge molecule. At the normal pH of the cell (7.8), all the phosphates in the backbone (all 9 million of them) are unprotonated and negatively charged, so this one molecule contributes greatly to the overall negative charge of the cytoplasm. that an intact, healthy cell must compact a huge bundle of comprises a large portion of a bacterial cell’s dry mass, about 3%–4%. Although packaging 3% of a cell’s dry weight confined only to ribosome-free areas of the cell, so the chromosome-packing density reaches about 15 mg/ml. In keep from getting hopelessly tangled? domains collectively called the nucleoid (see Section 3.4). Unlike the compact nucleus of eukaryotes, the bacterial nucleoid is distributed throughout the cytoplasm. 

Pass a section of break; then reseal. 

by (1) cleaving both strands at one site in the molecule, (2) passing an intact part of the molecule between ends of the cut site, and (3) reconnecting the free ends. 

supercoiling are called topoisomerases. To maintain topoisomerases are typically single proteins that cleave only shown in strand of a negatively supercoiled double helix and holds on to both ends of the break. The release of intrinsic energy allows the enzyme to pass the intact strand through the break and re-ligate the strand, which reintroduces a helical turn. The molecule is released with one less negative tetramer composed of two GyrA and two GyrB proteins. helix. Then GyrA, in an ATP-dependent process catalyzed by GyrB, introduces a double-strand break, passes a cleaves one strand of a double helix, holds on to both ends, and . . . 

The helix winds in this region, resulting in one less negative supercoil. 

GyrA ATPase passes the intact double-stranded section through the double-strand break. 

GyrA re-joins the at the other end to allow the strand that has passed through to exit. 

GyrB grabs one section (represented by cylinder). 

has transported a second duplex (the multicolored rosette) through the break. 

introduces positive supercoils into the chromosome. It is has extra turns, it takes more energy (heat) to separate the strands. 

nalidixic acid–resistant cells that contain mutations in gyrA still viable? 7.4 Bacterial cells contain many enzymes that can degrade like Borrelia burgdorferi (the causative agent in Lyme disease) avoid degradation? 

involves over 20 proteins coming together in a complex machine. Operation of the replication complex is all the more remarkable, considering that some bacteria, such as thermophilic Bacillus species that live in hot springs, can double their population in less than 15 minutes. important to understand because they provide targets for new antibiotics and tools for biotechnology, such as the in the human genome, defects in which produce inherited human diseases, such as xeroderma pigmentosum, that predispose the carrier to certain cancers. 

eukaryotic genome, while prokaryotes have very little and pyrimidine nucleotides in which phosphate links the 5′ carbon of one nucleotide with the 3′ carbon of the next in the chain. The result is a double helix containing a deep major groove and a more shallow minor groove. Hydrogen bonding and interactions between the stacked bases hold together complementary strands organized nucleoid. 

To replicate a molecule containing millions of base pairs poses formidable challenges. How does replication begin and end? How is accuracy checked and maintained? 

two replication forks. Replication is called “semiconservative” because one parental strand is conserved and inherited by each daughter cell genome. It is called “bidirectional” because it begins at a fixed origin and progresses in opposite directions. 

two phosphodiester backbones of the double helix are antiparallel, then how are both strands of a moving replication fork synthesized simultaneously′ One strand presents no problem, because it is synthesized in a 5′-to-3′ direction toward the fork, but synthesizing the other new strand in a 5′-to-3′ direction would seem to dictate that it move away from the fork (Fig. 7.13). How is this possible? 

1. Replication begins at origin. 

phases: (1) initiation, which is the melting (unwinding) of complex; (2) elongation, which is the sequential addition Replication from a single origin. Replication in bacteria from the origin; see Fig. 7.13, step 1) until it terminates at defi ned termination (ter) sites located on the opposite side of the molecule. Once the process has begun, the cell genome is critical. If it starts too soon, the cell accumulates unneeded chromosome copies; if it starts too late, the dividing cell’s septum “guillotines” the chromosome, killing both daughter cells. Consequently, elaborate fail-safe mass, generation time, and cellular health, making the timing of initiation remarkably precise. 

Some single-celled microbes have chromosomes with more than one origin. The archaeon Sulfolobus acidocaldarius, for instance, has a single chromosome with three replication origins. 

2. Replication bubble forms. Replication forks progress in opposite directions. 

3. One strand at each fork is synthesized continuously 5′ to 3′. 

4. Second strand at each fork is synthesized discontinuously in Okazaki fragments 5′ to 3′. 

5. Replication ends at terminus. 

1. DnaA-ATP proteins bind to the repeated 9-mer sequences within oriC. 

2. Binding of DnaA leads to strand separation at the 13-mer repeats. 

ring and place the ring around the single-stranded (ss) helicase leads to release of the helicase loader. 

enzymes loads a sliding clamp onto each leading-strand synthesize lagging strand primers. 

Leading-strand synthesis begins and continues to the end of the template. At each lagging strand, a sliding clamp is then loaded. 

chromosome replication is outlined in After initiation of replication, a replication bubble forms at the origin. The bubble contains two replication forks that move in opposite directions around the chromosome strand can be synthesized continuously until the terminus 5′ to 3′, the other daughter strand has to be synthesized discontinuously, in stages—seemingly backward relative to this discontinuously synthesized strand are called Okazaki fragments, after the Japanese scientists, Reiji and Tsuneko Okazaki, who discovered them. As we will discuss later, the Okazaki fragments are progressively stitched together to make a continuous, unbroken strand. Ultimately, the two replicating forks meet at the terminal sequence (step 5), and the two daughter chromosomes separate. about 40 minutes. Chromosome-partitioning processes then move each chromosome to different ends of the cell so that a cell wall can form at midcell (the cell “equator”). Once the cell wall is complete (the amount of time varies but is generally about 20 minutes), the two daughter cells, with their new chromosomes, can separate. So you might imagine the whole process from the start of replication to answer is that in fast-growing cells, a partially replicated chromosome can begin new rounds of replication even before the first round is complete. Now let’s examine each step in molecular detail to answer some important questions about this mechanism. 

What determines when replication begins? Initiation is presents an overview of the initiation process. 

Movement of newly replicated origins. The that binds only at oriC. 

to bind the two replication forks formed during initiation at the fork, and then it disengages and leaves. fork. After loading DnaB at the origin, DnaC is released nucleases patrolling the cell and preventing re-formation receives incoming deoxyribonucleotides. Consequently, loaded at each of the two replication forks. based—an exciting model of molecular evolution, discussed in Chapter 17. 

starts in the center of the cell, the newly replicated origins (green fluorescence) move toward opposite cell poles. Moving origins toward the cell poles is part of the partitioning mechanism that gets chromosomes out of harm’s way before the division septum forms at midcell (described below). 

replicates the leading strand. SSBs cover and helicase remains on the lagging strand, unwinding the dsDNA moving into the replisome complex. 

the lagging strand, which loops out after passing through the polymerase. 

approximately 1,000 bases, another lagging strand. 

4. When the lagging-strand polymerase bumps into the 5′ end of a previously synthesized and the clamp is disengaged. 

(in nucleotides per second) if the genome is 4.6 million base pairs, replication is bidirectional, and the chromosome completes a round of replication in 40 minutes? 

together, staple one end of the duplex to a piece of cardboard, and then pull the two strands apart from the free end. Notice the supercoiling that takes place beyond, or downstream of, the moving fork.) The increasing torsional (see Fig. 7.11) that is located ahead of the fork, removing the positive supercoils as they form. 

The clamp on the leading strand does not need replacing. 

that clamp and begins synthesizing another Okazaki fragment. 

bound to the ter region, where would you expect fluorescence to appear in the cell with two origins? 

Replication forms a linked catenane of sister chromosomes. 

called Tus (terminus utilization substance) binds to these sequences. Tus stops DnaB helicase activity and, thus, polymerization. Multiple terminator sites ensure that the on whether replication of one fork has lagged behind replication of the other. 

coli chromosomes toward opposite cell poles. The terminator region remains in the center of the cell until after it is replicated. The replicating chromosome, then, takes on the appearance of a butterfly with its wings outstretched toward either cell pole. This configuration must avoid making a cell division septum too early or risk slicing through its still-replicating chromosomes. How bacteria prevent this disaster is discussed in Special Topic 7.1. 

Replication is semiconservative, with newly synthesized strands lengthening in a 5′-to-3′ direction. Replication consists of initiation, elongation, and termination attached to the cell membrane. Initiation depends on the mass and size of the growing cell. It is controlled by the accumulation of initiator and repressor proteins and by methylation at the origin. Elongation requires that primase (DnaG) must lay as a dimer at each replication fork, and a sliding clamp accidental errors during polymerization. Termination involves stopping replication forks halfway around the chromosome at ter sites that inhibit helicase (DnaB) activity. Ringed catenanes formed at the completion of replication are separated by the proteins XerC and XerD. 

with bacterial genomes: horizontally transferred plasmids and the genomes of bacteriophages (viruses that infect bacterial cells). Plasmid-encoded functions can contribute to the physiology of the cell (for example, antibiotic will integrate into the bacterial genome (see Section 9.2). Eukaryotic genomes and the genomes of eukaryotespecific plasmids and viruses also share proteins and undergo chromosomal interactions, such as insertions of section we discuss aspects of plasmid replication. Discussion of bacteriophage replication can be found in Chapter 6 and eTopic 7.2. 

Consequently, the nucleoid exclusion near the origin and will also bind to part of FtsZ, as long as the nucleoid remains near midcell (Fig. 2). Part of the evidence for this model is shown in Du and Lutkenhaus examined cells whose nucleoids were stuck near midcell because of a parC mutation and estimated the frequency of septum formation sites. Comparisons express native SlmA but have an altered FtsZ that will polymerize even when bound to SlmA. Wildtype SlmA+ cells rarely formed inappropriate septa over their nucleoids quently formed inappropriate septa which ParCts will not help sister nucleoids move toward cell poles. Nucleoids were stained of FtsZ that was resistant to SlmA also exhibited higher numbers of data support the proposed model of of University of Kansas Medical Center. SlmA in preventing septal formation. So how does a septum ever form? Design an experiment in which fluorescently tagged proteins of replication, SlmA will be stripped from FtsZ as the siscould be used in vivo to confirm SlmA-FtsZ interaction. ter origins and chromosomes segregate toward opposite cell poles following replication. With the nucleoids nestled Du, Shishen, and Joe Lutkenhaus. 2014. SlmA antagonism at either end of the dividing cell and SlmA removed from of FtsZ assembly employs a two-pronged mechanism like FtsZ, septum formation can safely proceed and the cell MinCD. PLoS Genetics 10:e1004460. can divide. 

RepA dimer at plusstrand origin. RepA covalently binds to 5′ end of nick. 

replication (ori) and genes encoding resistance to ampicillin (amp) and tetracycline (tet). 

7. Single-strand origins are used by minus strand. 

6. RepA releases circularized old plus strand. 

only one of the two replication strategies (bidirectional or unidirectional), a few can use either one, depending on the circumstance of the cell. 

ParM molecules forms filaments on plasmid. 

Plasmids diffuse around the cell. 

Filaments connect two plasmids. 

Plasmid hitting cell pole triggers filament detachment and depolymerization. 

Stable filaments polymerize to drive plasmids toward opposite poles. 

for modern hospitals, where plasmids carrying multiple drug resistance genes are transmitted from harmless bacteria into pathogens. On the other hand, plasmids (such as pBR322) containing drug resistance genes are the workhorses of genetic technology and have benefited society Other kinds of host survival genes carried by plasmids include genes providing resistance to toxic metals, genes encoding toxins that aid pathogenesis, and genes encoding proteins that enable symbiosis. These are discussed in later chapters. Most of the genes involved in the nitrogen-fixing symbiosis of Rhizobium, for example, are plasmid-borne. Far from being freeloaders, plasmids often contribute significantly to the physiology of an organism. Some plasmids, however, use what could be called “strong-arm measures” to ensure their maintenance. These plasmids come equipped with self-preservation genes, called “addiction modules,” that force the host cell to keep the plasmid or die (eTopic 7.3). 

Plasmids have played a pivotal role in evolution because of how easily they can be passed back and forth between bacterial species. This is particularly evident today in the spread of antibiotic resistance, whose genetic basis is often a plasmid-encoded gene. Some plasmids are self-transferable via conjugation, a process that requires cell-to-cell contact to move the plasmid from a donor cell to a recipient (as discussed in Section 9.1). Other plasmids are incapable of conjugation if a self-transferable plasmid resides in the same cell. In this case, the conjugation mechanism produced by one plasmid will act on the other plasmid. Any plasmid released from dead cells can also be taken up intact by some bacteria in a process called transformation (see Section 9.1). Finally, plasmids can be transmitted in nature by accidentally being packaged into bacteriophage head coats—in other words, by bacteriophage transduction (also covered in Section 9.1). 

Plasmids can be transferred between cells. 

The chromosomes of eukaryotic microbes such as protists and algae have much in common with those of prokaryotes. both usually replicate bidirectionally. Nevertheless, important differences exist as well, particularly in genome structure. Eukaryotic chromosomes are linear and contained within a nucleus, and their replication involves mitosis (reviewed in eAppendix 2). Archaeal chromosomes, similar to bacterial chromosomes, are circular and lack a nuclear membrane, but archaeal proteins involved in transcription and replication appear more eukaryotic than bacterial. 

Overall, the genomes of eukaryotic nuclei are larger than those of bacteria, sometimes by several orders of magnitude. For example, Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Mycoplasma pneumoniae genomes are 12,052 kb and 800 kb, respectively. Eukaryotes typically have duplicate copies of multiple chromosomes (diploid number ranges between 10 and 100). All eukaryotic chromosomes are linear, whereas many, if not most, bacterial chromosomes are circular. Eukaryotic chromosomes use mitosis to replicate and segregate to daughter cells (see Appendix 1). Each eukaryotic chromosome has numerous origins of replication that collectively generate hundreds of replication bubbles, although not all of them “fire” during each replication cycle. Termination zones essential to bacterial chromosomes are not found in eukaryotes. The ends of eukaryotic chromosomes, called telomeres, have a special problem replicating. Because their chromosomes are linear, eukaryotes cannot replicate their 3′ ends the 5′ ends of a chromosome (the result of lagging-strand synthesis) are always shorter than 3′ ends. Left like this, chromosomes would become progressively shorter and genetic information would be lost. The solution to this chromosomes. Extension of the 3′ end by telomerase will the 5′ end of the chromosome. The process prevents the loss of genetic information during division. 

Section 17.2). The reverse transcriptase may also be the evolutionary source of retroviruses (see eTopic 6.1). 

Bacteria with linear chromosomes do not have telomerases. How do they replicate their 3′ ends? Some cap the ends of their chromosomes with covalently bound terminal proteins that closed hairpin ends (essentially making one long, circular, singlestranded molecule). The ends appear to recombine after being replicated (Borrelia). 

part of a pseudogene’s sequence is similar to that of a gene with a known function. Also note that some pseudogenes express mRNA, but the proteins produced have no obvious function. 

By themselves, promoters of eukaryotic genes have very transcriptional activity. Enhancer sequences act at long distances from promoters, and scientists suspect that once enhancers became important, it was necessary to place other, unrelated but adjacent promoters. 

and ribosomal components more closely resemble those to eukaryotic counterparts that help position and activate of eukaryotic-like transcription and translation in archaea is that archaea are resistant to antibacterial antibiotics that target those processes. Oddly, these organisms have two different types of the other unique to archaea. The archaeal origin of the replication sequence also shows greater similarity to those of eukaryotes. Finally, it should be noted that archaeal genomes encode certain unique components, such as the metabolic pathway of methanogenesis. (For more on archaea, see Chapter 19.) What experimental data allow us to make such comparisons? Overwhelmingly, we rely on new data from the growing number of microbial genomes sequenced (over 30,000 as of 2015). Comparison of genomes has revolutionized our understanding of evolutionary relationships among microbes. and amplification by the polymerase chain reaction—actually harness the molecular apparatus used by bacteria to replicate or protect their own chromosomes. 

Histones (eukaryotic DNA-packing proteins) play a critical role in forming chromosomes. sequences that make up a large portion of eukaryotic Archaeal chromosomes resemble those of bacteria in closely related to eukaryotic enzymes. 

How do we study a genome? We have just described the and the fundamentals of genomic analysis. But what about plasmid vehicles, and reading their nucleotide sequences. These are the techniques that drive the genomic revolution. 

reliable purification methods can be used to isolate it. bacterial cells. The cells may be lysed using lysozyme to degrade the peptiB. Eukaryotic doglycan of the cell wall, followed by treatment with detergents to dissolve the cell membranes. Lysozyme is an enzyme that cleaves the bond linking residues of peptidoglycan. Once the cell contents are released, most proteins are removed by being precipitated in a high-salt solution. The precipitated proteins are then removed by centrifuDNA remaining proteins are washed out of the column because Sulfolobus also show homology to eukaryotic counterparts. 

What seemed to be an esoteric line of research, exploring ized biology. One of the ways bacteria rid themselves of sequences called restriction sites (usually 4–8 bp long). Different species of bacteria use restriction endonucleases molecular biology recognize restriction sites that are (–) pole four to six bases in length. Notice that the sequence Samples are of each of these restriction sites is a palindrome in loaded here. which the top and bottom strands read the same in move toward tion site enables a restriction endonuclease to attack (+) pole. both strands of a duplex using the same substrate recognition site. Restriction endonucleases cleave the phosphodiester backbones of opposite strands at locations either near or within the center of the restriction site. The cut may produce blunt ends or staggered ends. In staggered ends, (+) pole ends are also called “cohesive ends” because the protruding Target sequences of sample enzymes. The names of these enzymes ism. The ability of cohesive ends from different organisms protect their chromosome with a methylating enzyme (a cipitated from aqueous solution by the addition of ethanol strands of restriction sites recognized by a specific restricand salt because ethanol removes water associated with DNA’s phosphoryl groups (negatively charged), which site if either one of the strands is methylated. Thus, newly tralized, precipitates out of the polar water-ethanol soluone strand, the template, remains methylated at all times. 

AluI and HaeIII produce blunt ends. 

BamHI, HindIII, and EcoRI produce “sticky” ends. 

with one type of restriction modification system will not be protected upon entering another cell even though it is methylated, will not be protected, because it will not be methylated in the right more likely to be destroyed than to undergo protective methylation. Agarose gels can be used to Plasmid vector ated by restriction endonuclease digestion (agarose-gel electrophosite resis is explained in eAppendix 3). Cleavage sites 1 with the same restriction endoby EcoRI travel to the positive pole during electrophoresis. Pore sizes in the agarose are such that they allow small molecules to speed through the gel, while larger molecules fragments in this gel separate on the basis of size—the smaller the fragment, the farther it travels Chimeric plasmid with single-strand ments are of different sizes, so they travel different distances in the gel. The sum of the sizes of the fragments in each lane yields the size of the original, intact, uncut molecule. 

molecules. If you ran a highly supercoiled plasmid in one lane of the gel and the same plasmid with one phosphodiester bond cut in another lane, where would the two molecules end up relative to each other in this type of gel? 

1. Plasmid and foreign restriction endonuclease (EcoRI) to produce identical cohesive ends. 

2. Cut vector and are mixed. Cohesive ends anneal. 

months later, the strategy, called cloning, worked. This seminal work was published by Boyer and Cohen along with students Annie Chang and Robert Helling. Over the next decade, the technique became known as “gene cloning,” an immensely powerful technology that thrust biology into the genomic era. For many years, scientists used the restriction endonuclease strategy discovered by Boyer, Cohen, Chang, and Helling to randomly generate genome libraries containing all the genes in an organism’s chromosome. Today, sequenced within a few days—a process that once took years. Once obtained, the sequence can be analyzed using bioinformatics, a computer-assisted process that predicts the beginnings and ends of genes, determines the amino acid sequences of gene-encoded proteins, and forecasts probable functions for those proteins (Chapter 8 describes bioinformatics in more detail). Interesting genes can then plasmids using restriction endonucleases. The cloned gene can be reintroduced into mutant or wild-type organisms using various techniques and the effects on physiology or pathogenicity determined. 

a gene from one organism to another without the cloned gene sequence being degraded? 

Imagine having the ability to amplify one copy of a gene into millions more within one or two hours. The technique, design of specific oligonucleotide primers (usually between reaction mixture must undergo repeated cycles of heating to thermophile Thermus aquaticus, was originally used for this purpose, but polymerases from other thermophiles are also cooling cycles, a machine called a thermocycler is used to reproducibly and rapidly deliver these cycles. It is important seemingly obscure class of microorganisms: extremophiles. many purposes. Primers can be engineered to contain specific restriction sites that simplify subsequent cloning, as involving several primer sets, can be used to detect multiple pathogens in a single reaction (see eAppendix 3). 

30 seconds: separates strands. 

Primers annealed. 

Taq polymerase replicates sequence. 

sheared by sonication, fragments of 100– 300 bp are isolated. 

2. Different adapters are ligated to each end. 

3. Separate randomly bind to solid surface. 

4. Fragment ends anneal to nearby oligos, which serve as primers to amplify the 5. Double-stranded bridges are denatured to single strands that remain attached to the surface. Free ends anneal with other surfacebound oligos, and amplification is repeated. 

base for the natural one, at which point the chain stops varying length, each one truncated at a different adenine position. How the tagged fragments are used to determine sequence is described in eAppendix 3. The Sanger method has been replaced by even more rapid techniques, all of which include an element of the Sanger chain termination approach. 

The old way of sequencing genomes was to randomly clone separately sequence each fragment. It took months, if not years, to sequence an entire genome. Today, new sequencing technologies, called “next-generation sequencing,” have combined the power of robotics, computers, and fluidics such that an entire bacterial genome can be sequenced within days. One of these techniques, pyrosequencing, is described in eTopic 7.5. The most used technique today is called sequencing by synthesis (a technology developed by Solexa, a company now part of Illumina, Inc.); the Illumina process is outlined in Basically, the genome to be sequenced is sonically fragmented into 100- to 300-bp segments, and different linker oligonucleotides are ligated to each end (Fig. 7.30, steps 1 and 2). Small fragments are used because the technique can sequence only 100– 300 bp from any one fragment. Strands of each fragment are then separated and the mixture added to an optical flow cell. The fragments, millions of them, are randomly fixed to the solid surface (step 3). Each individual fragment sticks to a different area of the cell. The glass surface also has a dense lawn of oligonucleotides fixed at their 5′ ends to the glass surface. These oligonucleotides are complementary to the fragment linker ends but do not hybridize to them at this point. 

converted into a tight cluster of identical fragments through a series of so-called bridge amplifications (Fig. 7.30, steps 4 and 5). Ends of each fragment anneal to nearby matched oligos (fixed to the glass surface), which then serve as primers to amplify the fragments further. Multiple amplifications result in millions of different ssDNA fragment clusters dotting each lane of each slide (step 6). All clusters are simultaneously sequenced in a repetitive series of single-step, reversible chain termination reactions that attach fluorescently labeled nucleotides one at a time to the clusters (Fig. 7.30, steps 7 and 8). Because each of the molecules in that cluster will have the same tagged base added and will fluoresce the same color. Note that the sequence of either strand can be determined by adding one or the other primer. After a base is added, a snapshot captures the colors, which reveal the bases added to each cluster (step 9). Next, the fluorescent marker (fluor) is removed from the growing chain, which also reverses chain termination, and the slide is again flooded with tagged bases (step 10). Snapshots taken after each sequencing round sequentially capture the fluorescent colors of each cluster as each base is added. The old Sanger dideoxy method could sequence 1,000 bp per template but required considerable time, effort, and space to do so. In contrast, each flow-cell lane in the bases). Each read is short (about 100 bases per template), but because millions of templates are read, the massively parallel sequencing yields hundreds of millions of bases. Computer programs then find the overlaps among the millions of sequence results and assemble them into the sequence of the entire chromosome. With this technology, you can have your own genome sequenced for less than $1,000. 

Sequencing byy synthesis type is annealed aled to free linkers att the he 3 end of the e clu ssDNA fragments. m ntts. 

Sequencing is done in repetitive o one-step cycles. tagged nucleotides 9. Unincorporated nucleotides are removed. Image is captured. Each cluster is seen as a ent do ot. Different e co s ntt d fferentt nu 10. Fluor and terminator are removed, and the flow cell is again flooded with the sequencing reactants that will add the next base in the sequence. As o the color is captured by laser snapshot. 

colored fluorophore and a reversible terminator. Polymerase adds one nucleotide, which will be the same for all members of the cluster. 

How the information from sequences is mined is discussed further in Chapter 8. Many important discoveries population) is embedded within the genome of Drosophila, the common fruit fly. The evolutionary implications of this discovery are under intense investigation. 

he cell accesses the vast store of data in its genome using tiny molecular machines. One fold properly and somehow find its correct cellular or extracellular location. Proteins that have outlived their usefulness must be destroyed and their amino acids recycled. In Chapter 8 we explain how the cell makes proteins and guides their fate. What emerges is a picture of remarkable biomolecular integration, controlled to maintain balanced growth and ensure survival. 

genes coupling requires a protein to link the ribosome to a prevents premature termination of transcription. 

How have your structural biology studies altered our view of transcription and protein folding? 

Transcription includes a series of transient intermediates that serve as targets for regulation. Structural analysis allows us to visualize these elusive states. We showed that factor RfaH change in which an entire domain refolds from an alpha helix into a beta barrel. This finding overturns the “one sequence–one fold” paradigm for proteins and suggests the existence of other “transformer” proteins. 

What future applications do you see for your team’s discovery? 

Dramatic alpha-to-beta refolding of prion proteins underlies pathological processes that cause some neurodegenerative diseases. The RfaH model of fold conversion could help guide the development of therapies for these devastating diseases. 

(left) and Marshall Nirenberg (right) were the first to crack the contributor to the genetic code experiments, also helped develop a new gene sequence with hundreds of thousands of known genes. These comparisons help predict for any given microbe what genes it has, what proteins it makes, and even species also allow us to pose new questions about microbial life, disease, and evolution. 

the yellow line. Subunits (αI, αII, β, β′, and ω) are color-coded dark green, medium green, light green, cyan, and gold, respectively. The function of the omega (ω) subunit is currently unclear. Recent evidence suggests it may have a role in sigma factor competition for core polymerase. areas of sigma are labeled sigma 1 through sigma 4 (σ1–σ4). Sigma factor interacts with the alpha (α), beta (β), and beta-prime (β′) subunits. 

(see the dotted black outline in Fig. 8.3). The bound sigma of a different subset of genes. However, a single core polymerase complex can bind only one sigma factor at a time. Hundreds of sigma factor genes have been sequenced from numerous species of bacteria and archaea. Although they all encode somewhat different amino acid sequences, there are enough sequence and structural similarities to make them recognizable as sigma factors. Promoters. Every cell has a “housekeeping” sigma factor that keeps essential genes and pathways operating. In bacteria, that factor is sigma-70, so named because it is a 70-kilodalton (kDa) protein (its gene designation is rpoD). 

–10 region –12 region sigma-70 (σ70)-dependent promoters from different genes. Dots were added to help visualize alignments: biotin synthesis (bioB); cytochrome o (cyoA); galactose utilization (galE); (rpoD); small-subunit ribosome protein (rpsL); tryptophan synthesis (trp); glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase (zwf, zwischenferment). Yellow indicates conserved nucleotides; brown of σ70-dependent promoters (red-screened letters indicate nucleotide positions where different promoters show a high degree of affect promoter strength (lac genes encode proteins that are used to metabolize the carbohydrate lactose). Some mutations can cause decreased transcription (called “down mutations”), while others cause increased promoter sequences recognized by different sigma factors. 

readjust its physiology, sometimes very quickly. Large readjustments can be made when a single sigma –10 region factor coordinately (simultaneously) activates a required set of genes. Gene sets controlled by different sigma factors include those dealing with nitrogen metabolism, flagelβ lar synthesis, heat stress, starvation, sporulation, and many other physiDirection ological responses. How does a sigma factor conpolymerase trol gene expression? In response to a given environment, microbes will increase synthesis or decrease of the appropriate sigma in Chapter 10). The resulting high concentration of after the transcription bubble is formed. The base at position +1 is the first base transcribed. the specialty sigma factor will dislodge other sigma factors from core Some positions in a consensus sequence are highly conto the promoters of genes best suited for growth or survival served, meaning that the same base is found in that posiin the new environment. tion in every promoter. Other, less conserved positions can be occupied by different bases. Few promoters actually have the most common base at every position. Even highly Thought Questions efficient promoters usually differ from the consensus at one or two positions. 8.1 If each sigma factor recognizes a different pro–35 region moter, how does the cell manage to transcribe genes that respond to multiple stresses, each involving a different sigma factor? 

helix? The phosphodiester backbone is quite uniform, and the interior of paired bases appears inaccessible. However, noncovalent bonding) side groups that protrude from the complex positioned at a promoter and the points (–10 sequences, called regions (see Fig. 8.3, σ1–σ4). Part of region 2 of the sigma-70 family recognizes –10 sequences, whereas region 4 recognizes the –35 sites. Part of region Sigma factor control of complex physiological responses. 

8.2 Imagine two different sigma factors with different promoter recognition sequences. What would happen to the overall gene expression profile in the cell if one sigma factor were artificially overexpressed? Could there be a detrimental effect on growth? 8.3 Why might some genes contain multiple promoters, each one specific for a different sigma factor? 

polymerase and a sigma factor, initiates transcription of a are located at –10 and –35 bp upstream of the transcription start site. Dynamic changes in gene expression follow changes in the relative levels of different sigma factors. 

occurs in three stages: 2. Elongation, the sequential addition of ribonucleotides 3. Termination, whereby sequences at the end of the another sigma factor to seek a new promoter. 

from ribonucleoside triphosphates (rNTPs). 

If present, the antibiotic rifamycin will bind to this form of polymerase and prevent formation of the subsequent open complex. 

4. Sigma factor leaves the complex. 

The “energy released” (actually the free energy change) following cleavage of the rNTP triphosphate groups is used Chapter 13.) is read. Another part of the beta-prime cleft is involved in hydrolyzing rNTPs. Deep at the base of the cleft is the active site of polymerization, defined by three evolutionarily conserved aspartate residues that chelate (bond with) polymerization reaction. 

C-rich regions. 

NusA protein (orange), causes termination. 

Contact between Rho causes termination. 

To be useful in medicine, all antibiotics must meet two fundamental criteria: They must kill or retard the growth of a pathogen, and they must not harm the host. Antibiotics used against bacteria, for instance, must selectively attack features of bacterial targets not shared with eukaryotes. Many antibiotics possess highly specific modes of action, binding to and altering the activity of one specific “machine” of one type of cell. 

Side chains were synthesized by addition of amino acids. 

Side chains extend along minor groove. 

human cancers because cancer cells replicate rapidly, but in normal cells too. (Antibiotics are discussed further in Chapter 27.) to reconstruct chimeric molecules. To determine which cell extracts. The component parts of the polymerases were will happen only when the subunit conveying resistance has been added—in this case, the beta subunit. Investigators used this information in subsequent in vitro assays and X-ray crystallography to learn more about the enzymatic mechanism of the beta subunit. 

discussed later, rRNA also forms the catalytic center of the tRNA is the presence of unusual modified bases not found (sRNA). Molecules of sRNA do not encode proteins but are used to regulate the stability or translation of specific discussed in Chapter 10). As will be discussed later in more detail, all mRNA molecules contain untranslated leader regions snap back on themselves to form double-stranded stems and stem loop structures that can obstruct ribosome access and limit translation. Regulatory sRNAs can basepair with these regions in mRNA and either disrupt or stabilize intrastrand stem structures. properties of both tRNA and mRNA (discussed later), and as ribozymes, are usually found associated with proteins in which the enzymatic (catalytic) activity actually resides assumed by proteins. The RNA-world model is discussed in Chapter 17. 

Once a gene has been copied into mRNA, the next stage a sentence in which triplets of nucleotides, called codons, represent individual words, or amino acids (Fig. 8.10). Ribosomes are the machines that read the language of mRNA and convert, or translate, it into protein. Translation involves numerous steps, the first of which is the search by ribosomes for the beginning of an mRNA protein-coding region. Because the code consists of triplet codons, a ribosome must start translating at precisely the right base (in the right frame), or the product will be gibberish. Before we discuss how the ribosome finds the right reading frame, let’s review the code itself and the major players in translation. 

The genetic code. Codons within a single box encode the same amino acid. Color-highlighted amino acids are encoded by codons in two boxes. Stop codons are highlighted red. Often, single-letter abbreviations for amino acids are used to convey protein sequences (see legend above). 

When learning a new language, we need a dictionary that converts words from one language into the other. In the case of gene expression, how do we convert from 20 amino acids? Through painstaking effort, Marshall Nirenberg, Har Gobind Khorana, and colleagues cracked the molecular code and found that each codon (a triplet of normally read as a stop codon but encodes tryptophan in Candida albicans.) In the code presented in we can see that most amino acids have multiple codon synonyms. Glycine (Gly), for example, is translated from four different codons, and leucine (Leu) from six, but methionine (Met) and tryptophan (Trp) each have only one codon. Because more than one codon can encode the same amino acid, the code is said to be degenerate or redundant. Notice that in almost every case, synonymous codons differ only in the last base. How the cell handles this degeneracy (redundancy) in the code will be explained later. 

Four of these act as codons that can mark the beginning of the protein “sentence.” In order of preference, they are Because of its inefficiency in starting translation, the use of are used to begin all proteins, they are not restricted to that role; they also encode amino acids found in the middle of coding sequences. Consequently, there must be something example, marks the start of a protein or resides internally, where it codes for an amino acid (as will be discussed shortly). are equally important, for they tell the ribosome when to stop reading a gene sentence. Called stop codons, they trigger a series of events (to be described later) that dismantle ribosomes from mRNA and release a completed protein. 

There are actually 21 or 22 amino acids found in the proteins of some microbes. The extra amino acids, however, are modifications of one of the basic 20. Selenocysteine, for instance, is synthesized by modifying a serine bound to a tRNA molecule. There is no pool of free selenocysteine in the cell. 

Codon-anticodon pairing. The tRNA anticodon consists of three nucleotides at the base of the anticodon loop. The anticodon hydrogen-bonds with the mRNA codon in an antiparallel fashion. This tRNA is “charged” with an amino acid covalently attached to the 3′ end. 

to establish evolutionary relationships between different species? Hints: 1. Genomes of different species have different from that found in the rest of the genome. 

Attach Amino Acids to tRNA (that is, charged) to the “correct” amino acid (here, arginine). Consequently, each tRNA must be charged with the proper amino acid before it encounters the ribosome. How are amino acids correctly matched to tRNA molecules and affixed to their 3′ ends? The charging of tRNAs is carried out by a set of enzymes called aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases. Each cell has generally 20 of these “match and attach” proteins—one for each amino acid. Some bacteria, however, have only 18, choosing instead to modify already-charged glutamyl-tRNA and aspartyl-tRNA by adding an amine to make glutamine Amino acid and asparagine derivatives. Each aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase recognizes all of the tRNA molecules that transport the same amino acid. for its 1. Formation of enzyme also has a site that recognizes activates amino acid. the target tRNA and an active site that joins the carboxyl group of the Amino acid synthetases) of the tRNA by forming an ester (Fig. 8.14). The tRNA synthetase disenO– 3′ 2′ 2. Ribose hydroxyl at gages after the amino acid 3′ end of tRNA has been attached to the form charged tRNA. tially attached to the 2′ Each aminoacyl-tRNA 3. Charged tRNA bears an amino acid joined by synthetase must recognize 3′ 2′ its own tRNA but not bind to synthetases form amino any other tRNA. Specificity is based on recognizing unique feaform ester tures of the tRNA anticodon loop, each tRNA has its own set of interacyl-tRNA synthetases. At the end of this process, each amino tRNA synthetase. Curved arrows indicate nucleophilic attack by electrons. 

8.5 The synthesis of ribosomal RNAs and ribosomal proteins represents a major energy drain on the cell. How might the cell regulate the synthesis of these molecules when the growth rate slows because amino acids are limiting? Hint: Predict what happens to any translating ribosome when an amino acid is limiting. Look up RelA protein on the Internet. 

green, and yellow, respectively.) Inset: The formation of a peptide and the growing peptide (yellow) exits from a channel formed in the (Fig. 8.17 ). During translation, each tRNA molecule moves through the sites in an assembly-line fashion, first entering at one site, and then moving progressively through the others before being jettisoned from the ribosome. The first position is the aminoacyl-tRNA acceptor The growing peptide is attached to tRNA berthed in the stripped of the polypeptide is located in the exit site into the ribosome and the nascent (that is, growing) peptide emerging from it. 

The ribosome makes the peptide bonds that stitch amino subunit. Contrary to expectation, the peptidyltransferase activity resides not in ribosomal proteins, but in the rRNA. rRNA that is highly conserved across all species (Fig. 8.16 The sequences of ribosomal RNAs from all microbes are very similar, in large part because rRNA plays an important catalytic role in the activities of ribosomes. But there are differences in rRNA sequences that increase in relation to the evolutionary distance between species. As a result, rRNA serves as a molecular clock that measures the approximate time since two species diverged. More information on molecular clocks can be found in Section 17.3. 

Right Reading Frame? 

ribosome that chooses the wrong frame will produce proteins with totally different amino acid sequences. In addition, a shifted reading frame often generates an inadvertent stop codon that prematurely terminates the peptide. So how does the ribosome find the right frame? The key is a of the protein-coding segment of mRNA. The upstream the start codon. This upstream sequence is called the ribosome-binding site or Shine-Dalgarno sequence, after Lynn Dalgarno and her student John Shine at Australian National University, who discovered it in 1974. The Shine-Dalgarno site is complementary to a sequence described in eTopic 8.2. Recall from Section 7.2 that many genes in the bacterial chromosome are arranged in tandem (an operon) and are transcribed together to produce a polygenic (formerly polycistronic) mRNA. Because the beginning of each gene in a polygenic mRNA carries its own ribosome-binding site, different ribosomes can bind simultaneously to the start of each gene. Mutating the first gene in a three-gene operon can halt translation of the first protein, but the second sequence for each has its own ribosome-binding site. 

Eukaryotic ribosomes have a different mechanism for finding the start codon. They generally start translating at the first out of the nucleus and/or to stabilize mRNA. 

prokaryotes, ribosomes attach at mRNA ribosome-binding sites and ribosomes along the chain, which are held together by mRNA (blue tracing). The closer the ribosome is to the 3′ end of the mRNA, the longer the synthesized protein molecules grow. 

genes in the nucleus where internal, noncoding parts of the splicing. The processed transcripts are then transported viruses do the same. However, a small amount of translation is performed in the eukaryotic nucleus, where it can also be coupled to transcription. 

Before we describe the mechanics of translation, it will help of a structural gene (a gene encoding a protein), and the mRNA transcript containing translation signals and the protein-coding sequences. shows the “sense” sequence of the sense strand matches that of the mRNA transcript, but with T’s substituting for U’s. The template region, located between translation start and stop signals (discussed later). Downstream of the translation stop signal trailer sequences help regulate gene expression. As you proceed in this chapter, refer back to to clarify composite genes, the polygenic transcript, and the resulting proteins. 

3. Ribosomes begin translating a few nucleotides codon−the amino terminus of each translated protein. 

steps are repeated: (1) An aminoacyl-tRNA binds to the new amino acid and the growing peptide pre-positioned features of the EF-Tu-GTP–aminoacyl-tRNA complex, ribosomal proteins customize the fit. If the fit is not perfect, the tRNA is rejected. bond is formed between the amino acid moored there For protein synthesis to continue, the ribosome must advance by one codon, which moves the peptidyl-tRNA complete translocation is explained in Special Topic 8.1. uncharged tRNA. molecular mimicry) and because both bind to the same site, the two factors must cycle on and off the ribosome sequentially. Although this process seems incredibly complex, the per second. Scientists have now visualized the staggered movements of a single ribosome as it translates an mRNA molecule (eTopic 8.3). 

3a. Peptidyltransferase activity catalyzes a peptide bond. 

Translocation of the ribosome down an mRNA molecule is a critical part of translation. Ribosomes must move one codon with mRNA, to the new sites. The result is the posttranslocation ribosome in which mRNA has moved one codon and respectively (see Fig. 8.22). One question, however, has troubled structural biologists by Thomas Steitz at Yale University (Fig. 1) discovered the Part of their strategy involved placing a nonhydrolyzPropose three ways that an antibiotic might inhibit protein Cell 160:219–227. translocation, but was tucked away in a manner that did not The authors propose that once some, the GTP-binding site becomes ordered, triggering a to an extended fingerlike form tRNA in the complete translocation of the 3. Previous extends into anticodon ends of tRNAs and moves the associated mRNA down the ribosome. The model is similar to a finger flicking a paper clip along a table. 

subunit to remove uncharged tRNA and prevent reassociation Termination of translation. The completed protein is released, and the ribosome subunits are recycled. 

tmRNA (step 3). The tmRNA is now attached to the nascent section of tmRNA then displaces the old mRNA and is translated (step 5). Translation adds a 10-amino-acid peptide tag to the carboxyl end of the incomplete protein, marking protein release and ribosome disassembly (step 6). Finally, a helper protein (SspB) recognizes the proteolysis tag and brings the useless aberrant polypeptide to the ClpXP protease (discussed in Section 8.4) for degradation. Mutant cells lacking this rescue system often struggle to grow. 

The Shine-Dalgarno sequence in mRNA located before the start codon helps the ribosome find the correct reading frame in the mRNA. 

Triplet nucleotide codons in mRNA encode specific (acceptor) site in the ribosome. 

Transcription and translation are coupled in bacteria and archaea. Initiation of protein synthesis in bacteria requires three initiation factors that bring the ribosomal subunits together on an mRNA molecule. elongates by one amino acid when the ribosome ratchets one codon length along the mRNA. 

dissociate the two ribosomal subunits from the mRNA. tmRNA rescues ribosomes stuck on damaged mRNA that lacks a stop codon. 

Once a protein is made, is it functional? For many proteins, translation is not the last step in producing a functional regulate its activity. Primary, secondary, and tertiary structures of proteins can be modified after the primary protein sequence has been assembled by the ribosomes. And what happens when a protein is damaged or is no longer then recycled into making new proteins. 

described). With some proteins, the N-formyl group is “sliced” removes the entire amino acid. N-formylmethionine (fMet) is important during the course of an infection because fMet peptides are produced only by bacteria and mitochondria, not by archaea or by the cytoplasmic ribosomes of eukaryotes. Our white blood cells can detect low concentrations of fMet necrotic (dying) host cells releasing mitochondria. a protein. Examples of modified bacterial enzymes include glutamine synthetase (adenylylation), isocitrate dehydrogenase (phosphorylation), and a variety of ribosomal proteins (acetylation). These modifications directly regulate enzyme activity (glutamine synthetase and isocitrate dehydrogenase) or alter tertiary structure (ribosomal proteins). 

structural change in molecule. 

GroEL-GroES-ATP, and GroEL-GroES from cryo-EM. The first two panels are side views; the third panel is a top view. GroES is red. 

cause conformational changes within the chamber that do not form rings like the GroEL and GroES chaperones, but can clamp down on a peptide to assist folding. Proteins emerging from a bacterial ribosome enter a folding pathway that involves a hierarchy of these chaperones. 

destabilizing N-terminal amino acids and then presents the protein to the bacterial ClpAP protease (described below). exposed. The protein is progressively degraded into smaller and smaller pieces by a series of these proteases. Initial cuts, usually involving ATP-dependent endoproteases like Lon protein or ClpP, are followed by digestion with tripeptidases and dipeptidases. Endopeptidases cleave proteins somewhere within the sequence but not hydrolysis to help unfold the target protein prior to digestion. Unfolding is necessary for the protein to slide into a barrel-shaped protease such as ClpAP, ClpXP, or ClpYQ in bacteria (Fig. 8.27). Bacterial Clp proteases have a proteolytic core made of two homoheptameric protein rings of either ClpP or ClpY. The ClpP protease has interchangeable homohexameric ATPase caps made of ClpX, ClpA, ClpB, or ClpC, each of which recognizes different substrates. ClpY plays a similar capping role for ClpQ. The accessory proteins recognize 1. DnaK and DnaJ chaperones bind to nascent protein. 

and present different substrate proteins to the ClpP protease, thereby regulating which proteins are degraded. Protein-degrading enzymes are classified as serine, cysteine, or threonine proteases, depending on the key residue in their active sites. Bacterial Clp proteases are structurally similar to eukaryotic proteasomes, which are even more complex proteindegrading machines. Proteasomes are found primarily in eukaryotes and archaea, although a few bacteria, such as the lung pathogen Mycobacterium tuberculosis, have them. Proteasomes are described in eTopic 8.5. Eukaryotic proteasomes recognize and then degrade proteins tagged by ubiquitin, a 76-amino-acid peptide. Some bacterial and viral pathogens exploit ubiquitination to reroute host What happens to proteins damaged by stress? Are they always degraded? Microbes are constantly exposed to environmental insults such as high temperature or pH extremes, which damage proteins and cause them to misfold. As an energy-saving device and to prevent interruption of protein function, injured proteins go through a kind of triage process that evaluates whether they are salvageable or must be destroyed before they can endanger the cell. Chaperones constantly hunt for misfolded (or otherwise damaged) proteins and attempt to refold them. But if the protein is released from a chaperone and remains misfolded, it can, by chance, either reengage the chaperone or bind a protease that destroys it (Fig. 8.28). This fold-or-destroy triage system is essential if a microbe is to survive environmental stress. 

2. Protein may be folded directly to an active form. 

However, a protein that unfolds in response to environmental stress (for example, heat) will undergo the same triage process. 

4. If still not properly folded, the protein may be passed to a protease for degradation. 

The N-terminal amino acid (N-formylmethionine, or fMet) can be removed by methionine aminopeptidase, or just the formyl group can be removed by methionine An inactive precursor protein can be cleaved into a smaller active protein, or other groups can be added to Chaperone proteins help translated proteins fold properly. All proteins in all cells are eventually degraded by specific devices such as proteases or proteasomes. The N-terminal rule describes one type of degradation signal (degron) that marks the half-life of a protein (that is, how long it takes 50% of the protein to degrade). ATP-dependent proteases such as Lon or ClpP usually initiate the degradation of a large protein. Damaged proteins randomly enter chaperone-based refolding pathways or degradation pathways until the protein is repaired or destroyed. 2a. Some integral membrane proteins are inserted directly. 

1. Ribosome is moves to the membrane to interact with FtsY. 

Microorganisms, especially Gram-negative bacteria, face a challenge in delivering proteins to different target locations in the cell. Recall that Gram-negative microbes are surrounded by two layers of membrane (the inner membrane, or cell membrane, and an outer membrane), between which lies a periplasmic space (see Section 3.3). Many proteins are specifically destined for one or another of these cell compartments. Other proteins are secreted completely out of the cell into the surrounding environment (for example, hemolysins that lyse red blood cells). But how do these diverse proteins know where to go? Protein traffic out of the cell is directed by an elaborate set of protein secretion systems. Each system selectively delivers a set of proteins originally made in the cytoplasm to various extracytoplasmic locations. The term “secretion” is used to describe movement of a protein out of the cytoplasm. There are protein secretion systems that move proteins out of the cytoplasm into the cytoplasmic membrane and across the membrane to the periplasm, others that move proteins to the outer membrane, and still others that deliver proteins across both of the membranes and into the surrounding environment. An added complication of protein export is that periplasmic proteins are usually delivered unfolded into the periplasm and require another set of chaperones to fold properly in this cell compartment. 

2b. Periplasmic proteins are secreted via the Sec system. 

Translation can then recommence. Some proteins designated for integral membrane location are inserted directly (top). Other integral membrane proteins and proteins destined for the periplasm are inserted or secreted via the Sec system (bottom). 

that aid in this insertion process. These hydrophobic regions are important because they are compatible with the hydrophobicity of the membrane itself. 12 such membrane-spanning regions, which weave back and forth across the One special export system begins proteins for inner membrane insertion. factor was mentioned earlier as a chaperone.) These two protein traffic pathways converge on a general secretion complex composed of three proteins, collectively called the SecYEG translocon, embedded in the cell (inner) membrane. Depending on the exported protein, SecYEG will assist export to the periplasm or insertion into the membrane. 

1. Trigger factor allows the ribosome to complete synthesizing the pre-secretion protein. 

2. Protein wraps around the pilot protein SecB. 

3. The protein is delivered to SecA and SecYEG. 

4. The protein is pushed through the SecYEG channel to the periplasm. 

5. SecA repeatedly releases the protein, withdraws, and pushes more of the protein through SecYEG. 

6. LepB cleaves the signal sequence. Periplasmic chaperones fold the protein. 

a pre-secretion protein unfolded in the cytoplasm assists the secretion process because sliding an unfolded protein through a membrane is far easier than trying to deliver a folded one. One model has the SecA ATPase acting like a plunger the protein and withdraw (step 5). At this point, SecA can channel. Proteins needed in the periplasm have cleavable signal sequences at their amino-terminal ends. Immediately following translocation of the amino-terminal sequence into the periplasm, the sequence is snipped off by periplasmic signal cleaving completes translocation and releases the mature protein into the periplasm (step 6). Signal peptidases, however, will not cleave signals from proteins destined to stay embedded within the membrane (integral membrane proteins). 

“Translocation” can refer to the movement of a ribosome along mRNA, or it can describe the movement of a protein from one cell compartment (cytoplasm) to another (periplasm). 

in the ExPortal include HtrA (assists in pili formation and covalent attachment of proteins to the cell wall) and sortase (aids maturation of secreted proteins), as well as Sec system components and chaperones. Some proteins that pass through the ExPortal are truly secreted; others are not. The latter proteins have a transmembrane domain (missing in Gram-negative homologs) that anchors the proteins to the Gram-positive cytoplasmic membrane. The anchored protein is extracellular but will not float away. Eukaryotic microbes such as the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae also possess secretion systems that move proteins to the membrane and beyond. However, the eukaryotic Sec systems are more complex and are evolutionarily distinct from bacterial Sec systems. Archaeal secretion systems are actually more similar to those of eukaryotes than to those of bacteria. 

Periplasmic proteins delivered by the Sec system arrive unfolded and inactive. Because the folding chaperones mentioned earlier are cytoplasmic, periplasmic proteins need another set of dedicated periplasmic chaperones to guide their tertiary folding. Another problem with periplasmic proteins is that the oxidizing environTransient pore ment of aerobic cells can oxidize cysteines within allows substrate a protein and produce inappropriate cysteine disulPeriplasm protein to pass. fide bonds that destroy enzyme function. Special TatC TatB TatA oligomer periplasmic disulfide reductases are required to Many periplasmic proteins, however, need certain disulfide bonds to be active, so the periplasm also contains a disulfide bond catalyst (DsbA) to make those bonds. Gram-positive bacteria must also export proteins across the cell membrane and then fold and process them once they are secreted. However, Grampositive bacteria lack a periplasmic space that could facilitate interactions between newly secreted proteins and the accessory processing proteins. Many streptococci solve this problem by clustering their Protein recognized secretion systems and accessory factors at the cytofor transport by plasmic membrane in an anionic phospholipid microdomain called the ExPortal. The ExPortal to peptidoglycan synthesis (Fig. 8.31). Proteins protein translocase, which includes proteins TatA, TatB, and TatC. 

TatA oligomers transiently rupture the membrane bilayer to form temporary pores that allow protein substrates to pass. 

of OMPs as they traverse the periplasm and deliver the proteins to a multisubunit, outer membrane machine called the in the transport of so-called autotransporter proteins such as the attachment protein pertactin of Bordetella pertussis. Autotransporters, which also possess a beta barrel domain, were previously thought to mediate their own transport across the outer membrane unassisted by other transporters. 

membrane systems take over and complete export. Other systems provide nonstop service, delivering the protein directly from the cytoplasm to the extracellular space. The diversity of system design is impressive. It is the result, in some instances, of selective evolutionary pressures appropriating established cell processes (for example, pilus assembly). New systems evolve through the accidental duplication of one set of genes followed by random mutations that innovatively redesign the duplicated set for a new purpose. We know this because the footprints will be covered during the discussion of pathogenesis in Chapter 25. 

the protein secretion systems and make up what is called three protein components, one of which contains an ATPbinding cassette. One component is an outer membrane inner membrane. export systems share the channel protein TolC. TolC is an intriguing protein composed of a beta barrel channel embedded in the outer membrane and an alpha helix Six other protein secretion systems are briefly summarized in Table 8.2. Some move proteins directly from periplasm by the Sec system. They all play important roles in microbial pathogenesis and are more fully discussed in Chapter 25. 

Special protein export mechanisms are used to move proteins to the inner membrane, the periplasm, the outer membrane, and the extracellular surroundings. N-terminal amino acid signal sequences help target membrane proteins to the membrane. The general secretory system involving the SecYEG translocon can move unfolded proteins to the inner membrane or periplasm. translation of a subset of proteins that will be placed into the membrane. SecB protein binds to certain unfolded proteins that will eventually end up in the periplasm, and pilots them to the SecYEG translocon. and into the periplasm. 

Bioinformatics: Mining the Genomes twentieth century. So, too, was the ability to sequence now call on the vast store of information gathered over the last half century to make predictions about the genetics and physiology of microbes even when we cannot grow them in the laboratory. These predictions are made using bioinformatics, an interdisciplinary field that combines computer science, mathematics, and statistics. The following sections reveal basic principles of this field. 

All six reading frames are translated in silico. 

Arrows indicate the relative locations and direction of transcription of different ORFs in the dsDNA. 

Noncoding sequences (introns) must be spliced out of primary mRNA. Final mRNA leaves nucleus. Computer programs can predict introns. 

or wound infections associated with eating, or catching, identify which genes are associated with disease. 

protein secretion systems, which export virulence proteins, have evolved from paralogous genes encoding flagellar biogenesis. The two sets of genes share a common ancestor but have since evolved completely different functions (in this case, secretion and motility). Paralogous genes are maintained in a microbial genome because their distinct functions contribute to the organism’s adaptive potential. Duplicate genes of identical function usually result in loss of one copy or the other by degenerative evolution (see Chapter 9). Many computer programs and resources used to analyze Here are some useful programs. You can find the program by simply querying for it in any search engine. 

These genes are paralogous and likely have evolved different functions. 

ExPASy (Expert Protein Analysis System) contains many molecular tools, including Swiss-Prot, the definitive index of known proteins. Joint Genome Institute Genome Portal has compiled known genome sequences of microbes and eukaryotes. 

sequences or deduced protein sequences from different species. The goal can be to identify genetic relatedness between sequences (discussed in Section 17.3). To assign function to a newly sequenced gene, it is best to compare protein products is easier to see the homology using the deduced peptide. On the other hand, not all genes encode proteins. Prime examples species, and their similarities reveal homology even among the three ancestral domains (Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya). 

3. Two species, x and y, evolve from w. 

outlines biochemical pathways in many sequenced organisms. Areas within this site graphically display reference biochemical pathways (for example, glycolysis) and then indicate which proteins in that pathway are predicted to occur in any organism with a sequenced genome. signatures such as ATP-binding sites. 

A2y. A1x is orthologous to A1y. The comparison is between two species. A1x is still paralogous to A2x. 

Paralogous versus orthologous genes. An ancestral gene can undergo a duplication to evolve an orthologous or paralogous gene. 

generated model was used to design a defined minimal medium that would grow the organism. The defined medium had several amino acid and vitamin growth factors added because genes encoding their synthetic pathways were missing from the bacterium. The organism can now be grown in defined media. This is an example of what has been called functional genomics. Functional genomics is an integrative process in which bioinformatic approaches enable scientists to make predictions about function for a set of genes and then test those predictions experimentally. 

specifically degrades a sulfonated polysaccharide, porphyran, present in edible marine red algae (seaweed). The team this enzyme in other species and discovered that all orthologs of porphyranase, except one, were encoded by marine microbes. This makes sense because the biological source of the substrate is found in the sea. The one exception was Bacteroides plebeius, a human gut microbe found only in Japanese individuals. Metagenomic studies found no examples of a porphyranase gene in gut microbiota from North American or French individuals, or from any terrestrial source. Why the Japanese? Curiously, red seaweed, known as nori, is a common food in Japan, and the only source of the porphyran substrate for showed that this human intestinal microbe received an unusual set of genes from a marine bacterium, probably by horizontal gene transfer. One of these was the porphyranase CAZyme gene. Horizontal gene transfer is discussed in Sections 7.1 and 9.6. shows the presentday sequence homologies between genes transferred to the How might Japanese gut bacteria have acquired the marine microbe’s porphyranase gene? In the eighth century, the Japanese government accepted seaweed as a form of payment, suggesting that seaweed was very important in Japanese culture. The authors propose that consumption of red seaweed with its attendant marine bacteria containing porphyranase is the likely route by which the gene was transferred to the gut microbe. The gene, now part of the Japanese intestinal microbiome, enables humans to digest the porphyran polysaccharide in red seaweed. 

what size and molecular weight? Hint: Find the molecular weight of an average amino acid. 

Antibiotics and evolution. Streptococcus pneumoniae produces invasive disease such as pneumonia but also causes recurrent ear infections. The most recent ear infection strain will contain genes incorporated from earlier strains. JanWillem Veening found that antibiotics may stimulate this transformation, a process initiated by competence genes located near the replication origin. Antimicrobials that stall replication forks but allow initiation can increase copy number stall replication forks and trigger expression of competenceregulated gene ssbB-gfp (green cells). Thus, some antibiotics may stimulate in vivo pneumococcal evolution by activating Source: Slager et al. 2014. Cell 157:395–406. 

How might gene dosage–induced competence enhance evolution during Streptococcus pneumoniae infections? Many types of stress, including some antibiotics, cause gene dosage–induced humans are often co-colonized by multiple pneumococcal strains, competence acquire resistance and virulence factors from others. Circumstantial evidence strongly suggests that gene dosage–induced competence plays a very important role for successful pneumococcal carriage. It will be interesting to see whether other key regulators located close to the origin of replication in the pneumococcus, or in other bacteria, are affected by gene dosage and how the cell’s physiology changes in response. 

change over generations through mutations, between species. Bacterial and archaeal genomes sometimes shuttle large clusters of genes between members of different taxonomic domains. All this ecologists to expand the definition of the “microbial organisms to which the microbe has potential access. 

Antibiotics that stall replication elongation include the commonly used fluoroquinolones. Our work suggests that physicians should, whenever possible, treat pneumococcal infections with alternative antibiotics that do not activate competence, like beta-lactam antibiotics. In addition, we are trying to identify novel compounds that can inhibit competence development. Such compounds might be used together with existing antibiotics to reduce the spread of antibiotic resistance. 

We often think of meaningful evolution as having to take place over thousands if not millions of years. But that is not always so. One striking example involves the pathogen Streptococcus pneumoniae, which causes serious lung infections in any age group, and also recurrent ear infections in infants. (Drexel University) found convincing evidence of evolution child stricken with recurrent ear infections over 7 months. Genome sequences of strains isolated during separate bouts revealed 16 distinct recombination events leading from the earliest to the latest isolate. During her short life, the the Current Research Highlight suggests, the high level of horizontal gene transfer was likely influenced by antibiotic treatments. The resultant gene transfers allowed the species to quickly evolve and cause recurrent disease. Two other scientists, John Sullivan and Clive Ronson from New Zealand, witnessed microbial evolution taking place in soil within a mere decade. These researchers were studying the microbe Mesorhizobium loti, a symbiotic bacterial species that forms nitrogen-fixing nodules on plant roots. Genes encoding symbiosis are located as a group on the mesorhizobial chromosome. In addition to these symbiotic rhizobia, there are many nonsymbiotic species that are incapable of forming root nodules. In a remarkable experiment, Sullivan of land devoid of natural nodulating rhizobia. Seven years later, they discovered that the area contained many genetically diverse symbiotic mesorhizobia now able to nodulate the flowering plant Lotus corniculatus. These microbes did not exist before the experiment. The 500-kb genome segment encoding symbiosis had somehow made its way from species. How did this happen so quickly? In Chapter 9 we address the mechanisms that mediate evolutionary change. We close the chapter by explaining how all these processes collaborate over millennia to remodel genomes and build biological diversity. The consequences of gene flow during evolution will be discussed in Chapter 17. 

Genomic analysis shows that over millennia, microbes undergo extensive gene loss and gain. Archaea, for example, arose from a common eukaryotic-archaeal phylogenetic branch and, as a result, possess many traits in common with eukaryotes, such involved with intermediary metabolism look purely bacterial. In fact, 37% of the proteins found in the archaeon Methanocaldococcus jannaschii are found in all three domains—Archaea, Eukarya, and Bacteria. Another 26% are otherwise found only among bacteria, while a mere 5% are confined to archaea and eukaryotes. Archaea, then, enjoy a mixed heritage. Another surprise arising from bioinformatic studies is inversions, deletions (when compared to similar species), paralogous genes, and orthologous genes. How did all this genomic blending happen? The answer appears to involve heavy gene traffic between species (horizontal gene transfer), recombination events occurring within a species, and these processes accelerated natural selection, where trial and error shaped genome content. 

5. Transformasome binds strand is transported; one strand is degraded. 

3. Phosphate from ComD is transferred to ComE. ComE-P (SigH) transcription. 

Why do species such as Neisseria undergo natural transformation? First, species that indiscriminately import which genes to import or keep. Finally, transformation can influence evolution, enabling species to adjust to new environments by acquiring new genes from other species via horizontal gene transfer. Transformation may have enabled pathogens such as Neisseria gonorrhoeae, the cause of gonorrhea, to acquire genes whose protein products now help the organism evade the host immune system. 

2. As cell numbers rise, increases and activates ComD sensor kinase. 

4. SigH directs transcription of transformasome components. 

Sex pilus 1. Sex pilus from the (left) attaches to receptors on the recipient cell (right). 

4. The strand remaining in the donor is replicated. 

An F-factor plasmid can remain a plasmid or can be integrated into the chromosome of the recipient cell (Fig. 9.4). Integration of the plasmid into the genome involves recombination Section 9.2. Because the plasmid can exist in extrachromosomal and integrated forms, it is sometimes called an episome (epi, Greek for “over”; and some from “chromosome”). 

region of sequence homology between are recognized by host cell recombination host chromosome. The transfer genes (tra) and replication origins (oriV = vegetative; oriT = transfer) are shown. 

conjugation bridge breaks, so the recipient almost never organism. Nevertheless, conjugation remains important for evolution and as a tool for scientists to move genes between species. 

an Hfr cell occurs between sequences within the host chromosome proper. The result is excision (deletion) of the gene from the host chromosome and production of a plasmid F′-factor plasmid is capable of transferring to a new cell via conjugation. 

release of plant hormones that stimulate tumorous growth of the plant. Plant cells within the tumor release amino acid derivatives, called “opines,” that the microbe can then use as a source of carbon and nitrogen. The unique mode of (nonplant) genes to be engineered into crops (discussed in Chapter 16). 

Conjugation in bacteria and archaea is mechanistically different from conjugation among eukaryotic microbes. Some eukaryotic microbes exchange nuclei through a structure, called a conjugation bridge, very different from that of bacteria (see Chapter 20). 

unnecessary. Thus, bacteriophages can accidentally move bacterial genes between cells as an offshoot of the phage life cycle (see Section 6.4 and eTopic 7.2). The process in one cell to another is known as transduction. There are two basic types of transduction: generalized and specialized. Generalized transduction can take any gene from a donor cell and transfer it to a recipient cell, whereas specialized transduction (also known as restricted transduction) can transfer only a few closely linked genes between cells. site defines the ends of the phage genome, marking where The result of this mistake is that 1% of the phage transducing particles. Any single transducing particle will particles in the phage population will contain different in the host chromosome of the newly infected cell, thus changing the genetic makeup of the recipient. 

Zinder (1928–2012) first suspected that bacteriophages idea, he grew Salmonella in two tubes separated by a fine filter through which viruses could pass, but not bacteria. The experiments, reported in 1966, showed that a filterable agent, or virus, could carry genetic material between bacterial strains; direct contact between bacteria was a lysogenic cell will prevent the replication of any new phage cell. By preventing the replication of superinfecting phage transduction carried out by a similar phage? For example, grown on a different strain of Salmonella? Explain why or why not. 

a host cell and makes subunit components for more phage. 

Some capsids 3. New phage assembly is completed. 

Generalized transduction. transduction by phage vectors can move any segment of donor chromosome to a recipient cell. The number of genes transferred in any one phage capsid is limited, however, to what can fit in the phage head. 

Direct-repeat spacer sequences captured from are interleaved by repeat sequences. 

sites evades the restriction-modification screening systems of its host? 

One of the most formidable wars on Earth is waged by phages and viruses against Bacteria and Archaea, respectively. Phage predators outnumber their prokaryotic prey 10:1 and destroy between 4% and 50% of prokaryotic life-forms. In an attempt to save themselves, Bacteria and Archaea have developed intriguing defense systems. One short palindromic repeats), in which an organism that manages to survive a phage attack captures a piece of the invader’s genome and wields it as defense against future attack. Nearly 50% of Bacteria and 85% of Archaea possess one or sequences (averaging 32 bp) separated by spacers of uniform length (20–72 bp, depending on the species). Although the sequences of direct repeats are, by defi nition, nearly identical, the sequences of the spacers are different from one another. Note that repeats and spacers do not encode proteins. Near these sequence clusters lie CRISPR-associated gene encoding a putative polymerase. 

crRNA is transcribed and processed by Cas products. 

transcript is then cleaved and trimmed (processed) by some of the Cas products into small RNAs composed of a single spacer Cas proteins to form a riboprotein complex that binds to a homologous sequence from an infecting phage or plasmid stage). As a result, the infected cell is spared destruction. molecules can be designed to direct Cas nucleases to cleave beyond providing immunity from phage infections. One George O’Toole’s Dartmouth laboratory, may be to banish a lysogenic cell from a biofi lm, so that phage produced by the lysogen cannot kill the rest of the biofi lm community. demonstrates this phenomenon with Pseudomonas aeruginosa. 

Cells that form a biofilm stick to the side of the tube and are not dislodged by washing. The biofilm is revealed after staining with crystal violet. cys4 is a Cas-encoding gene. 

Competence for transformation in some organisms is triggered by a genetically programmed physiological change. transferable plasmid that requires cell-cell contact and formation of a protein complex between mating cells. domains. For example, Agrobacterium tumefaciens conjugates with plant cells. Transduction is the process whereby bacteriophages preparation can move any gene in a bacterial genome to another bacterium. In specialized transduction, a phage can move only a limited number of bacterial genes. 

gene exchange systems, what happens to it? The answer plasmid, capable of autonomous replication, it can coexist in incapable of autonomous replication, however, then it may be incorporated into the chromosome through recombination or, as is usually the case, it may be degraded by nucleases. one of two main mechanisms: generalized or site-specific recombination. Generalized recombination requires that the two recombining molecules have a considerable stretch it does require a short sequence (10–20 bp) recognized by the recombination enzyme. 

Recombination is part of a “self-improvement” program that samples genes from other organisms for an ability to enhance the competitive fitness of the cell. 

RuvAB proteins pull matched hybrid strands in opposite directions and elongate the region of base pairing. 

2. RecBCD unwinds strand continues unwinding. RecA filament forms. 

Duplex ends 3. RecA finds homology and mediates strand invasion. 

7. Visualize rotating the right half of the molecule. The result is called the Holliday junction. 

5. Endonuclease cleaves one end of displaced recipient 6. Displaced ends are ligated to opposite strands. 

8. RuvC cleaves across the junction. Ligation of broken ends on either side of the arrow completes the single crossover event. 

■ Mechanism of generalized recombination. Steps 1–4: Strand invasion and branch migration. Steps 4–7 and blowup: RuvAB proteins catalyzing branch migration at the crossover (Holliday junction). Arrows mark movement of the helices. This movement elongates the region of base pairing between donor the Holliday junction. 

9. If the donor is linear and the recipient is circular (e.g., Hfr transfer or transduction), the circularity of the recipient chromosome will be lost. The cell will die, unless . . . 

10. . . . a second crossover occurs to maintain circularity of the recipient from the donor. The linear product will eventually be degraded by nucleases. 

radiation-resistant species Deinococcus radiodurans, for example, does the exact opposite. Its RecA first binds dsDNA and exchange accounts, in part, for the remarkable radiation resistance of this microbe (read more about it in eTopic 9.3). 

In contrast to generalized recombination mechanisms that require RecA protein and can recombine any region of the chromosome, site-specific recombination does not utilize RecA and moves only a limited number of genes. This form of recombination involves very short regions Dedicated enzyme systems specifically recognize those sequences and catalyze a crossover between them to produce a cointegrate molecule. The integration of phage lambda, described earlier, is one example of site-specific recombination involving a 15-bp att site and the integrase enzyme (see Fig. 9.8). Other examples of site-specific recombination are flagellar phase variation in the pathogen Salmonella enterica and phase variation in the expression of type inverted (flipped) at a low frequency, resulting in the onor-off regulation of adjacent gene expression. Phase variation is frequently employed by pathogens to evade the host immune system by changing the expression of cellsurface proteins. For more on flagellar phase variation, see Section 10.1. 

What are mutations, and how do they affect evolution? whether harmful, beneficial, or neutral, is called a mutation. Two basic requirements are needed to produce a heritable mutation: Namely, there must be a change in the base sequence, and the cell must fail to repair the change before the next round of replication. Repair mechanisms will be discussed in Section 9.4. Although it is tempting to think that all mutations destroy a protein’s activity, this is not the Mutations come in several different physical and structural forms: purine or a pyrimidine to a different pyrimidine is called a transition. Swapping a purine for a pyrimidine (or vice versa) is a transversion. 

Insertions and deletions involve, respectively, the addition or subtraction of one or more nucleotides or shorter than it was originally. 

codon shifts the reading frame and changes all the downstream amino acids. 

Removing two nucleotides from causes a frameshift. 

is structurally similar to the original (for example, leucine is substituted for isoleucine), or nonconservative replacements, or eliminate the activity of the protein (a loss-of-function mutation), or it may make the protein more active. It could even gain a new activity, such as an expanded substrate specificity or a completely different substrate specificity (these are called gain-of-function mutations). point mutation that changes an amino acid codon into a likely lacking any function—another example of a knockout mutation. Typically, these defective, truncated proteins are degraded by cellular proteases (see Section 8.4). Insertions and deletions can alter the reading frame codon at a time, stringing amino acids together in the process. It translates each codon “word” but cannot understand the overall protein “sentence.” It does not recognize when bases have been added or removed through mutation; instead, it keeps reading the sequence in triplets. If the number of bases inserted or deleted is not a multiple of three, the ribosome will read the wrong triplets. The result is a frameshift mutation, which produces a garbled protein “sentence.” Frameshift mutations often cause the ribosome to encounter a premature stop codon, originally in a different reading frame. If the insertion or deletion involves multiples of three bases, the reading frame is not changed, but one or more amino acids are added or removed. remain right where they are. The rotation would retain the 5′-to-3′ polarity in the new molecule. But if the inversion occurred within a gene, it would likely change the codons genes. If an entire gene with its promoter inverts, the gene will likely remain functional, and its encoded protein may very well still be made. Inversions occur within a genome sequences or as a consequence of mobile genetic elements jumping between different areas of a genome. Mutations can affect both the genotype and the phenotype of an organism. The genotype of an organism reflects its genomic sequences. Regardless of whether a mutation causes a change in a biochemical trait (phenotype), every mutation causes a change in the genotype. In contrast to genotype, phenotype comprises only observable characteristics, such as biochemical, morphological, or growth traits. For instance, the product of argA allows an organism to make enough arginine to support growth in media devoid of arginine. Any mutation in argA is a genotypic change, but if the result is a synonymous amino acid substitution, then there is no phenotypic change; the organism can still make its own arginine. However, if the mutation destroys the activity of the argA product, then the microbe can no longer make arginine, and the amino acid must be supplied that has lost the ability to synthesize a substance required for growth is called an auxotroph. 

It is also important to realize that small mutations (such as a single base substitution) can have large effects on phenotype, whereas large mutations (such as the insertion of a 5-kb transposon between two genes) may have little or no effect. To illustrate, consider that a single point mutation in the hpr gene of the phosphotransferase sugar transport system (discussed in Section 4.2 and eTopic 4.1) will render a bacterium incapable past the hpr stop codon will have no effect on cell growth. For mutations, it’s often not the size that counts; it’s the location. 

will increase the number of mutational events. Even though the replication apparatus is very accurate with various proofreading and repair functions, such as the 3′-to-5′ exonuclease in Section 7.3), mistakes do occur, albeit at a very low rate. Besides misincorporation mistakes, naturally occurring These endogenous reactions are an important source of spontaneous mutations. For example, cytosine spontaneously glycosidic bond connecting the base to the sugar backbone purine would obviously hinder transcription and replication. 

merase function and stop replication or interfere with the transcription of affected genes. The blue highlighting identifies modifications to thymidine and guanosine residues. 

Modifications can interfere with polymerases to stop replication or transcription. 

The excited electrons of carbons 5 and 6 on adjacent pyrimidines can then be shared to form a four-membered cyclobutane ring between adjacent pyrimidines. The pyrimidine dimer blocks replication and transcription. 

of its electrons to the point where the molecule is unstable. their energized electrons can react to form a four-membered cyclobutane ring. The result is a pyrimidine dimer that will block replication and transcription (Fig. 9.22). the cell can repair that damage before it becomes fixed as a mutation. But the repair mechanisms are not perfect. Repair errors contribute heavily to the formation of heritable mutations and, thus, to evolution. Although most mutations decrease the fitness of a species, some can improve fitness by, among other things, enabling an organism to more efficiently use or compete for available food sources. 

■ Sectored colonies of bacteria. mutator strain is a lactose-negative mutant that does not ferment lactose and thus does not turn the indicator blue. But because the strain has a mutation in one of the mutator genes, there is a high rate of reversion to the lactose fermenter strain, which shows up as blue papillae on the white colony. 

from 103 (1,000) cells to 107 (10,000,000) cells requires approximately 107 cell divisions (10,000,000 – 1,000 = 9,999,000 cell divisions). If 10 mutants developed in a specific gene, then the mutation rate would be approximately 10/107 = 1 × 10 –6. More on mutation rate can be found in eTopic 9.4. 

a gene in Salmonella enterica, so you dilute an 18-hour broth culture to 1 × 104 cells/ml and let it grow to 1 × 109 cells/ml. At that point you dilute and plate cells on the appropriate agar medium and estimate that there were 10,000,000 mutants in the culture. What you don’t know is that the original dilution of 1 × 104 cells/ml already had 10 mutants defective in that gene. Does the presence of those 10 mutants affect your estimate of the mutation rate? If so, then how? 

Salmonella enterica will not grow on histidine-free medium. 

Basic Ames test for mutagenesis. Salmonella enterica hisG mutant was spread uniformly over the surface of a histidine-free medium. 

Plate on agar and count possible mutagen is placed at the center of the plate. 

Prototrophic hisG+ revertants form around the disk as the mutagen diffuses into the medium. 

■ The modified Ames assay to test for the mutagenic properties of chemicals processed through the liver. The potential mutagen, his-mutant bacteria, and liver homog- enate are combined and mixed with agar. The combination is poured into a petri plate. If the liver extract enzymes act on the test compound and the metabolites produced are mutagenic, then increasing numbers of His+ revertants will be observed with increasing doses of mutagen. If the compound is not mutagenic, few relevant colonies will be seen on any plate. 

the liver convert the compound to a mutagen (they do this accidentally, not on purpose), then His+ revertant colonies will be seen. This method accelerates the process of drug discovery by providing an inexpensive preliminary screen for weeding out mutagenic chemicals before more expensive animal testing is undertaken. More involved assays for mutagenicity involve transgenic mice. Mice are engineered to have the bacterial lacZ gene, for instance, inserted into their chromosomes. The lacZ gene encodes an enzyme that is easily assayed, so it is useful as a reporter for mutagenic activity. This reporter gene potential mutagen is administered to the mouse, and after some time the mouse is sacrificed, its organs are removed, track where the mutagen is distributed in the mouse and to determine whether certain organs convert harmless precursor chemicals into dangerous mutagenic compounds. 

Genotype reflects the genetic makeup of an organism, whereas phenotype reflects its physical traits. Classes of mutations include silent mutations, missense mutations, nonsense mutations, point mutations, insertions, deletions, and frameshift mutations. Spontaneous mutations reflect tautomeric shifts in replication, or “natural” levels of chemical or physical (irradiation) mutagens in the environment. 

Chemical mutagens can alter purine and pyrimidine structure and change base-pairing properties. The mutagenicity of a chemical can be assessed by its effect on bacterial cultures. 

merase simply makes a mistake and incorporates a normal in a live cell is actually only 10 –10 per base pair replicated. But how can a cell repair a mutation after it has already been introduced during replication? One method is methyl Misincorporation of a base during replication produces a mismatch between the incorrect base in the newly synthesized but unmethylated strand and the correct base residing in the parental, methylated strand. Methyl-directed mismatch repair enzymes (MutS, MutL, and MutH) bind to the mismatch. MutS first binds to the mismatch and recruits loop to meet MutS and MutH (steps 3 and 4). Then, MutH cleaves the unmethylated strand containing the mutation, UvrD then unwinds the cleaved strand, exposing it to a variety of exonucleases (step 6). The result is a gap that is filled The methyl-directed mismatch repair proteins (and genes) are called Mut (and mut) because a high mutation a mutator strain. 

MutHL to the site. 

6. UvrD unwinds the nicked strand, exonucleases remove the synthesizes a replacement. 

strand, then the result would be a mismatch after recombination. Explain how, in the face of mismatch repair, the recipient cell ever retains the wild-type sequence from the donor. 

The bacterial cell, in strands are not immediately methylated. So, when a mismatch is found, the mismatch repair system views the newly synthesized to what is shown in (steps 7 and 8). 

Low affinity e– recipient prote d to a +2 2 st low-affinity binding. 

damage in between proteins prevents charge ttransfer. High-affinity +3 protein scans for damage. 

Repair proteins cycle on and transport fails when there is damage proteins. High-affinity (+3 oxidation state) proteins accumulate near the site of damage. The redox-active [4Fe-4S] clusters in the proteins are signified by clusters of two orange and two yellow spheres. Inset: [4Fe-4S] cluster. 

can be repaired by a light-activated mechanism called photoreactivation. In photoreactivation, the enzyme photolyase binds to the dimer and cleaves the cyclobutane ring linking the two adjacent, damaged nucleotides. The damage is repaired without any bases being excised. While photolyase is specific for pyrimidine dimer repair and requires light, a system called nucleotide excision includes the dimer (Fig. 9.27 ). The basic mechanism involves UvrA, associated with UvrB, recognizing the damaged base (Fig. 9.27, steps 1–3). UvrA is ejected (step 4), and UvrB binds UvrC (step 5), which actually cleaves the damaged strand at two sites flanking the damaged base (step 6). The small fragment is removed, and the gap is repaired that significantly alter base pairing and helix conformation. Nucleotide excision repair is also used to excise other kinds Nucleotide excision repair can be enhanced by ongoing since a cell unable to transcribe such a gene because of dependent). The transcription-coupled repair protein then snares a nearby UvrAB to begin nucleotide excision repair. 

5. UvrB lures the actual cleaving enzyme, UvrC, to the site. 

6. UvrC cleaves the phosphodiester backbone of the damaged strand at two places. 

the 5′ end of the preexisting strand. 

phosphodiester backbone missing a base (an abasic site). a purine (apurinic) or a pyrimidine (apyrimidinic). The in its stead a replacement strand containing the proper repair process is complete (step 4). 

binds to and excises the damaged base. 

All of the repair processes described thus far (mismatch repair, photoreactivation, nucleotide excision repair, and base excision repair) are error-proof pathways that rely on the presence of a good template strand opposite the damaged strand. Replication of the template strand is used to replace the damaged bases accurately. But what happens when both strands are damaged or when there is only one strand? Recombinational repair. illustrates one some replication) cannot decode a dimer, it skips primer, leaving a gap opposite the dimer. At this cleaves old backbone and synthesizes a replacement strand. because chromosome integrity would be lost. However, the RecA protein involved with recombination can bind to the gap and initiate a genetic exchange in Sealed nick which a piece of the undamaged, properly replicated national repair and happens mostly near replication forks. Once the gap is fi lled, the Uvr complex can in the other strand. The recombinational repair system is also an error-proof ester backbone. NTPs = nucleoside triphosphates. 

1. Replication fork approaches thymine dimer. 

3. The RecA protein binds to the sister double helices at the single-stranded segment. 

5. Products of the target genes inhibit cell division, participate in nucleotide excision repair. 

1. Double-strand break occurs. 

2. Ku protein binds ends. 

repair system. In humans, the ancestor of mutS evolved to have multiple repair functions, as well as to participate in postmeiotic segregation. Defects in this repair mechanism have been linked to increased risk of certain colon cancers. Numerous other human genetic diseases are caused by mutations in homologs of bacterial repair genes. For example, defective excision repair genes in humans cause repair causes Cockayne syndrome in humans, a devastating neurodegenerative disease. 

4. LigD polishes and ligates ends. 

common repair mechanism in eukaryotes, has been documented in some bacteria, such as Mycobacterium tuberculosis. These pathogens can survive within macrophages that produce antibacterial compounds (nitric oxide and hydrogen peroxide) that those dsDNA breaks. 

Photoreactivation cleaves the cyclobutane rings of pyrimidine dimers. bases without cleaving the phosphodiester backbone. Recombinational repair takes place at a replication homologous damaged strand. 

Recall that you must consider both strands strand in the 5′-to-3′ direction. View the top strand left to right and bottom strand right to left. When no nucleotides intervene between the inverted sequences, the whole structure is called a palindrome. 

Transposition is the process of moving a transposable element within or between Replication produces repeats (duplicated sequences). one copy of the sequence will flank each duplication. Enzymes that catalyze transposition generate duplications in the target end of the element (Fig. 9.32). The transsite by ligating the ends of the insertion element to the long ends of a staggered cut at sible target sequences where it will move the insertion element. Transposable elements transpose by one of two mechanisms—namely, nonreplicative chromosome to another. Although McClintock’s theories or replicative transposition (Fig. 9.33 ). were provocative at the time, we now know that these types In nonreplicative transposition, the insertion sequence excises uted greatly to genome rearrangements during the evoluoriginal host. tion of all species. Transposable elements are not autonomous. Unlike plasmids, these mobile elements are incapable of existing Duplication from molecule (Fig. 9.32 ). All transposable previous jump Transposable element elements include a gene encoding a transposase, an enzyme that catalyzes the transTn fer or copying of the element from one types of transposable elements in Bacteria: Transposable element insertion sequences and transposons. An element jumps from Target sequence is copied. One copy one site to another. for insertion and remains in original site. posable element (typically 700–1,500 bp) consisting of a transposase gene flanked by short inverted-repeat sequences that are targets of the transposase (see Fig. 9.32). other genes in addition to those required another without leaving a copy of the element at the original site. Replicative transposifor transposition. tion leaves the element at the original site and moves a replicated copy to the new site. 

are replicated to make duplicated sequences at each end of the element. 

(Fig. 9.34 , step 1). The transposase cuts the phosphodiester backbone (step 2), severing one strand at one end of the insertion sequence and the other strand at the other unnicked strands in a transesterification reaction that produces hairpin structures (step 3). In this instance, joining the ends of the double-stranded molecule produces a single strand with a hairpin. (Fig. 9.34, step 4). The element has successfully “jumped” from one molecule to another without replicating. Note insertion process, thereby producing a copy of the target composite transposon typically consists of two insertion sequences that flank an antibiotic resistance gene, or one or more catabolic genes (for example, genes for benzene elements have degenerated, so the transposase acts on primarily the two outermost inverted repeats, causing the whole transposon to move as one unit. Tn10 is one such example (Fig. 9.35). In contrast to composite transposons, replicative transposition is typically observed with complex transposons, such possesses transposase and antibiotic resistance genes, but also includes a gene whose product is called resolvase. The transposase acts on the inverted-repeat ends of the element, result of transposition and replication, the cointegrate molecule will contain two copies of the element flanking the integrated plasmid. Resolvase is a site-specific recombinase that mediates recombination between the duplicated transposons at the internal Tn3 res sites. The result of this recombination is restoration of the two original circular replicons, each one now containing a copy of the transposon. 

absence of tetracycline, only a few cells in a population may have Tn916. However, the presence of just a small amount of tetracycline triggers conjugative transfer of the element, spreading it throughout the population. The study of transposons may provide insight into the type of mobile element, called an integron, has evolved in resistance genes (see eTopic 9.5). 

chromosome occurs using the inverted repeats closest to the tetracycline resistance gene (see Fig. 9.35). If you draw it right, you will see, in the end, that the tetracycline resistance gene is lost. 

Transposable elements and insertion sequences another, usually without replicating separately (that is, they are not plasmids). Transposase is an enzyme that forms a transpososome complex with the transposable element and target DNAs. inverted-repeat sequences. Transposable elements move by nonreplicative or replicative mechanisms. Transposons are complex transposable elements carrying additional genes (encoding, for example, drug resistance). Composite transposons have two duplicate insertion sequence elements that flank additional genes. Often the interior inverted repeats of these elements contain Transposons can carry a variety of genes, including antibiotic resistance genes. 

Can bacterial genes evolve to become part of eukaryotic before, pervades efforts to understand microbial genomes. Genes can be removed (deletion), added (insertion), rearranged (recombination), or divided to the point where the genome bears only a slight resemblance to what it once was. The evolution of a genome is a random process driven by natural selection. Chapter 17 describes the many features of microbial evolution, but here in Chapter 9 we discuss the molecular mechanisms that drive that evolution. 

The result of evolution can be seen in the genomes of various strains of the gut microbe Escherichia coli. Much of this evolution presumably took place in the intestines of human and other animal hosts, the normal habitat of this 4,641,652 base pairs (compared with the 3 billion base pairs of the human genome). Of this genome, 87.8% encodes proteins, 0.8% encodes tRNA and rRNA, and another 0.7% is chromosome is involved with various forms of regulation. planet, about 20% of the 4,489 genes still remain a mystery to us, having no known function other than vague annotations such as “oxidoreductase.” Close examination of the came about through the evolution of an ancestral genome. Two basic processes are thought to contribute to genome restructuring: horizontal gene transfers and duplications followed by functional divergence through mutation. 

Microbial genomes evolve by randomly assembling an eclectic array of genes from many sources. For example, it has been several fatal outbreaks of food-borne disease throughout the and encode virulence factors, metabolic pathways, and prophages (phage genes integrated into host chromosomes), all of which were acquired from other species. The impact of horizontal gene transfer on genome evolution is estimated to be 100 times greater than the impact of mutations. 

Functions for each island are identified. 

containing numerous genes that serve a common function, such as virulence (pathogenicity islands), symbiosis (symbiosis islands), or survival (fitness islands). Genomic islands are often flanked by boundary regions such as direct repeats or insertion elements, usually found near tRNA genes (Fig. 9.37). The association of genomic islands with tRNA genes may reflect the fact that some tRNA genes are dispensable because often multiple copies of a given tRNA gene are present within a genome. Genomic islands as a whole are often genetically unstable, subject to further rearrangements or deletions, and very often contain functional or remnant mobility genes encoding transposases, integrases, or other enzymes associated with recombination. 

Each data point represents three nymphs. Horizontal lines indicate mean values. 

transferred from Bacteria to eukaryotic ticks and mites several times over millions of years. The bacterial version of the protein, called Tae, degrades peptidoglycan and is delivered as the tip of a spear from one bacterium to another via injected into the “enemy” bacterium, Tae kills the victim by disassembling the bacterial cell wall. Among the eukaryotic recipients of the dae gene is the deer tick Ixodes scapularis, which serves as the reservoir for the Lyme disease spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi (Lyme disease is described in Chapter 26). After their horizontal transfer, the dae genes became expressed and eventually acquired eukaryotic protein secretion signals. illustrates that the gene, therefore, became part of the Ixodes innate immune Innate immunity is described in Chapter 23. Evidence of bacteria to their eukaryotic hosts is discussed in eTopic 9.6. copy and insert themselves from one gene into another. 

It is important to note that evolution involves gene loss as well as gene acquisition. The large-scale loss of genes through evolution is known as genome reduction. For example, pathogenic shigellae (the cause of bacillary dysentery) exhibit chromosomal “black holes,” regions lacking these genes is required for a fully virulent phenotype (why is not clear). Genome reduction is discussed in Chapter 17. 

Sometimes evidence of genome reduction in the making can be observed. Many genomes contain pseudogenes, genes that by homology appear to encode an enzyme but are nonfunctional because a portion is missing through deletion. These appear to be the remnants of genes that were useful to an ancestral species but were made superfluous when one of its descendants adapted to a new environmental niche. When evolutionary pressure to retain a functional form of the gene no longer exists, the imperative to repair mutations within that gene also evaporates. The pseudogene, therefore, is in the process of being eliminated. One pathogen caught in the act of losing its genes because of its lifestyle is Mycobacterium leprae, the cause of Hansen’s of pseudogenes, presumably formed from genes it no longer needs after becoming an obligate intracellular pathogen. 

injected into intestinal cells compel pedestals to form that non-PAI regulatory system (GlmZ) that normally controls cell the core chromosome-encoded Glm system was co-opted to control a horizontally transferred pathogenicity island. 

bacterial genome encodes thousands of different proteins needed to handle many different environmental contingencies. But to compete in any mixed-species environment, a microbe cannot waste energy making unneeded proteins. Cells achieve molecular efficiency by using elegant control systems that selectively increase or decrease gene transcription, mRNA translation, or mRNA degradation, as well as by degrading or sequestering regulatory proteins. Chapter 10 describes how a cell “knows” when it needs to alter its physiology and explains the regulatory mechanisms used to effect that change. 

The most likely reason horizontally acquired islands appropriate recipient regulatory systems is that those systems already sense of this secretion system requires cell wall rearrangement. 

Actin is stained green. 

Boris Gorke’s group found that QseF also regulates synthesis of the sRNA glmY that stabilizes GlmZ. So, during infection, QseE senses epinephrine and phosphorylates QseF. QseF-P activates the transcription of glmY, which then stabilizes GlmZ. Finally, elevated GlmZ limits pedestal formation. 

The Current Research Highlight illustrates how a horizontally acquired gene becomes integrated into the regulatory network of a bacterial cell. Integration ensures that the new gene is expressed only when it is beneficial to the cell. But what constitutes a regulatory network? Microbes use numerous mechanisms to sense their internal and external environments. The information collected directs synthesis of waves of proteins whose concentrations change with changing environments. The cell’s surface, for example, contains an array of sensing proteins that monitor osmolarity, pH, temperature, and the chemical content of the surroundings. Quorum sensing, in which bacteria secrete and sense chemical signaling molecules, allows members of microbial communities to communicate, cooperate, and even promote symbiotic relationships. Take the Hawaiian bobtailed squid, Euprymna scolopes. During the day, this tiny squid remains buried in the sand of shallow reef flats around Hawaii. After sunset, the animal emerges from its hiding place and begins its search for food. As it swims in the moonlit night, its light organ projects light downward in an apparent attempt to camouflage the squid from predatory fish swimming below. Looking up, the fish see only light (called counterillumination), not a squid’s shadow moving against the surfacefiltered light of the moon. The light, however, is not made by the squid. Inside the squid’s light organ are luminescent bacteria called Aliivibrio fischeri (formerly Vibrio fischeri). Bacteria, not the squid, produce the light. However, these microbes do not constantly glow. They light up only when their cell number and the concentration of a secreted signaling molecule rise above a threshold level. The critical density of bacteria is attained by nightfall, and the genes needed to make light are “turned on.” Symbiosis is achieved because the bacteria obtain nutrients growing in the light organ, and the squid, for its part, survives another night. Chapter 10 explores the fundamental principles of gene regulation in microbes and discusses how these individual systems are woven into global regulatory networks that interconnect many processes throughout the cell. 

(translational/posttranslational) level is the most rapid and most reversible. We summarize these control levels here and then discuss examples. 

How many ways can a gene’s expression be controlled? The expression of genes and their products (mRNA and protein) can be controlled at various levels, with each level of control offering different advantages to the cell. The major translational controls, and posttranslational modifications. 

enables a pathogen to turn on or turn off expression of cell-surface proteins. The switch in protein structure helps the microbe evade a host’s immune system. 

Control of mRNA stability. Levels of specific mRNA molecules are regulated by RNase activity, which degrades some mRNA molecules as fast as they are transcripts and help or hinder degradation. 

Translational control. Translation by ribosomes can be regulated by sequestering mRNA ribosome-binding sites or by concealing mRNA sequences that recognize specific translational repressor proteins. Translational control mechanisms are often coupled to transcriptional mechanisms, offering “fine-tuning” of operon control. Attenuation, for instance, is a mechanism that uses translation to sense the level of an amino acid in the cell and then increase or decrease transcription of the genes encoding the enzymes that synthesize the amino acid. 

Posttranslational control. Once proteins are made, their activity can be controlled by modifying protein structure—for example, by protein cleavage, phosphorylation, methylation, or acetylation. These modifications can activate, deactivate, or even lead to the destruction of the protein. 

All of these control measures can be used in various combinations by the cell to build integrated control circuits that coordinately regulate multiple systems throughout the cell—a key to homeostasis and balanced growth (see nitrogen regulation, discussed in Section 15.5). 

Next we discuss how bacterial cells monitor conditions inside and outside of the cell to make “informed” decisions about altering gene expression. In Section 10.2 we will then explore several paradigms of operon control. 

Most regulatory mechanisms that alter gene expression example of this strategy is phase variation. Phase variation helps microbial pathogens avoid the immune system. Any infection will trigger the production of antibodies specific to the invading microbe’s component parts, such as pili, flagella, and lipopolysaccharides (discussed in Chapter 24). Antibodies that bind to these microbial surface structures are useful for clearing an infection. However, some microbes use gene regulation to periodically change their immunological appearance, like a chameleon changing its color, by changing the amino acid composition of a particular surface protein. This “shape-shifting” by the microbe, called phase variation, renders useless those antibodies specific for the old structure. The embattled immune system must start all over again making new antibodies, thus prolonging the course of infection. Two variations: gene inversions and slipped-strand mispairing. Gene inversion: an on/off switch. Flagellar phase varia- tion in the Gram-negative bacterium Salmonella enterica outwardly directed promoter and a gene called hin, whose product, Hin recombinase (also called Hin invertase), is flanked by short (26-bp) inverted repeats called hixL (left) and hixR (right). 

Hin recombinase collaborates with other less specific within the cassette then forms a loop. Hin cuts within the center of each hix site, producing staggered ends. An exchange of Hin subunits leads to strand inversion, so that In one orientation, the outwardly directed promoter of fljB) and a repressor (FljA) that prevents transcription of the the antigenicity, of the two flagellar proteins are different. it appears to a host immune system. In each generation, the rate of the reversible switch varies from about one cell in 103 to one in 105. Note, however, that this switch would not accomplish much if the infecting population of bacteria started out mixed—that is, producing both types of flagella. The initial infection must be of one phenotype. 

tion relies on multiple, short sequence repeats within a gene. adds a repeat to, or deletes a repeat from, the gene and alters its translational reading frame. If the mRNA produced during transcription is out of frame, the protein is not made. This random process can alternately turn a gene off and then is discussed in eTopic 10.1 using the opa genes of Neisseria gonorrhoeae, the causative agent of gonorrhea. Eukaryotic microbes, especially pathogenic sporozoa, possess elaborate mechanisms of phase variation. The trypanosome that causes “sleeping sickness” undergoes extensive genetic shuffl ing and mutation of its coat proteins over successive generations, essentially overwhelming the host immune system by presenting every possible form of antigen. 

3. Salmonella expresses 2. This promoter drives transcription of fljB and fljA. 

1. Phin promoter drives expression of hin. 

5. Hin recombinase is made and binds to hix sequences. 

6. Hin dimer brings hix regions together, and then breaks and re-joins ends to invert whole sequence. 

7. Promoter is in wrong orientation to express fljB and fljA. 

Would cells be motile? What type of flagella would be produced? Would the cells undergo phase variation? What would happen if fliC alone was deleted? 

ing of a regulatory system. The product of the regulatory gene (the bind to specific chemical ligands in the cytoplasm before the protein stimulate transcription. 

Ligand influences protein-DNA binding. 

Scenario 1: Repressor target gene; inducer causes repressor to release. 

Scenario 2: Repressorcorepressor complex target gene. 

Removing the ligand stops transcription. 

in a pond of water, a gastrointestinal tract, or a mammalian host cell. Once the environment is sensed, the cell can change the repertoire of genes it expresses to meet its needs or to protect itself. Cells use different mechanisms to sense and respond to conditions within the cell and outside the cell membrane. Sensing conditions within the cell is relatively straightforward. Regulatory proteins bind specific low-molecularw proteins bind different ligands. For example, n regulator binds a carbohydrate ligand and alerts the cell that a new carbon source is available, while a different regulator senses whether enough of the amino acid tryptophan is present in the cytoplasm to carry out protein synthesis. The ligand, once bound, then alters the ability of the regulatory protein to latch onto specific near to or quite far away from the target gene on the Genes encoding regulatory proteins are usually, but not always, transcribed separately from the target gene bind to regulator sequences and prevent the transcription of target genes—an event known as repression. Repression happens in one of two ways (scenarios 1 and 2 in Because a small inducer molecule is required, the increased expression of the target gene is called induction. The lactose operon, discussed in Section 10.2, is one example of an inducible system. 

The sequences shown are located upstream of the genes noted in italics. Inverted repeats are shown in yellow. Note that in some inverted repeats, occasionally a base is not repeated (only those bases that repeat are highlighted in the diagram). Arrows indicate the direction of symmetry. 

protein when a nearby weak binding-site sequence changes by mutation into a tighter binding site. 

1. Sensor kinase detects condition outside the cell. 

Sensing what goes on outside the cell is more challenging than sensing intracellular conditions because intracellular regulatory proteins cannot reach through the membrane 2. Signal triggers (or prevents) used by Gram-positive and Gram-negative organ3. Phosphate is isms to collect information from outside of the transferred to a cell relies on a series of two-member protein phosADP in the cytoplasm. phorylation relay systems called two-component and either stimulates signal transduction systems. Each two-compoor represses the nent system will regulate a different set of genes. target genes. The first protein in each relay, the sensor kinase, sory domain of most sensor kinase proteins contacts the outside environment (or periplasm), while the other end (the kinase domain) protrudes into the cytoplasm. ognizes a different molecule or condition (for example, removes the PhoQ in Salmonella senses magnesium). Once activated, phosphate and the external sensory domain triggers a conformational the system. a specific histidine residue located in a different part of the protein. Then, like two relay runners passing a baton, sensor kinase protein senses an environmental condition outside the cell (as in Gram-positive bacteria) or in the periplasm (as in the phosphorylated sensor kinase protein passes the phosGram-negative bacteria). phate to a cognate (matched) cytoplasmic protein called a response regulator. This transfer, called transphosphorylation, occurs at a specific aspartate residue within represses expression. By linking different forms of regulation, the cell pro■ Regulatory proteins help a cell sense changes in its duces overlapping controls and complex integrated circuits internal environment and alter gene expression to match. that coordinate many aspects of cell physiology. ■ Repressor and activator proteins bind to operator and genes. Repressors prevent transcription; activators stimTo Summarize ulate it. 

Expression or function of a gene product can be modifying the protein). Small regulatory RNAs also play key roles in affecting the transcription, mRNA turnover, and translation of specific genes or gene products. 

Two-component signal transduction systems help the cell sense and respond to its environment, both inside and outside. Integrated control circuits connect many individual regulatory systems to coordinate regulation throughout the cell. 

present (that is, constitutive) in the cell. The groundbreaking work of Jacob and Monod, and of André Lwoff (1902– them a Nobel Prize and launched the field of gene regulation, a scientific realm where discoveries continue to surprise us. 

proton) into the cell. Once there, the enzyme beta-galactosidase (LacZ) can cleave the disaccharide into its component parts (galactose and glucose) or alter the linkage between the monosaccharides to produce allolactose, an important chemical needed to induce the genes that encode this pathway. 

lacI and lacZYA are separate transcriptional units, each with its own promoter. 

beta-galactosidase (LacZ). The products, glucose and galactose, are subsequently degraded by the enzymes of glycolysis to harness energy and capture carbon (see Section 13.5). Without LacY and LacZ, the catabolic energy of lactose is unavailable to the cell. 

lacA form an operon, which is a group of genes cotranscribed from a common promoter. The role of lacA, which encodes thiogalactoside transacetylase (LacA), is unclear. It is not needed to ferment lactose but may detoxify a harmful by-product of lactose metabolism. 

“Lactose operon,” “lac operon,” and “lacZYA operon” all refer to the same system. 

The bound protein overlaps the lacZYA promoter (lacP) and prevents transcription. 

Inducer (lactose converted to allolactose) binds LacI repressor. This reduces LacI affinity for lacO, and transcription of the operon occurs. 

tion of the operon. Bent arrows mark promoters. Green indicates Lacl protein-binding of beta-galactosidase) removes the repressor Lacl and allows expression of lacZYA. 

simultaneously binds the lacO and lacOI operators (a not important to our discussion here.) Once lactose is added to the medium, the lac operon is expressed at 100-fold higher levels. How does lactose get into the cell to induce the operon if the operon encoding its transport protein is repressed? As noted already, even when repressed, the lacZYA operon is transcribed at a low level. (Most genes are expressed at low constitutive levels even when uninduced.) This means that a small amount of lactose can be transported into the cell because a few molecules of the lactose transporter LacY are made. The tiny amount of beta-galactosidase (LacZ) expressed in uninduced cells is also important. At this low level, the enzyme does not completely cleave the glycosidic bond of lactose, but rearranges it to form allolactose, the form of lactose that activates the operon (whose structure is shown in Fig. 10.7). Allolactose binds the find the lac promoter sequences and initiate transcription of the lacZYA structural genes. cAMP and cAMP receptor protein stimulate transcription. Another important mechanism that governs the level (adenosine monophosphate) in which the 5′ phosphate is structure. How cellular levels of cAMP change in response to carbon starvation has been extensively studied, but questions still remain. What is clear is that intracellular cAMP levels fluctuate with the activities of enzymes that can make (adenylyl cyclase), degrade (phosphodiesterases), or export cAMP. Various internal and external signals alter the balance of these processes (see eTopic 10.2). 

is generally preferred today. Thus, the gene encoding the protein is called crp. 

Moat et al. 2002. Microbial Physiology, 4th ed. Wiley-Liss. 

Recall that a gene name written in roman (not italic) type and with a capital first letter is really the name of the protein product of that gene. Thus, lacZ is the gene, but LacZ is the protein. In presenting a genotype, gene names written with a superscript + are considered wild-type genes. Gene names written without a superscript + are considered mutant genes. 

the induction of beta-galactosidase by lactose, and predict whether the lacZ gene is expressed at high or low levels in each case: The inactivated, mutant genes to consider are lacI, lacO, lacP, crp, and cya (the gene encoding adenylyl cyclase). What effects will those mutations have on catabolite repression? 

10.4 Predict what will happen to the expression of lacZ when a second copy of the lac operon region containing various mutations is present on a plasmid. The genotypes of these partial diploid strains are presented as chromosomal genes/plasmid gene. (a) lacI– lacO+P+Z!+Y!+A+/plasmid lacI+; (b) lacO– lacI+P+Z!+Y!+A+/plasmid lacO+; (c) crp– lacI+O+P+Z!+ Y!+A+/plasmid crp+. 

addition to lactose, the medium contains an alternative carbon source, such as glucose? Enzymes for glucose catabolism (glycolysis) are always produced at high levels because glucose is the favored catabolite (carbon source), providing the quickest source of energy. Many carbohydrates, including lactose, must fi rst be converted to glucose to be forestalls inducing the lac operon while glucose is present. 

the experiment to parallel cultures, and beta-galactosidase activity was measured. At the point indicated, glucose was added to one culture. From that point on, synthesis of beta-galactosidase continued to increase in the culture that lacked glucose but stopped in the culture that had glucose. 

The phenomenon is known as catabolite repression, in which the presence of a more favorable catabolite (commonly glucose) prevents expression of operons enabling catabolism of a second carbohydrate. When glucose and lactose are both present in the medium, cells initially grow by breaking down glucose until the glucose is depleted. Growth temporarily stops while lactose present in the medium induces the lacZYA operon. Once induced, cells can consume lactose and resume growth. The resultant biphasic growth curve is was present from the start, why was lacZYA turned off? It was turned off because glucose indirectly prevents the when lacZYA is already induced, adding glucose stops (or represses) induction. Catabolite repression via inducer exclusion. Failure of lactose to induce lacZYA during growth on glucose that growth on glucose keeps lactose out of the cell. This phenomenon is known as inducer exclusion. If lactose cannot enter the cell, the lacZYA operon cannot be induced. The key to inducer exclusion is that a component of the glucose transport system (phosphotransferase system, or to and inhibit LacY permease (Fig. 10.13). 

level of unphosphorylated IIAGlc is high because glucose continually siphons off the phosphate. Unphosphorylated IIAGlc inhibits LacY (lactose permease) activity to keep lactose from entering the cell. transports lactose, and the lac operon is induced. 

can interact with the LacI repressor, but it is not degraded preferred in these studies? 

Besides the lac operon model, bacteria have a surprising number of different ways to regulate operons. In this section we discuss proteins that have dual regulatory functions—performing as both activators (positive control) and repressors (negative control)—and we’ll see how an idling ribosome sends a chemical signal that affects the expression of many genes and operons. 

AraC forms a dimer. Without arabinose, the N-terminal arm binds its own C-terminal DNA-binding domain. When bound to arabinose, the N-terminal arm binds to the dimerization domain of the other monomer. 

Compact AraC binds at araI1 and araI2, and interacts with araBAD transcription. Arabinose is catabolized. 

Elongated AraC binds at araI a loop. 

AraC in this position cannot bound at the ParaBAD promoter, so araBAD is not transcribed. 

in a rigid, elongated form because the N-terminal arm of each monomer binds to its own C-terminal domain. This form represses expression of the araBAD operon for arabinose degradation. When arabinose is present, however, the dimer assumes a more compact form because the N-terminal arm of one monomer binds to the N-terminal How does AraC act as both repressor and activator? AraC is able to bind to three important DNA-binding sites. a binding site for cAMP-CRP that, as discussed in Section 10.2, is a global activator of many bacterial genes, including araBAD. The elongated AraC dimer (no arabinose) can bind these two sites. The result is a looped (but stuck) at the araBAD promoter. Transcription of the araBAD operon begins. of AraC. Arabinose moves the dimer from one site (repression) to the other (induction). AraC-like proteins show strong family resemblance at their DNA-binding domains, but homology usually disappears at the other end of the protein, the dimerization domain. The dimerization domain is where these proteins appear to bind or respond to a particular ligand (for example, arabinose). For most of the AraC/XylS family members, the identity of the ligand remains a mystery that, when solved, can yield interesting discoveries. For example, the AraC-like regulator MarR binds salicylate (an aspirin metabolite) to activate multiple genes conferring antibiotic resistance. 

mutation, the lacZYA operon is highly expressed regardless of whether lactose is present in the medium. Based on and its illustration of arabinose operon expression, what would happen to araBAD expression if AraC was missing? Why? 

In contrast, genes encoding biosynthetic enzymes are regulated by repressors (called inactive aporepressors) that must bind the end product of the pathway (for example, tryptophan for the trp operon) to become active repressors. The pathway product that binds the aporepressor is called a corepressor. Binding of the corepressor (end product) to the repressor increases the repressor’s affinity for the operator sequence upstream of the target gene or operon. As the concentration of end product, such as an amino acid or nucleotide, increases in the cell beyond what is needed to support growth, the cell will shut the biosynthetic pathway down and not waste energy making a superfluous pathway or compound. 

As just noted, many amino acid biosynthetic pathways are transcription. For instance, when internal tryptophan levels exceed cellular needs, the excess tryptophan (acting as a corepressor) will bind to an inactive repressor protein, TrpR, converting it to an active repressor (Fig. 10.15). positioned upstream of the tryptophan (trp) operon, 2. Binding of holorepressor to the trp operator inhibits−but does not altogether prevent−transcription. 

contains areas capable of base pairing. 1:2, 2:3, and 3:4 stems are possible. The 3:4 stem will terminate transcription. 

2. Ribosome stops, covering mRNA regions 1 and 2. Polymerase continues to transcribe regions 3 and 4. The 3:4 termination loop forms. 

1. Ribosome translates through trp codons and encounters translation stop codon. 

2. Scarce tRNATrp makes ribosome stall at trp codons. Polymerase continues through attenuator. 

1. Ribosome translates leader. 

polymerase and causes its release before reaching trpE. 

4. Polymerase transcribes trpE. 

four complementary nucleotide stretches within the leader mRNA. These regions, numbered 1–4, can base-pair to the stem loop structures are critical to the mechanism. These are the anti-attenuator stem loop formed by regions 2 and 3 and the attenuator stem loop (or terminator stem loop) formed by regions 3 and 4. If the 3:4 attenuator stem loop stem loop, however, prevents formation of the 3:4 stem loop because the 2:3 stem is longer and more thermodynamically stable than the 3:4 stem. The anti-attenuator stem, if High tryptophan levels. Because the ribosome is very large, cell is replete with charged tryptophanyl-tRNA and needs through the key tryptophan codons in the leader sequence but runs into a translation stop codon between regions 1 and 2. The ribosome stops in this position, enveloping region 2 and preventing formation of the 2:3 stem. As a the 3:4 attenuator stem snaps together. The attenuator stem halts transcription. As you would expect, the ribosome dissociates after reaching the region 2 stop codon, but because the 3:4 stem loop is already in place, the anti-attenuator 2:3 stem loop does not form. Subsequent ribosome release leads to formation of a 1:2 stem structure, precluding all possibility of regions 2 and 3 annealing. Low tryptophan levels. However, if the level of charged tryptophan codons. Because these codons occur right at the beginning of region 1, the ribosome does not cover region 3, the 2:3 anti-attenuator stem loop forms and stops formation of the 3:4 attenuator stem loop. The result is that binds to a ribosome-binding site at the trpE message.) Realize that for the trp operon, attenuation is a finetuning mechanism. The repressor provides the majority of control. However, transcriptional attenuation is a common regulatory strategy used to control many operons that code for amino acid biosynthesis. Note that even though translation is part of the attenuation control mechanism, attenuation is not considered translational control. The reason is discussed shortly. 

4. Less rRNA is made, which results in fewer ribosomes. 

DNA-binding proteins often recognize symmetrical the operator, and allows induction of the operon. The cAMP-CRP complex activates lacZYA transcription by interacting with the C-terminal domain of the many types of operons. In catabolite repression, a preferred carbon source (for example, glucose) prevents the induction of an operon (for example, lac) that enables catabolism of a different carbon source (lactose). Glucose transport through the phosphotransferase system causes catabolite repression by inhibiting LacY permease activity (inducer exclusion) and lowers cAMP levels. Many anabolic pathway genes (for example, for tryptophan biosynthesis) are repressed by the end product of the pathway (for example, the amino acid), which binds to a corepressor that inhibits transcription. AraC-like proteins are a large family of regulators, present in many bacterial species, that can activate and repress a target operon by assuming different Attenuation is a transcriptional regulatory mechanism in which translation of a leader peptide affects mRNA structure to influence transcription of a downstream structural gene. 

The stringent response is triggered during nutrient limitation when low cellular amino acid levels cause ribosomes to rRNA, which slows the rate of new ribosome synthesis. The overall rate of translation, then, will match growth rate. 

We have seen how repressor and activator proteins can sense the substrates or end products of biochemical pathways and influence the transcription of individual genes and operons. Might the cell also control the expression of large numbers of genes by modulating the levels or activities of The answer to both of these questions is yes. 

3. Transcription of spoIIAB constantly replenishes anti-σF. σF remains inactive. 

replication makes two chromosome copies; a polar-division septum traps part of one chromosome in the forespore. 

2. One gene initially left out of the forespore is spoIIAB, encoding anti-σF factor. 

Mother Cell and Forespore transcription of a variety of genes that promote survival in stationary phase. In large part, Salmonella orchestrates the proteolysis of the factor (protein degradation is discussed in or experience an environmental stress that slows growth, situations and trigger the expression of stress survival genes. Other sigma factors are controlled by anti-sigma factor proteins that inhibit sigma factor activity. Anti-sigma factor proteins target specific sigma factors and block access expression of target genes until they are needed. For example, Salmonella uses an anti-sigma factor (FlgM) to time events involved in constructing flagella. The transcription final stages of flagellar biosynthesis. The anti-sigma factor Once complete, the basal body selectively secretes the antisigma factor from the cell. Secreting FlgM from the cell, the final set of flagellar assembly genes. Anti-sigma factors can themselves be neutralized by anti-anti-sigma factors that bind the anti-sigma factor more tightly than sigma factor does. The anti-anti-sigma factor acts as a decoy to release anti-sigma factor from the actual sigma factor. Freed sigma factor can then join core Many mechanisms can liberate sigma factors from antisigma factors. The next section describes one linked to a cell differentiation event. 

5. Within 30 minutes, the entire chromosome (including spoIIAB encoding anti-σF ) moves into the forespore; anti-σF is replenished; σF is inactivated. 

is dislodged by anti-anti-σF replaced. σF is free to activate forespore-specific 4. Anti-sigma factor SpoIIAB is degraded in both compartments but, because of the genetic asymmetry, is replaced only in the mother cell. Anti-σF disappears in the forespore. 

These events occur in both compartments (forespore the forespore? Recall that at the time of septum formation, one chromosome is slowly pumped into the forespore. The during this time, and what was there is dislodged from σF by anti-anti factor and degraded by ClpPC (steps 3 and 4). the part of the genome trapped early on in the forespore. 

Eventually, the spoIIAB gene enters the forespore and replenishes anti-σF (step 5), and the next stage of sporulation begins. Elegant proof for this model was obtained in the laboratory of Richard Losick, a leading scientist in the field of microbial development. In Losick’s experiment, the gene for SpoIIAB (anti-sigma) was moved from its normal location far from the origin to a position near the origin. As a and stopped sporulation. The simple, unequal distribution of the chromosome during septal formation is heavily exploited during sporulation to trigger differential gene expression in two different cell compartments. 

transcribed; mRNA secondary structure hides ribosomebinding site; very little σH is made. 

secondary structure melts; ribosome-binding site is exposed; σH is made. 

2. DnaK-DnaJ-GrpE chaperones shunt σH to degradation. 

denature; unfolded forms bound by DnaK-DnaJ-GrpE. 

5. Freed from DnaK-DnaJ-GrpE, σH is not degraded and can drive expression of heat-shock genes. 

DnaJ, GrpE, DnaK, etc. 

Storz. Gottesman roles in establishing the importance of sRNA molecules in bacteria. 

discovering that regions between genes (intergenic regions) that affect the expression of many other genes. In addition to intergenic sRNAs, there are so-called that lay opposite an mRNA-encoding template strand (see Fig. 8.20). Cis-antisense regulatory transcripts can base-pair with cognate sense mRNAs and control their expression. Regulatory RNAs help control a variety of processes, such as plasmid replication, transposition, phage development, viral replication, bacterial virulence, environmental stress responses, and developmental control in lower eukaryotes. Mechanisms of sRNA function. Regulatory sRNA molecules typically affect gene expression after transcription (posttranscriptional control) by binding to complementary sequences located within target mRNA transcripts. These hybridizations can either stimulate or prevent translation, or affect degradation. Many but not all sRNAs require an and promote its regulatory effects on target mRNAs. Hfq is a hexameric ring protein with sRNA- and mRNA-binding faces. Table 10.2 groups sRNA molecules by mechanism. Most known sRNAs inhibit translation by base-pairing molecules can enhance translation by binding to part of a long 5′ untranslated mRNA sequence located upstream and prevents translation. However, when sRNA binds the target mRNA sequence, the untranslated region refolds to bind the mRNA and translate the message. Some sRNA molecules promote degradation of mRNA by altering mRNA folding to expose an RNase cleavage The second mechanism in this group prevents degradation Another class of sRNA affects mRNA processing. Assisted by sRNA, a long, unstable, polycistronic transcript can be processed to make shorter, more stable monocistronic mRNAs. For instance, an sRNA such as GadY of regulatory group can bind to select regulator proteins and CsrB, for example—can prevent the regulator from binding sRNA molecules expand the reach of regulatory proteins. 

5. Stimulates processing of mRNA to make more stable transcripts. 

6. Titrates regulatory proteins away from target mRNAs. 

energetically expensive. Small RNAs can expand a protein’s regulatory reach and, thus, maximize return on investment. The benefits of sRNAs are that they do not require protein synthesis to control gene expression, they diffuse rapidly, and they typically act on preexisting messages. Small RNAs represent one of the most economical ways to inhibit gene which regulates iron storage by expanding the reach of Fur, the ferric uptake regulator. Iron is hugely important for pathogens growing in the human body and for the quality of soil, where it determines which communities of bacteria and plants can grow. However, too much iron increases senses iron and regulates several genes whose products either scavenge iron from the environment or store iron in the cell (see Section 4.2). When intracellular iron levels are high, Fur represses expression of scavenging genes but operator sequences in front of target genes. But how does Fur activate iron storage genes? One mechanism is indirect and involves Fur repression of the sRNA RyhB (90 nt) low (as within the human body) because the Fur repressor is not active. RyhB then helps destroy mRNAs of several iron-storing and iron-using proteins (such as succinate dehydrogenase made from the sucCDAB operon). As a result, dwindling iron reserves can be put to more productive use. When iron is plentiful, however, Fur will directly repress ryhB. The lack of RyhB sRNA stabilizes the expression of the iron storage genes. Thus, succinate dehydrogenase is made, binds intracellular iron, and enables the use of succinate as a carbon and energy source. 

sequence in front of the genes regulated by Fur) and represses their low iron conditions, RyhB sRNA is expressed. RyhB sRNA binds to the sucCDAB message and renders it susceptible to an RNase. 

Binding of Fur represses ent and rhyB. 

regulatory protein Fur, and succinate dehydrogenase is shown in Based on this regulatory circuit, will a fur mutant grow on succinate? 

2. Formation of an extended duplex hinders ribosome binding but loop-loop interactions with target mRNA. 

(see the discussion of quorum sensing in Section 10.5). It then inhibits the translation of, and helps degrade, mRNAs no longer required for the infection (for example, those for some exotoxins and surface attachment proteins). 

S-box (specific for S-adenosylmethionine, of antisense message. 

MccA protein from the Clostridium acetobutylicum ubiG-mccB-mccA operon helps convert methionine to cysteine when cellular methionine levels are high. Red arrows indicate promoters and transcription start points for the ubiG operon and the antisense levels are low. (Black and red horizontal arrows indicate direction of polymerase movement.) The MccA transcript is not made, and the premature does not form when methionine concentration is high. Transcription of the ubiG-mccBA operon is completed, and cysteine can be made. 

archaeal sRNAs have been identified, but more must be learned about their functions if we are to understand their place in archaeal biology. 

2. Collision polymerases causes premature termination. The premature transcripts are degraded. 

No collision. ubiG-mccB mRNA is completed, and cysteine is made. 

antisense mccA gene will collide with, and stop, the and the premature transcript is degraded. However, when methionine concentration is high, S-adenosylmethionine (made from methionine) binds to the asRNA at the S-box (a riboswitch, described next) and stabilizes a transcription asRNA disengages, there is no polymerase collision. The ubiG-mccBA operon mRNA is completed, MccA is made, and cysteine is synthesized. Evidence suggests that asRNAs in bacteria have a broad impact on microbial processes. 

Changing the synthesis or activity of a sigma factor will coordinately regulate a set of related genes. Sigma factors can be controlled by altered transcription, translation, proteolysis, and anti-sigma factors. Sporulation relies on the hierarchical activation of a series of different sigma factors. Control mechanisms include temporary asymmetrical chromosome distribution between the forespore and the mother cell, and anti-sigma and anti-anti-sigma factors. Small regulatory RNAs found within bacterial intergenic regions regulate the transcription or stability of specific mRNA molecules and broaden the reach of protein regulators. 

affects expression of only that gene. These RNAs bind to complementary target mRNA and either stabilize the mRNA or make it susceptible to degradation. 

structures at the 5′ end of specific mRNA molecules that can obscure access to ribosome-binding sites or transcriptional terminator stems. Conditions that stabilize and small molecules for riboswitches) will alter translation of an mRNA or prematurely stop transcription. 

CheZ dephosphorylates CheY-P; rotor turns counterclockwise (run). 

1. No attractant. CheA kinase makes CheY-P; rotor periodically turns clockwise (tumble). 

It is interesting to note that while the basic chemotactic mechanism is evolutionarily conserved in bacteria, different genera use it differently. In the Gram-positive Bacillus CheA kinase, and CheY-P stimulates counterclockwise flagellar rotation and, thus, extended runs. This mechanism is Chemotaxis is important for some obvious and perhaps not so obvious reasons. It clearly provides a useful survival strategy in nature, keeping bacteria moving toward nutrient and away from trouble (for example, toxic compounds). For natural commensal bacteria or pathogens, however, chemotaxis can also be used to move the organism toward a cell surface to which it can attach. For example, the intestinal lining can exude chemical attractants that, like a beacon, will lead the bacteria in the intestine toward the cell surface where they can attach. In sum, chemotactic sensory perception plays a major role in structuring microbial communities, in affecting microbial activities, and in influencing various microbial interactions with the surroundings. Other important regulatory mechanisms operate without affecting gene expression. One intriguing system involving toxin-antitoxin modules is described in eTopic 10.4. 

(planktonic) and an adhesive multicellular biofilm. The transition can be seen clearly in batch cultures. The highly motile state appears during post-exponential growth when resources diminish further (stationary phase), the organism changes strategy: growth slows, motility decreases (a huge energy savings), and the synthesis of adhesins such as curli pili increases. After adhering to a surface, the cells start synthesizing exopolysaccharide matrix (see Chapter 4). The molecule c-di-GMP coordinates the transition by repressFIGURE 10.29 ■ Cyclic di-GMP [bis-(3′-5′)-cyclic dimeric ing flagellar synthesis genes and activating biofilm-promotguanosine monophosphate], or cdiGMP. ing genes such as those encoding curli pili. How is coordination achieved? Synthesis of c-di-GMP the bacterial cell in search of effector proteins. Another important second messenger is cyclic di-GMP (c-di-GMP) (Fig. 10.29), which is one key to timing biofilm formation. (see for explanation of the single-letter amino acid abbreviations). However, dedicated phosphodiesterases Stationary phase tiate degradation of c-di-GMP nella and Pseudomonas contain Cyclic di-GMP (c-di-GMP) is synthesized by diguanylate cyclases (DGCs), and degraded by phosphodiesterases (PDEs). becomes activated by a difFlagella ferent signal, thus increasing or decreasing c-di-GMP levels under different conditions. PDEs predominate in postBiofilm/No swim High levels of c-di-GMP in stationary phase exponential phase cells, which synthesis, thereby favoring biofilm formation. keeps c-di-GMP level low. Low c-di-GMP concentration favors motility and scavenging. In contrast, DGCs predomic-di-GMP nate in stationary phase and increase c-di-GMP level. High Lower levels of c-di-GMP in exponential phase favor motility and the search for food. c-di-GMP inhibits motility and Relative enzyme levels scavenging. Thus, highly motile cells are made in post-exponenTime tial phase while sessile, adherent cells able to produce biofilms are produced in stationary that c-di-GMP is required for Salmonella to make biofilms. biofilm on liquid medium. motif proteins eliminates c-diproteins, cannot make c-di-GMP, and does not form a biofilm. Cyclic di-GMP is a ubiq■ second messenger in bacteria and is not found in production by Salmonella requires c-di-GMP. 

eukaryotes or archaea. But why does one cell possess so many pairs of these proteins may operate at separate locations within a single cell and generate localized changes in c-di-GMP concentrations. Multiple, focused c-di-GMP gradients could produce different outputs in different parts of a single cell. Other examples of integrated control circuits are found throughout the microbial world. Regulation of nitrogen assimilation, for example, integrates physiological and of integrated control involves the “lifestyle” decisions made by bacteriophage lambda, which are described in Chapter 11. 

Methyl-accepting chemotaxis proteins (MCPs) clustered at cell poles bind chemoattractants and initiate a series of events lowering CheY-P levels. Reversible methylation or demethylation of MCPs desensitizes or sensitizes MCPs, respectively. The second messenger cyclic di-GMP (c-di-GMP) is acid motif. Many cellular functions are influenced by c-di-GMP, including biofilm formation and motility. 

Chemotaxis is a behavior in which motile microbes swim toward favorable environments (chemoattractants) or away from unfavorable environments (chemorepellents). The direction of flagellar motor rotation determines the type of movement. Counterclockwise rotation results in smooth swimming; clockwise rotation results in tumbling. Random movement toward an attractant causes a drop in CheY-P levels, which enables counterclockwise rotation and smooth swimming. 

Aliivibrio fischeri (formerly Vibrio fischeri) colonizes the light organ of the Hawaiian bobtailed squid (Euprymna scolopes). The light organ is deep inside each squid and of Hawaii) has studied various aspects of the symbiotic If the same colonies are viewed in darkness, the intensity of luminescence is remarkable. 

■ Microbial communication through quorum sensing. The lux system of Aliivibrio fischeri mediates that organism’s produces blue-green light. Other lux gene products are involved in synthesis of the aldehyde. 

with actual cell numbers. Induction of a quorum-sensing gene system really requires the accumulation of a secreted small molecule called an autoinducer (usually a homoserine lactone, although Gram-positive organisms are known to use short peptides). The more cells there are in a discrete space, the faster the critical level of autoinducer is reached. At a certain extracellular concentration, the secreted is LuxR (Fig. 10.32 ). The LuxR-autoinducer complex activates transcription of the luciferase target genes that confer bioluminescence. Luciferase is the enzyme of purified autoinducer to a low-density cell culture. Many other microbes use these chemical languages to coordinate behavior of the population (Table 10.3). For instance, quorum sensing is used by pathogens to time the production of virulence factors for optimum effect on the host. 

of the lung. The organism forms a biofilm in the lung and secretes virulence factors (such as proteases and other degradative enzymes) that destroy lung tissues (and thereby severely compromise lung function). These virulence proteins, however, are not made until cell density is fairly high—that is, at a point where the organism might have a chance of overwhelming its host. Made too early, virulence proteins would alert the host to launch an immune response. The induction mechanism involves two interconnected quorum-sensing systems, called Las and Rhl, both composed of regulatory proteins homologous to LuxR and LuxI of Aliivibrio fischeri. Many pathogens besides Pseudomonas appear to use chemical signaling to control virulence genes. These include Salmonella, Escherichia coli, Vibrio cholerae, the plant symbiont Rhizobium, and many others. 

kinases trigger converging phosphorylation cascades that end with the phosphorylation of LuxO. Phosphorylated LuxO (LuxO-P) activates the expression of Qrr small RNAs that promote degradation of LuxR mRNA. Luciferase is not made. As autoinducer concentrations increase, they inhibit autophosphorylation of the sensor kinases and the phosphorylation cascade. As a result, Qrr levels decrease, allowing synthesis of the LuxR regulator, which activates the lux operon. 

(a eukaryote) produces motile zoospores that explore and attach to Vibrio anguillarum bacterial cells in biofilms (Fig. 10.36). They attach and remain there because the sense. Part of the evidence for this interdomain communication involved showing that the zoospores would even “speak” to us? Do we “speak” back? For further discussion of molecular communication between prokaryotes and eukaryotes, see Chapter 21. This knowledge begs the question, Why would a squid want to harbor this bioluminescent microbe? Buried in the sand by day, the squid emerges at night from its safe hiding place to hunt for food. In moonlight, the squid would appear as a dark silhouette from below, marking it as easy prey for predators. It is thought that the squid camouflages itself by projecting light downward from its light organ, giving the appearance of surface-filtered light to predators below. Quorum sensing is a wonderful way to coordinate group behaviors, but what about more private communication between individual cells? Is that possible? Special Topic 10.1 shows that it is. 

Greenberg has studied quorum sensing in Vibrio species and various other pathogenic bacteria, such as Pseudomonas. 

alga Enteromorpha (red) attach to biofilm-producing bacteria (blue) in response to lactones produced by the bacteria. 

Greenberg, one of the pioneers of cell-cell communication research. 

10.10 Genes encoding luciferase can be used as “reporters.” was fused to the luciferase open reading frame? 10.11 What would happen if a culture was coinoculated with an Aliivibrio fischeri luxI mutant and a luxA mutant, neither of which produces light? 

can mediate nutrient transfers between auxotrophic organisms under starvation conditions. Communicating by nanotubes, therefore, gives bacteria a means of straightforward immediate transfer of information and materials across inherent species barriers. Moreover, molecules channeled by nanotubes are protected from degrading enzymes and harsh environmental conditions. Though untested, nanotubes might also be an efficient defensive strategy used to kill competitors by directly delivering toxic molecules. 

Erm protein lincomycin-resistant (LinR) cells forming nanotube connections that indicated (columns 2–4) or with no drugs added (column 5). Growth on the Cm + Lin plate was achieved only when the two strains were mixed in a single patch. 

Knowing that nanotubes can temporarily transfer antibiotic resistance from one cell to a second cell, how might you select for a mutant defective in nanotube formation? Discuss one potential pitfall with your approach. 

Quorum sensing involves the synthesis, secretion, and extracellular accumulation of small autoinducer signaling molecules. Cells within a population sense a threshold concentration of autoinducer and simultaneously respond by expressing a subset of genes. Quorum sensing enables communication between cells of a single species or between multiple species. Pathogens use quorum sensing to time the expression of virulence genes during growth within a host. 

The studies exposing many of the regulatory systems discussed in this chapter were accomplished by examining only a small number of genes at any one time. Now, however, new technologies enable scientists to examine thousands of genes or proteins in a single experiment. 

Red and blue genes are transcribed to the right and left, respectively. 

■ Transcriptomics of Escherichia coli acid resistance genes. Deep sequencing was used to quantify the relative numbers of transcripts made from each gene in wild-type and rpoS mutant strains. Each vertical bar in the bottom four panels represents a portion of a transcript. The experiments actually captured data from all genes expressed from the genome, but only some of these data are shown. 

■ Proteomic profile of Bacillus subtilis cells grown in minimal media with and without mixed amino acid supplementation (casamino acids). The isoelectric focusing the color red to proteins expressed in minimal media and green to proteins expressed in amino acid–supplemented media. If the proteins are expressed under both conditions, the red and green colors combine to form yellow or orange. 

reverse transcriptase. The number of cDNA fragments made corresponds to the number of transcripts present in cDNA molecules. Each molecule, with or without amplification, is then sequenced in a high-throughput manner (for example, Illumina’s sequencing by synthesis) to obtain short sequences from one end or both ends of each fragment (corresponding to transcript copy). The reads, and then tabulates the number of fragments sequenced at much that gene was expressed. Comparing results between cells grown under different conditions, or between a mutant and a wild-type strain, will expose how the expression of every gene is influenced by the change. for instance, illustrates the effect time—a property known as acid resistance. This capability requires numerous genes, as shown in the top panel of the figure. Tyrrell Conway and colleagues at the University of Oklahoma used deep sequencing to quantify the transcript levels of these genes in wild-type and rpoS mutants of sensitive to acidic environments like stomach contents. compares the expression of these genes in wild-type (panels 2 and 4) and RpoS-deficient strains (panels 3 and 5). Note that transcripts of all of these genes are decreased in the acid-sensitive rpoS mutant. every gene in a cell. For an organism like Salmonella Typhi, the causative agent of typhoid fever, this requires seeing more than 4,600 genes. All of this can be done on a slide the size of a postage stamp. The microarray technique is described in eAppendix 3. 

the level of a protein is higher, lower, or the same in the two cultures. Proteins of interest can be plucked from the gel and their identities determined though mass spectrometry techniques, discussed next (see also eAppendix 3). 

1. Proteins extracted from bacterial culture. 

3. Peptides separated by column chromatography. 

2. Protease added to digest protein. 

5. Molecular weight of each peptide provided by mass calculations. 

6. Protein identified by sum of its peptide masses. 

7. Peptides quantified by heights of peak signals. 

a bacterial culture are digested into peptides with trypsin. The peptides are separated by column chromatography and analyzed mass of each peptide is determined first (peaks 1–4 in the graph), and then selected peptides are subjected to additional fragmentation by ion spray (not shown). Each resulting peptide fragment will differ in size by one or more amino acids. Knowing the mass of each amino acid and the masses of the different peptide fragments enables extrapolation of the original peptide’s sequence. 

where modifications such as phosphorylation or acetylation happen on proteins? 

1. Proteins extracted and digested by trypsin. 

2. Peptides labeled with isobaric tags. 

Each subfragment peak contains identical but differentially tagged peptides from each sample. 

to make volatile odorous products. Helena Barzantny and this organism. The result was a network of 48 regulators and 674 gene regulatory interactions that provide an early step in understanding how body odor develops. 

Reporter groups are released during subfragment ionization, and ratios are measured. 

Transcriptomic and proteomic technologies have been used for many microbial applications. One fascinating example centers on the transcriptional events that occur during the developmental cycle of Caulobacter crescentus. This organism progresses from a nonreplicating swimming and proteomic analysis have revealed several potential regulators of this complex developmental process. Bioinformatic approaches have also been applied to human body odor. 

Bacteria employ a vast array of regulatory mechanisms, both simple and complex, to make survival decisions. But do they possess cognitive ability? This is a controversial idea, but one worth pondering. Cognition in its broadest sense is the process of acquiring, processing, storing, and acting on information from the environment. Memory, for instance, is critical to cognition. Chemotactic bacteria use arrays of methyl-accepting chemotaxis proteins to remember where it is in a chemical gradient. The information acquired is then used to guide decisions about cell movement. Two-component signal transduction systems, prominent in bacteria, contribute to cognition if the systems cross-talk. Bacterial signal transduction systems crosstalk when a histidine kinase phosphorylates a noncognate tags for relative and absolute quantitation technique) contain a reporter group and a balance group so that different tags still have the same masses. The peptide reactive group is used to link the tag to peptide amines. 

Human embryo makes retroviral particles. Human genomes contain many sequences of endogenous retroviruses (HERVs) that infected human ancestors millions of years ago. In some cases, the retroviral genes evolved into human genes that express essential proteins. Human embryos at the capsid antibody stain (red). The blastocyst nuclei are labeled arise when cell nuclei express an embryonic regulator protein (labeled green). Activation of viral proteins may protect the embryo from infection by exogenous viruses. Source: Edward Grow and Joanna Wysocka et al. 2015. Nature 522:221. 

Nucleus expresses embryonic regulator. 

iruses such as influenza virus, hepatitis virus, worldwide. Yet many other viruses coexist with us without harm. What makes one virus deadly and another helpful? The answer lies in the molecules. Endogenous viral genomes contribute molecular parts for our bodies, such as a protein for placental fusion. Even the viruses most deadly to humans can be converted to vectors that cure a human disease. 

How does an endogenous retrovirus contribute to the human genome? 

Endogenous retroviruses (ERVs) are remnants of ancient retroviral infections and comprise about 8% of the human genome. Major evolutionary innovations, such as placentation, have been associated with the co-option are readily detected in human blastocysts, indicating that early human development proceeds in the presence of retroviral What do you find most exciting about the implications for virology and human biology? From the human development perspective, these results argue that complex interactions between HERV-encoded retroviral products and host factors fine-tune regulatory properties of early human development. Moreover, HERVs can rewire developmental networks via their functions as promoters or enhancers for human genes. Furthermore, HERVs are also interesting from a human evolution perspective, as they can be exapted (evolve a new function) in a lineage-specific manner as human-specific enhancers. 

Lederberg in her laboratory at Stanford, holding phage stocks in cotton-stoppered tubes. 

Lederberg (1922–2006), pioneering bacterial geneticist at the University of Wisconsin–Madison, and later Stanford University (Fig. 11.2). At the time, it was known that some kinds of bacteria spontaneously lyse and release phages, but the mechanism, even the source of phage from within the been isolated in 1922 from a healthy patient’s colon and was used for decades thereafter in teaching and research. In 1950, Lederberg was performing a genetic cross between a strain that she had mutagenized with ultraviolet light. After the two strains were mixed, the mutant strain formed The plaques resulted from phage particles lysing the mutant strain. The mutant had lost its lambda prophage and was Further experiments confirmed that at that time, all coli, were lysogenic for phage lambda. Lysogeny means that the genome of a phage is incorporated into the genome of the host cell (discussed in Chapter 6). As the host cell then reproduces, phage particles no longer exist the host, as an integrated prophage. The presence of the prophage confers resistance to infection by the same type of phage. Phage lambda is thus called a “temperate always kills its host. But occasionally (about once in a million cells), a molecular signal tells the prophage genes to plaques show a cloudy center where newly formed lysogens appear. reporter strains on MacConkey agar; with Lynn Thomason, at the National Cancer Institute. 

make progeny phages and lyse the cell. Thus, unknown lysogen typically carried about a million lambda phages per milliliter. The phages released can form plaques on a strain that is not a lysogen (has no lambda prophage) some of the infected cells become lysogens, which start growing up where the infection began. most strains used today. Other notable discoverers of the nature of lysogeny include French microbiologists André Lwoff (1902–1994) and François Jacob (1920–2013). The molecular basis of the lysis/lysogeny “switch” was elucidated by Mark Ptashne and colleagues (discussed shortly). 

Tail tip proteins is called the “head.” Usually the 50 nm Side tail fiber head consists of an icosahedral proprotein Stf tein complex, equivalent to the capsid of a tail-less virion. The head of phage lambda contains coiled dou■ lambda falls under Baltimore Group Full regulation of the switch includes numerous viral and host proteins, whose details continue to be discovered by pentamer at each vertex of the icosahedron, except for the researchers such as Lynn Thomason and her student Kathtail connector. The tail connector comprises four proteins subunit is found in multiple copies that form a ring around the tail connector. Thought Question Tail fibers 11.1 Plaques from phage lambda quickly fill with resistant lysogens. Could there be a different way for the host cells to become resistant, without forming lysogens? 

Cohesive ends at cos sites. 

1. Nick. 3. 5′ peels off. 

Then it replicates multiple genomes end to tail, forming a concatemer. 

The receptor for phage lambda is obtain these short glucose chains from anaerobes such as BacteroiExterior des species that break down large complex polysaccharides from plant material (discussed in Chapters 13 and 21). Sugar chain uptake is cruMaltose porin normally helps Beta barrel unlikely to lose the complex by evoprovided by anaerobic bacteria lution, even though phage lambda of the gut microbiome. takes advantage of it for infection. The phage binds specifically to maltose porin, the outer membrane pore that transports maltose into the cell (Fig. 11.7). Porins are a large family of proteins that share ture (presented in Chapter 3). The beta barrel of maltose porin (blue in Fig. 11.7) is buried in the outer membrane. The phage-binding sites (green) were identified by amino acid substitution mutations that prevent phage binding and confer host resistance to generates a long line of tandemly repeated genomes called tor,” LamB, because it was discovered by its function as the later. Once the long double-stranded molecule is complete, lambda receptor. Of course, the protein actually evolved in the terminase enzyme cleaves the concatemer into pieces the host as a way to obtain nutrients. that fit into phage head coats. For phage lambda, the Attaching to the cell surface is just the first challenge the genomes are cleaved at the cos site, which acts as a signal phage faces to establish infection (Fig. 11.8, step 1). How to package the progeny genome into the protein head coat. Cleavage restores the two cos ends to form linear genomes coiled into the phage head. an extrusion mechanism that is not fully understood. SomeThought Question maltose transport complex of the inner membrane, to reach 11.2 What advantages does rolling-circle replication offer a the cytoplasm (step 2). Within the cytoplasm, the staggered ends of the cos sites anneal and are ligated, circularizing the to transcribe the phage operons. At first, though, the newly introduced phage genome Phage Attachment and Infection face and insert its genome into the cytoplasm (discussed in Chapter 6). Most types of bacteriophages extrude their ■ Cro protein leads to lysis. Small amounts of Cro actigenome from the head or capsid and thread it across the vate the lytic cycle. bacterial envelope while leaving the capsid outside. An capsid penetrates the entire envelope to replicate slowly within the cytoplasm. Phage lambda, however, uses the face receptor. The phage adsorbs (attaches) to the receptor depends on numerous factors in the gut environment, by contact with its tail fibers. 

7. Capsid assembly, tail assembly, fiber assembly. 

9. Lysis by holin and endolysin. 

suppose multiple phage particles coinfect the cell at the same time. This event implies that the host population is outnumbered by phages, and thus progeny phages will have poor opportunities to find a host. For this reason the phage has evolved a mechanism to avoid lytic reproduction: which now evades the host protease and blocks Cro. When integrates with att by site-specific recombination—that is, recombination between the backbones of two DNAs that share a short sequence in common (discussed in Chapter 9). lambda phages. This is what happens to most of your intestinal bacteria between meals: the bacteria stay in stationary phase with their lysogenic phages repressed. The phage was the first protein-DNA binding event to be described (Fig. 11.9). Mark Ptashne at Memorial Sloan Kettering groove mediates the function of many genetic regulators of animals and plants, as well as bacteria. lysis (host cell destruction, and release of progeny phages). 

it did without any prophage integrated. The nearly all expression of phage genes dangerPR Lytic-cycle mRNA ous to the cell and prevents superinfection by other phage lambda particles. Yet at any time, Cro blocks repressor and trigger a lytic cycle. The lysis/ proteins, with multiple other regulators that modify their function, only some 1. Multiple phages of which are shown in Fig. 11.10. Such complexity is evidence of a lengthy evolution, in which multicII ple “adjustments” had time to occur in both phage and host genomes. The result is a control network highly responsive to diverse signal inputs from the environment. 

Induction of lytic cycle. During lysogeny, by HflB protease. 

repressor can be made to block phage production, and the cell is committed to lysis. Maintaining lysogeny. To avoid lysis requires continual the major lytic operon, as well as the leftward-transcribing (not shown). The multiple molecules working together show “cooperativity,” a property whereby the binding of two regulators is stronger than the sum of the individual off character of a molecular switch, lessening the occurrence of partial states in between. Other examples of cooperative molecular regulators are presented in Chapter 10. 

mechanisms to construct bacteria with functions useful to us. For example, Pamela Silver’s students used a CI/Cro switch to build a bacterial recorder that detects an environmental signal within the intestine. This kind of bacterial device offers promise for future development of diagnostic and therapeutic tools. fused to lacZ, whose product generates blue colonies when expressed on indicator plates. (Gene fusion techniques are result is colonies that are white. The same bacteria contain another fragment of the lambda switch, the “trigger element,” in which Cro is expressed from a gene under control of the antibiotic-inducible promoter to the bacteria. The tetP-cro trigger element now expresses The blue phenotype recurs for many generations. What happens when we put this bacterial recorder into the microbiome of a mouse? First, to colonize the mouse intestine, the bacterium needs to include a selective gene for competitive advantage within the microbial community—a gene conferring resistance to streptomycin. The mice are treated exposure and report it long after the signal has gone. Other applications of phage lambda sound more like science fiction. In 2015, Ido Yosef and colleagues at Tel Aviv University constructed a lambda phage that specifically kills antibiotic-resistant bacteria, while sparing bacteria that lack antibiotic resistance. The phage actually delivers a CRISPR-Cas defense to its host, protecting the host from phage lysis. In a different kind of experiment, physicists at the Weizmann Institute of Science in Rehovot, Israel, used This partly biological device is used to study biochemical networks relevant to medicine. There is no end in sight to future applications of the familiar phage lambda. 

Reporter makes blue colonies. 

Phage lambda binds to the host maltose porin. early phage genes are expressed. or lysogeny. Single-phage infection (Cro protein) leads to lysis, whereas multiple-phage infection In a lytic cycle, rolling-circle replication generates progeny genomes. The progeny genomes are packaged into head coats and then cleaved from the concatemer; the filled heads are attached to tails. Late-expressed proteins lead to lysis. own expression, while repressing expression of Cro and proteins of the lytic cycle. Human gut bacteria frequently switch between lysis and lysogeny. The CI/Cro switch is used for synthetic biology. The molecular switch is built into biomedical devices. 

infecting human cells require complex replication cycles among the compartments of a eukaryotic cell. Their progeny virions must navigate our organ systems to maintain infection and achieve transmission to new hosts; for example, avian influenza strains poorly transmit to humans because the cell-surface receptors they need are hidden deep within the human respiratory tract. And viruses face the defenses of our immune (–) strand system (see Chapters 23 and 24). Even for the deadliest strains, such as the pandemic influenza of 1918, a large proportion of infected people eliminate the virus without symptoms (asymptomatic infection). Why do some people fight off the virus, whereas others who appear equally succumb? Many mysteries remain to Nuclear export challenge the research virologist. 

expressed in the previous host, before the virions formed base pairs, and differs from the standard helical forms Segmented genome. Influenza virus has a segmented genome consisting of multiple separate nucleic acids, like the multiple chromosomes of a eukaryotic cell. The influenza genome includes eight segments, each a separate (Figs. 11.12 and 11.14). Within the infected cell, each (–) strand segment must be transcribed to a (+) strand mRNA two different strains of influenza virus infect a host simultaneously, their segments can reassort to generate a novel hybrid strain. Because influenza genomes are capable of reassortment, they can rapidly generate a new strain that same time, like the other viruses, influenza viruses continually acquire small mutations that can lead to new phenotypes with respect to drug resistance and host range. The double threat of drastic change and subtle smaller changes in its genome explains why influenza presents a huge global challenge for public health. 

11.5 Could the influenza genome change by recombination of segments, rather than reassortment? What about the lambda phage genome? 

In 1979, in Europe, an avian flu strain was found to have “jumped” into swine (the “avian-like” swine strain). In 1992, a triple-reassortant strain was identified that came from a human strain, the triple reassortant could be transmitted readily between humans. Today, molecular surveillance reveals many emerging strains of human influenza measures such as quarantine helped keep the disease rate in China in 2013. So far, these avian strains have been contained—but the next time we may be less fortunate. 

■ Influenza receptors in different hosts. The avian host receptor polysaccharide contains sialic acid with an alpha-2,3 bond to galactose, whereas the human receptor in the upper respiratory tract has an alpha-2,6 bond. Swine receptors include both forms of sialic acid; thus, swine can be infected by both avian and human strains and may act as a “mixing bowl” for reassortment. 

could arise from antigenic drift, a small mutation in the pandemic with high mortality. That is why public health transmission in the ferret model system, which closely resembles acid-activated fusion the human system. Endocytosis and membrane fusion. 

4. The fusion peptides extend into the vesicle membrane, where they mediate fusion between viral and host membranes. 

Endocytosis of the influenza virion involves a key step of acidmediated membrane fusion, which offers a target for antiviral agents (Fig. 11.17 ). As the influenza vvirion binds its sialic acid receptor (Fig. 11.17, step 1), a host of an envelope protein (cleaved from hemagglutinin in the case of influenza virus) that changes conformation so as to facilitate envelope fusion with the host cell When the virion is taken up by endocytosis, the endocytic vesicle fuses with a lysosome and its interior acidifies (Fig. 11.17, step 3). in the matrix layer (see Fig. 11.12 for virion structure). The influx of acid causes the matrix proteins to dissociate from the NP-coated of amantadine, one of the first antiinfluenza drugs; unfortunately, most strains today have evolved resistance to the drug. Low pH also induces a conformational change shifting the C-terminal ends back and the N-terminal fusion peptides outw to face the vesicle membrane. 

The replication of influenza virus requires that the viral components travel in and out of the nucleus (Fig. 11.18 ). Several viral enzymes and structural proteins travel along with its genetic material. As progeny envelope proteins are the cell membrane. The overall replication cycle is highly complex—even in the simplified diagram shown here. 

4 Transcription primed by b capped host mRNA. 

imported from the cytoplasm. The NP-coated (+) strand export protein (NS2)—proteins that were imported from segments exit the nucleus to the cytoplasm (Fig. 11.18, step 11), where they approach the cell membrane for packaging into progeny virions (step 12). 

are glycosylated by host enzymes and then transferred to the Golgi (Fig. 11.18, step 13) for export to the cell membrane (step 14). Within the cell membrane, the envelope complexed with their matrix and packaging proteins, completing the virion particle (step 15). To exit the cell, the virion buds out (Fig. 11.18, step 16). Viral exit requires a final step of host release: link of the host glycoproteins (step 17), releasing the virion out into the bloodstream. This host release activity of neuraminidase is inhibited by oseltamivir (Tamiflu), the main antiviral agent currently useful against influenza. Tamiflu remains useful today, but resistant strains of the 2009 Experimental evidence. How do researchers figure out all and labeled nucleic acid probes reveal the presence of viral within a cell, even tracking their motion over 14. Envelope proteins transfer to cell membrane. 

15. Envelope coats capsid. 

13. Envelope proteins enter Golgi. 

16. Virion buds out and neuraminidase cleaves sialic acid receptor, releasing virion. 

7. Packaging proteins return to nucleus. 

1 Nuclear export tthe nucleus. 

host protease activates fusion peptide. 

National Institutes of Health. In this experiment, influenza laboratory culture derived from canine kidney tissue. The linked to four different fluorophores with different excitation-emission properties. Thus, the positions of progeny four different colors. The “merge” panel shows how many of the different fluorophore positions overlap (white dots). The overlap of colors from different types of segments suggests that vRNAs are already linking together as they exit the nucleus (Fig. 11.18, step 11) and enter the cytoplasm for assembly into virions. Such ingenious experiments continually require us to rewrite the textbooks. 

The influenza virus consists of segmented (–) strand segments of the influenza virus. The matrix is surrounded by an envelope containing spike proteins. viral envelope and host cell membrane. For influenza, the virion is internalized by endocytosis. 

Influenza mRNA synthesis initiates with a capped viral mRNAs return to the cytoplasm for translation. segments are then packaged in newly made nucleocapsid protein and exported to the cytoplasm, for coating with matrix, host cell membrane, and viral envelope proteins. Neuraminidase cleaves the sialic acid connection to host glycoproteins. This key step of virion release can be blocked by Tamiflu. 

Research Highlight). Surprisingly, endogenous retroviruses evolve into essential parts of host genomes (see Section 11.4). claimed 1.5 million lives. Yet three decades of research have from populations. And the virus is engineered to make “lentivectors,” our most successful agents of gene therapy (see Section 11.4). 

type that appears to have evolved independently from a different strain infecting monkeys. The virus is transmitted through blood and through genital or oral-genital contact. gradual buildup of virus particles, most of which are eliminated by the host. Eventually, however, the virus destroys against many organisms that normally would be harmless. 

pill to greatly decrease their chance of infection. But still, infected individuals must take expensive drugs with side We need a vaccine, but decades of research have failed. Why? The answers to this question are complex. 

electron-dense core particle (or capsid) surrounded by a the core contains spike proteins, which join the membrane to the matrix, as in influenza virus. The envelope forms around the core from host cell membrane, when a progeny cell function (discussed shortly). 

Vif, Vpr, Vpu, Rev, Tat, Nef. 

Virion component: arrests T-cell growth. cells in which mitosis dissolves the nucleus. 

Virion component: virions, and to lessen immune response to the infected cell. 

Membrane protein: • Promotes virion assembly and release from cell-surface tetherins. 

Nuclear phosphoprotein, combines with host cell proteins: • Stabilizes certain mRNAs in nucleus. • Exports mRNA out of nucleus into cytoplasm, inducing shift from latent phase to virion-producing phase. 

(simian immunodeficiency virus) arose independently multiple times over several decades, from a common origin in monkeys. P.t.s. = Pan troglodytes patient, different drugs may select strains with different resistance mutations. The mutant strains may then recombine to generate a double-resistant strain. 

The variants may colonize different tissues and organs. Only one of these types (purple) is optimized to infect the next “recipient.” Within the recipient, the new virions replicate and regenerate the quasispecies. Source: Modified from Sarah Joseph, 2015. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 13:414. 

of antibodies (discussed in Section 24.2). Disruption of this antibody production is the main cause of the AIDS-related susceptibility to opportunistic infections. Note, however, microglia (macrophage-like cells in the central nervous system) and Langerhans cells (immune cells of the epidermis). Their presence may make other cells susceptible to infection Spike proteins mediate membrane fusion. The binding proteins accessible to the host immune system. peptide rearrangement similar to that of influenza virus, except that it takes place at the cell surface (Fig. 11.24). to secondary receptors in the membrane called chemokine Chemokines are signaling molecules for the immune system, but their receptor proteins can bind viruses that evolve with different receptor preferences varies over the course An exciting discovery was that individuals who lack approved for therapy in 2007 (see eTopic 11.5). 

Viral and host membranes fuse. 

that of influenza virus, in which endocytosis and lysosome fusion are required to open the capsid and release the the cytoplasm. 

3′ poly-A “tail” that enable them to mimic host nuclear the previous infected cell. The primer might be expected “points” toward the opposite end, positioned to synthesize the tRNA actually binds near the 5′ end, where initially it can generate only a brief sequence. These early sequences insertion into the host genome (discussed next). 

deoxyribonucleoside triphosphates (dNTPs) starting at the to retroviruses. The details are important, as they suggest possible targets for new antiviral drugs. 

“fingers”—a configuration typical of other degraded, and the DNA-primer complex is transferred to the opposite end, where it can somewhere in the host genome. 

integrates into the host chromosome, flanked by repeats and host target. 

step 6). The circular molecule then integrates into the host provirus. Integration generates two copies of the provirus flanked by two copies of the host target sequence. Proviral sequences can now be expressed, directing production of progeny virions. An alternative to virion production is that the integrated within the genome of its host cell, hiding for many years with only infrequent production of virions. The few virions shed by the patient, however, can infect an unsuspecting individual who has sexual contact with or is exposed to the blood of the patient. 

an exceptionally large number of accessory proteins that govern the level of viral production and the duration of the quiescent phase, when the integrated chromosome replicates with the host cell. 

a 5′ cap and a 3′ poly-A tail (step 6). Some of the RNAs exit the nucleus (step 7) to serve as mRNA for translation of are cut and spliced to complete the env gene sequence for translation of Env (envelope) proteins (step 9). The Env proteins are made within the endoplasmic the Golgi for glycosylation and packaging (step 11) and are exported to the cell membrane (step 12). At the membrane, Env proteins plug into the core particle as it forms from the Virion assembly and exit. The core particles are packaged with envelope derived from host cell membrane containing Env spike proteins (Fig. 11.26, step 14). To escape the host cell, emerging virions require accessory protein Vpu to bind a “tetherin,” a host adhesion protein induced by interferon to cause reuptake and digestion of virions. Vpu causes proteosomal degradation of the tetherin. Emerging virions, containing Gag subunits as well as reverse transcriptase the conical core structure. Proteases that cleave Gag-Pol offer important drug targets, which have led to the development of anti-HIV drugs known as protease inhibitors. transmission that avoid exposing virions to the immune system. One alternative is cell fusion, mediated by binding core particles can enter the new cell through their fused cytoplasm. The fusion of many cells can form a giant multinucleate cell called a syncytium. Cell fusion with formation ever exiting a cell. Another means of cell-to-cell transmission is to travel through a “nanotube” connection between The intricate scheme in actually omits of genes for accessory proteins often decreases virulence; thus, these proteins are potential targets for chemotherapy. so crippled by its high mutation rate that the slightest interference greatly decreases production of infective virions. Thus, numerous effective antiviral agents are now known— but all have side effects, and all select for resistant strains. 

Accessory proteins regulate virion formation and the without reproduction of progeny virions. 

emerge, they remain tethered to the cell surface by host tetherins, with different fluorescent labels (red versus green). 

Endogenous Retroviruses and Gene Therapy the ability to produce progeny. What would happen to its genome? The integrated genome would be “trapped” within a cell, an endogenous retrovirus. If the cell entered the host germ line, over many host generations in its host the retroviral sequence would inevitably accumulate more mutations. It could even provide the material for evolution of a new trait. Such endogenous retroviruses inspired the idea that researchers could intentionally manipulate a retrovirus to impart a useful trait and use it for gene therapy. 

Endogenous retroviruses and other retroelements in the human genome may arise from progressive degeneration of ancestral retroviruses, or they may be progenitors of new retroviruses. 

Other elements, known as retrotransposons, retain only partial retroviral elements but may maintain a reverse transcriptase to copy themselves into other genomic locations. An example of a retrotransposon is the well-known Alu sequence, a short sequence found in about a million copies in the human genome. In some cases, a retrotransposon such as Alu can interrupt a key human gene, leading to a genetic defect such as a defective lipoprotein receptor associated with abnormally high cholesterol level and heart failure. Still other retroelements, known as LINEs (long interspersed nuclear elements) and SINEs (short interspersed nuclear elements), show more vestigial remnants of retroviral genomes. Amazingly, retroelements and transposons appear to have generated about half the sequence of the human genome. Many HERVs and other mammalian ERVs are now known to express viral components, such as reverse transcriptase, as part of normal host function. An example response to carbohydrate antigens (Fig. 11.29). In mice, normal function of the B-cell response involves B-cell antigen receptors, antibody-like molecules that reside in the plasma membrane (discussed in Chapter 24). Like antibodies, B-cell receptors specifically recognize certain types of foreign molecules—in this case, carbohydrates that might come from a pathogen. The B-cell receptor signal requires a cascade of intracellular signals culminating in B-cell proliferation and antibody production. Part of the cascade requires induction of an activate genes for antibody production. The requirement is demonstrated by treating mice with inhibitors of reverse transcriptase, which consequently inhibit antibody production. 

allows lentivector endocytosis by various kinds of human cells. 

that allows uptake by various kinds of cells. The engineered viral genome lacks disease-causing genes but possesses a transgene needed by the patient. The Emily Whitehead was the first child to be considered cured of an illness (B-cell leukemia) by a lentiviral vector. 

with human gene is integrated into host cell genome. 

contains a human transgene that becomes integrated into the host genome. Could lentiviral integration be dangerous for the patient? activating an adjacent proto-oncogene—that is, a human gene that causes cancer when expressed at the wrong time. To avoid this problem, lentivectors are modified so that their promoters can activate only the gene of choice, not an adjacent cancer gene. Furthermore, lentiviral vectors offer a boys. The lentivector inserted a gene replacing a defective gene in each boy’s blood stem cells. In a different case, in 2012, the first leukemia patients were successfully treated by lentiviral gene therapy. The Whitehead (Fig. 11.30 inset), was the first child to be considered fully “cured” of disease by a lentiviral vector. 

Only lentivector enters cell of human patient. 

Plasmids supply infection proteins in cultured cells that produce lentivectors. 

required for genomic integration (dark blue), with promoter and regulator elements derived from various other viruses (red) and the plasmids. Their expression is driven by regulatory elements from other viruses (red). Source: Modified from Blesch. 2003. Methods 33:164. 

To express the transgene (the gene of interest for found in previous studies to contribute specific properties to infection. Although these genes originate from different viruses, they nevertheless function together like parts of a vector plus the three helper plasmids are introduced into a special tissue culture line. The vector and plasmids enter the cells by a process, called transfection, in which calcium phosphate treatment promotes the uptake of nucleic acids across the cell membrane. The host tissue culture cells replicated and packaged into virions. 

Deleting virulence genes. Viral genes that promote disease and virion proliferation, but are not required deleted from the vector genome. To produce the vector in tissue culture, the viral proliferation genes are provided on helper plasmids. 

altogether. The disadvantage of avoiding integration is lentivectors, molecular modification avoids activation of proto-oncogenes. 

Altering tissue specificity. The tropism, or tissue specificity, can be altered by replacing the gene for the viral envelope glycoprotein (spike protein) with the envelope gene from a different virus. For example, a rabies virus glycoprotein can be used to target the vector to brain cells. The alteration of viral tissue specificity by envelope gene replacement is called “pseudotyping.” Pseudotyping can be used either to narrow the host range or to broaden it, depending on the needs of the vector. Avoiding germ-line infection. Current medical standards prohibit alteration of the germ line, the egg and sperm cells that transmit genes to the next generation. Because the long-term risks of gene therapy are unknown, only somatic gene therapy (gene insertion into somatic, or body, cells) is permitted. Thought Question 11.8 What do you think are the arguments for or against lentivectors editing the germ line? 

Ancient retroviral sequences persist within animal genomes, including the human genome. Endogenous retroviruses (ERVs) retain the four main retroviral genes. Other sequences decay by mutation and are called Gene transfer vectors are made from viruses. Virulence genes are deleted from a lentivector (lentiviral vector). Efficient promoter sequences from other viruses are inserted. Adenoviral vectors circularize and replicate separately from the host genome. Lentivectors integrate within the host genome. 

for example, the vaccinia genome encodes nearly 200 different proteins. The complexity of viruses such as vaccinia and herpes approaches that of small cells. Herpes viruses have been associated with humans and our ape ancestors for hundreds of millions of years (see Chapter 6). Different herpes viruses cause diseases ranging from chickenpox (varicella-zoster virus) to birth defects (cytomegalovirus). Today, in a remarkable twist, we have engineered a “tumor-eating herpes” to treat metastatic tumors (discussed shortly). used in the replication of prokaryotic and phage genomes, more than a polymerase; enzymes such as helicase, primase, and single-strand binding proteins are also needed. 

Herpes Simplex Virus Infects the Oral or Genital Mucosa most common infections in the United States. Approximately 60% of Americans acquire herpes simplex, usually through sexual contact (oral or vaginal). Genital herpes causes recurrent eruptions of infection in the reproductive tract (Fig. 11.32). Many of those infected are unaware of symptoms, but they can still transmit the disease to others. Herpes simplex virus typically infects cells of the oral or genital mucosa, causing ulcerated sores. The primary infection is epithelial, followed by latent infection within the trigeminal ganglion, which processes nerve impulses between the face and eyes and the brain stem. The latent infection of the ganglia later leads to new outbreaks of virus, often triggered by stress such as menstruation, sunlight exposure, or depression of the immune system. Progeny virions travel back down the dendrites to the epithelia, causing lytic infection. In the trigeminal ganglion, herpes reactivation can lead to eye disease or lethal brain infection. In most cases, herpes symptoms can be controlled by antiviral agents such as acyclovir (discussed to the fetus, with serious complications for the child. Herpes simplex virus is closely related to varicella-zoster virus, the cause of chickenpox, also an epithelial infection. Varicella, too, can hide in ganglial neurons, emerging decades later to cause painful skin lesions called shingles. 

packaged within an icosahedral capsid. The capsid is surrounded by tegument, a collection of virus-encoded and host-derived proteins. The two segments meet. 

a collection of about 15 different kinds of virus-encoded proteins, as well as proteins from the previous host. The tegument is contained within a host-derived membrane genetic linkage map appears circular. Herpes genes and gene regulatory elements resemble those of eukaryotic genes. Each gene has a promoter Genes are transcribed and translated individually; there is no polyprotein. Genes fall into temporal classes within the viral replication cycle: immediate, early, and late expressed genes. Each class has specific regulatory elements. Thus, the virus expresses only the gene products needed for a (discussed next). 

2. The envelope fuses with the host membrane, releasing the capsid into the cytoplasm. 

3. The capsid then travels down a scaffold of microtubules to the nuclear pore. 

Virion host shutoff factor (Vhs) degrades host cell mRNA 4. The capsid injects the complex into the nucleus. 

circularizes and is transcribed to mRNA. 

7. Immediate and early mRNAs leave the nucleus to be translated. The translated proteins return to the nucleus for packaging within capsids. 

Immediate and early mRNA Immediate and early proteins 11. The late proteins return to the nucleus, where they are packaged into capsids linear chromosomes. 

12. Capsids receive envelope membrane from the outer nuclear membrane. 

Late mRNAs 13. The virions are transported through and, ultimately . . . 

10. Envelope proteins migrate nuclear membrane. 

Late envelope 14. . . . the cell membrane. The cell membrane releases mature virions through exocytosis. 

switching to lytic infection. Latent infection is seen most often in nerve cells, such as those of the trigeminal ganglion. 

School of Medicine in St. Louis showed that mice infected with a gamma herpes virus similar to Epstein-Barr virus resist infection by the bacterial pathogens Listeria monocytogenes (the cause of listeriosis) and Yersinia pestis (the cause of bubonic plague). The mechanism of antibacterial resistance may involve stimulation of the immune response. Thus, some of our silent herpes viral “partners” may have coevolved with humans in a mutually beneficial relationship, or mutualism (discussed in Chapter 21). The maintenance of persistent or latent viral infection long-lived cells that provide the virus with an everlasting home in the host. Similarly, Epstein-Barr virus persists within long-lived memory-B-cell lymphocytes. 

Viral subversion of cellular apoptosis. To maintain to viral infection. For example, cytomegalovirus prevents apoptosis by mimicking one host apoptosis protein and p53, which suppresses tumors through apoptosis. 

Evasion of immune responses. Both herpes viruses and retroviruses express proteins that inhibit signaling molecules of the immune system, or that mimic immunosuppressive signals. 

The long-standing adaptation of herpes viruses to the human body confers properties useful for virotherapy. Some kinds of viruses have a preference for infection of tumor cells. Such a virus is called “oncolytic.” Oncolytic viruses are being developed to treat cancer. An example of an oncolytic virus treat melanoma in patients with inoperable tumors. 

embryonic neural progenitor cells (NPCs, left) grow as clumps of round neurospheres. NPCs infected with virus (right) form long projections and commence migration—a sign of premature differentiation. 

cells, it also releases tumor cell fragments that attract cells destroy tumors throughout the body. This antitumor effect of a virus is particularly promising for metastatic tumors that are hard to treat by other means. 

Herpes simplex virus causes recurring eruptions of sores in the oral or genital mucosa. Initial transmission is by oral or genital contact, followed by eruptions from reactivated virus latent in ganglial neurons. genome, packed in an icosahedral capsid. The capsid is surrounded by numerous matrix proteins and by an envelope. 

Infectious mRNA expression leads to production of other membranes. The virions are released from the cell by exocytosis. Rapid release leads to mucosal pathology. 

on human neural progenitor cells (NPCs), the cells that develop into neurons. Neural progenitor cells were obtained from the brain of a premature infant that died of natural causes. When cultured in a dish, the neural cells grow as round cells in a clump, remaining in position. The cells can be induced to differentiate (become more advanced neural cells). But what happens when NPCs begin to differentiate prematurely, at the wrong stage their cytoplasm, and starting to move. Thus, Fortunato shows how cytomegalovirus could alter the differentiation of embryonic cells during neonatal development. immortalized cell line in which the virus replicates its genome glioblastoma cells (Fig. 2). Glioblastoma is a cancer of the glia, accessory cells to neurons. The cancer cells have lost their growth inhibition and replicate continually in tissue culture. shows infected cells with the nuclei stained understanding of this viral process can yield insights that will help prevent future birth defects. 

Different viruses evolve to take advantage of different cell membrane proteins in order to recognize and gain entry into host cells. Mutation of host receptors confers resistance to the virus. 

Viruses recruit host cells to replicate their genomes. the host cell, replication proceeds by a variety of methods, with varying dependence on viral and host enzymes. 

the complexity of cells. The advantage of simplicity is the minimal requirement for resources. The advantage of complexity is the fi ne-tuning of infection mechanisms for evading host defenses. The study of viral molecular biology raises intriguing questions about the nature of viral replication and about viral origins (see eTopic 6.1). Research in virology offers hope for new drugs and cures for humanity’s worst plagues, as well as devastating diseases of agricultural plants and animals. At the same time, it is sobering to note that despite the enormous volumes we now know about continues to grow, and we face the likely emergence of a new deadly flu strain. Molecular research can succeed only in partnership with epidemiology and public health (discussed in Chapter 28). 

“Shadow” genetics. Can a “shadow” protein synthesis system exist in a bacterial cell? Special ribosomes would be needed whose subunits would not mix with native ribosomes but would recognize unnatural mRNA ribosome-binding sites with novel functions. Source: From Cédric Orelle et al. 2015. Nature 524:119–124. 

he science of biotechnology uses living organisms or their products to improve human health or to perform specific industrial or manufacturing processes. Achieving these goals, however, requires the constant invention of new technologies. Chapter 12 describes these technologies and explores how they are used. 

What potential uses do you envision for this technology? We can now ask previously unanswerable questions about ribosome function. For example, we assumed that the two ribosomal subunits had to separate for successful protein synthesis. Ribo-T proves this assumption is inaccurate. We can also use Ribo-T to create the first ever fully independent ribosome mRNA system in cells, where mRNA decoding, catalysis of polypeptide synthesis, and protein excretion can be optimized for new substrates and functions. This opens a transformational new direction in biomolecular engineering and synthetic biology. 

with Shura [Alexander Mankin], as he is one of the world’s experts on the ribosome. We share a fascination with this molecular machine, and only through interdisciplinary science at the boundaries of traditional disciplines could we pursue the adventure that led to Ribo-T. 

Transposons Inactivate and Mark Target Genes in that process. The initial goal was to inactivate relevant genes and tag them with an antibiotic resistance marker. To do this, a transposon (see Section 9.5) containing a tetracycline resistance gene was randomly inserted into the chromosome by transposition. When a transposon inserts into a target gene sequence, the target gene is inactivated and the mutant cell becomes antibiotic resistant. In our example, each tetracycline-resistant cell resulting from transposition grew into a colony; the colony was picked with a sterile toothpick and transferred into a well of a microtiter plate After about 10,000 colonies were transferred to microtiter dishes and grown, a multipronged replicator device (a square with 48 metal prongs arranged in six rows of eight) was used to transfer small amounts of each culture to new microtiter plate wells that contained a pH 2 medium. After several hours of incubation, the multipronged replicator was again used to sterilely transfer samples of the pH 2 culture had been killed by the pH 2 environment. The transposon in these acid-sensitive mutants had inserted into a gene required for acid resistance, rendering it inactive. The acidsensitive mutants were retrieved from the original growth medium microtiter plates and subjected to further analysis. 

of an amino acid, such as glutamic acid? Hint: You can use a minimal agar medium. 

1. Random, antibiotic-resistant transposon insertion mutants are selected from agar plates and transferred by sterile toothpicks to wells in a microtiter plate containing growth medium. 

pH 7.0 growth media 2. After growth, a sample from each well is transferred with a multipronged replicator to a second microtiter plate containing pH 2 media. Cells that have lost acid resistance because of an insertion mutation will die. 

3. After 2 hours of incubation, samples of each well are transferred to an agar plate and incubated. 

Once mutants in a project are identified, it is important to know which genes the insertions occurred in. In our example, an oligonucleotide primer (a short, single-stranded was used to sequence across the insertion joint and into the obtained were subjected to computer-based homology genes. Two of these genes encode isoforms of glutamate decarboxylase (GadA and GadB) that differ by only a few antiporter (GadC), and a fourth gene encodes a putative DNA-binding protein with no known function, although it was annotated as a possible regulator. The nature of the genes’ functions suggests how the system might protect cells submerged in acid (Fig. 12.3). 

1. At pH 2, protons enter the cell and acidify the cytoplasm. 

4. Wild-type cells that survived will be rescued and form a patch of growth. Mutants that died during acid challenge will not form a patch on the plate. 

sequence in the transposon and a second primer that can, at a low annealing temperature, bind random sequences around the chromosome (including downstream of the transposon) are used to amplify the junction between the transposon and the gene into which it has inserted. Subsequent sequencing of the product using only the transposon primer identifies the gene and the insertion point. 

it with a proton from the cytoplasm, thereby decreasing acidity and elevating cytoplasmic pH. The decarboxylation product of the reaction is gamma-aminobutyric acid bring in more glutamate. The glutamate/GABA antiporter Alternative strategies have also been used to identify genes potentially related to acid resistance. Microarrays and under milder acid environments. Bioinformatic strategies outlined in Chapter 8 were then used to hypothesize function of the products (regulator, transporter, and so on). Some of the acid pH-regulated genes were then selectively deleted using in vivo molecular tools that precisely delete the gene of interest, replacing it with an antibiotic drug marker. Once these genes were deleted, researchers could determine the effects of the missing gene on acid resistance or on the expression of other acid-regulated genes. 

The target gene is controlled by its own promoter and has its own ribosome-binding site. 

The reporter gfp gene is spliced into the target gene. This gfp has its own ribosome-binding site but no promoter. 

Transcription of the gfp gene is controlled by the promoter of the target gene. The fusion produces one message but two proteins. 

In a gene fusion, the gfp reporter gene lacks a ribosome-binding site and has no promoter. 

Transcription of the gfp gene is controlled by the promoter of the target gene. sequence of the target gene. The fusion produces one message and one fused, hybrid protein. 

■ Transcriptional (operon) and translational (gene) fusions. Aspects of a gene’s regulation can be monitored by fusing a second gene, one that produces an easily assayed protein, be fused in-frame to the amino-terminal end of the target gene. 

Because there is only one promoter, only one mRNA transcript is made. The 5′ end of the newly engineered polycistronic mRNA will contain the target gene transcript followed at the 3′ end by the reporter gene transcript. Now, any factor that controls expression of the target gene’s promoter will also control production of the reporter. Because the reporter retains its own ribosome-binding site, it will not respond to translational controls over the target transcript. The fusion just described is known as a transcriptional fusion, which can monitor transcriptional control of the target gene. Another type of reporter lacks both its promoter and its protein fusions or translational fusions). For the reporter protein to be synthesized, the reporter gene sequence must be joined to the target gene sequence in the proper codon transcripts of the target and reporter genes be fused, but the peptides of the truncated target gene and the reporter gene will also be linked. In this case, anything controlling the transcription or translation of the target gene will also control reporter protein levels. Each type of fusion can be constructed in vitro using plasmids and then transferred into recipient cells in a way that promotes the exchange of the reporter fusion for the resident gene. Once constructed, these fusions allow the researcher to monitor how different growth conditions, or whether suspected regulators, influence the transcription or translation of the gene. These fusions provide convenient phenotypes (for example, lactose fermentation or fluorescence) that can be exploited in mutant hunts to screen for new regulators. eAppendix 3 describes how lacZ fusions can be used to find regulatory genes. 

dips. Now imagine looking down at a neighborhood of houses. You see that the heater in one house turns on as another house’s heater turns off. The result appears to be a stochastic (random) process of heaters being turned on and off, but the population as a whole stays warm. Do bacterial cells respond to stress in the same way? What technique could even address this question in single cells? LacZ fusions are inadequate because LacZ enzyme activity is scientists to view (in real time) what happens inside single cells within a population. Realizing this, Michael Elowitz and colleagues from the California Institute of Technology Elowitz and co-workers placed the promoter and next was observed using quantitative time-lapse microscopy. Surprisingly, the constant energy stress imposed on the population triggered unsynchronized pulses of sigma controls its target genes through sustained on/off pulsing (like the neighborhood house heaters) rather than by continuous activation. 

You find a 50-fold increase in expression of gadA (based on fluorescence level) when the cells carrying this fusion are grown in media at pH 5.5 as compared to pH 8. What additional experiments must you do to determine whether the control is transcriptional or translational? 

used to track gene expression, identify the location of proteins inside cells, and follow the movement of pathogens within host animals. 

Chapter 9 described a form of bacterial and archaeal interspaced short palindromic repeats). Recall that when a locus as a kind of memory of the attack (see Fig. 9.13). many viruses, forming a kind of rogues’ gallery of viral suspects. The virus-derived sequences are separated from each other by short (32 bp) palindromic repeat sequences. 

random deletions and frameshift mutations. 

Flanking homology to target 3. If an alternative allele is provided, homologous replace the damaged gene with the new allele. 

Flanking homology to target 2. dCas9 protein plus transcription of luciferase gene. 

Streptococcus pyogenes can efficiently knock out eukaryotic genes or replace gene circuit engineered in Bacteroides dCas9-sgRNA prevents transcription of the luciferase gene nanoluc. 

The CRISPR-Cas9 system has also been modified to serve (CRISPRi), for example, uses an inactive version of Cas9 (dCas9) that no longer works as an endonuclease but can target, dCas9 blocks transcription. Timothy Lu’s laboratory of mammalian gut microbiomes (discussed in Sections 13.4 and 23.1). The scientists designed an sgRNA (single guide The gene for dCas9 also included the lacO operator, which to turn it off. The authors demonstrated that the system worked when the programmed organism resided in the The ability to precisely modulate gene expression in commensal organisms should enable functional studies of the microbiome, noninvasive monitoring of in vivo environments, and long-term targeted therapeutics. 

Transposons can be used to mutate genes and mark the defective gene with antibiotic resistance. The location of a transposon insertion can be determined by sequencing from the end of the transposon across the insertion junction. The junction sequence identify the gene in the genome. Annotations of the gene may provide clues about the function of the protein. Regulation of a gene can be determined by fusing that gene to an easily assayed reporter gene. Transcriptional fusions to reporter genes reflect transcriptional control of the subject gene. Translational fusions to reporter genes (gene fusions) reflect transcriptional and translational control of the subject gene. The CRISPR-Cas9 microbial “immune system” has been adapted as a tool to quickly and efficiently edit eukaryotic genes. 

4.4 kb 2.37 kb 1. Proteins are separated bands shown are seen only after being stained with Coomassie blue. 

Nylon membrane blotted with grown at pH 7.7 or pH 5.5 was probed with 32P-labeled gadA and gadB. 

2. The gel is placed against a electrical field moves the buffer and proteins through the gel and onto the membrane, where the proteins stick. 

Gad protein is identified by interaction with antibody. 

Source: Modified from Zhuo Ma et al. 2003. Mol. Microbiol. 49:1309. 

The membrane is then washed with a solution containing an antibody that binds to the specific protein (primary bound to a DNA-binding protein antibody). Primary antibodies are made by injecttravels more slowly than does ing purified protein into animals and then extracting the serum after a few months. – + + + Depending on the source of the priCompetitor – – – + Direction of antibody (mouse, rabbit, or other), the membrane is then probed with a secondary antibody that will bind to the primary antibody. If the primary antibody was made in mice, the seccomplex ondary antibody will be an anti-mouse IgG antibody that specifically binds to an amino acid sequence common to all mouse primary antibodies. The secondary antibody may be tagged with Unbound target horseradish peroxidase to help visuSpecific alize where the antibody binds to the blot. The result is an antibody “sandwich” in which the primary antibody showing that the GadE regulatory protein binds to a radiolabeled promoter fragment of gadA. antibody. Adding hydrogen peroxide (which is reduced by horseradish perand GadE protein. Lane 4 is the same as lane 3 but includes excess unlabeled promoter fragoxidase) and luminol (a chemical that ment. The unlabeled fragments effectively outcompete labeled fragments for the protein, so emits light when oxidized by horse no shift in the radiolabeled fragment is seen. The treatment in lane 4 provides a check on the specificity of the binding. Source: Modified from Zhuo Ma et al. 2003. Mol. Microbiol. 49:1309. radish peroxidase) sets off a luminescent reaction wherever an antibody sandwich has assembled. The light emitted is detected by autoradiography, which Zhuo Ma et al. 2003. Mol. Microbiol. 49:1309. 

and the culture is induced to produce His6-tagged fusion protein constituting up to 30% of the cellular protein. 

3. The crude cell extract is poured over a nickel column. The fusion protein binds to the nickel while all other proteins flow through. The fusion protein is then eluted in purified form with imidazole. 

1. The gene of interest is cloned into one of the His-tagged vectors, yielding a gene fusion. 

uses X-ray film to capture the light, or phosphor imaging (a phosphorimager is a machine that records the energy emitted as light or radioactivity from gels or membranes). Only protein bands to which the primary antibody has bound will be detected. The technique is used to determine whether, and at what levels, specific proteins are present in a cell extract; it can also reveal whether a protein has been cleaved (processed) from a larger to a smaller form. blot analysis was performed to detect glutamate decarboxylase protein. The blot shows that the level of this protein is induced by growth under acidic conditions. Thus, the acidinduced increase in mRNA from transcription (as shown by northern blot) correlates with an increase in translated protein (as shown by western blot). Thought Question 12.5 What would you conclude if the northern blot of the gad genes showed no difference in mRNA levels in cells grown at pH 5.5 and pH 7.7, but the western blot showed more protein at pH 5.5 than at pH 7.7? 

travel more slowly than smaller ones. If a protein binds to a and will travel even more slowly in the gel. This method of In our research example, one of the genes that affected acid resistance (yhiE) was annotated in databases as a potential transcriptional regulator. The encoded protein the promoter regions of the two potential targets, gadA protein, renamed GadE because of its role in regulating glutamic acid decarboxylase expression, did bind the gadA sequence and retard its mobility. Thus, GadE is a true regulator of the acid resistance genes. 

How do researchers purify proteins? Today, a protein with a known sequence can be purified in about a week. The sequence encoding a peptide tag that strongly binds a particular small ligand molecule. The target ligand is attached to beads, and the cell extract containing the tagged protein is passed over the beads. The tagged protein binds to the beads, while other proteins do not. This technique, called affinity chromatography, allows researchers to essentially “fish” the tagged protein from a complex mixture of proteins present in a cell extract. There are several commonly used peptide tags. One tag is a series of six histidines, called a His6 tag, which tightly is used to make His-tagged proteins includes an inducible promoter constructed by linking the promoter from 4. The His tag is cleaved from the purified fusion protein by a specific protease. 

5. The protein of interest is separated from the His-tagged peptide by passing the mixture over another nickel column, which retains the His-tagged peptide. 

Recall from Section 8.1 that promoters have consensus sequences located at –10 and –35 bp from the transcription start site. To begin searching for upstream promoter sequences, we need to define where each transcript begins. One method to determine transcript length is called primer extension (details are provided in sequencing ladder of the region (made using the same primer), the cDNA product aligns with the base corresponding to the transcription start site. eAppendix 3 describes how primer extension was used to identify the gadA promoter. Primer extension will identify transcripts for single genes, but how can transcript start sites for an entire genome be determined all at once? This is possible using modern deep small fragments that are converted to cDNA. The cDNA is sequenced using next-generation sequencing platforms. Computer programs then assemble the fragments and align assembled, nonoverlapping transcript is presumed to be the transcriptional start site. So the segment in the figure contains two transcripts—or does it? 

which a long transcript starting from a bona fide promoter cleaved (processed) transcript has to be a monophosphate identify primary-transcript start sites by comparing TEXtreated transcripts with untreated libraries. The dRNAseq procedure has been used to identify primary transcripts in numerous species, including small RNAs (sRNAs) in the plant pathogen Xanthomonas campestris. 

transcriptional regulatory protein, the technique does not reveal which nucleotides are bound. There are several techniques that can do this. One method asks which nucleotides are protected from nuclease digestion when a regulatory Identifying specific nucleotide-protein interactions between transcriptional regulators and their target sites (for instance, an activator of a pathogenicity operon) provides insight into how these interactions promote or inhibit transcription. cannot get close enough to do damage. Deoxyribonuclease such enzyme. It cleaves phosphodiester bonds between bases. concentration that can nick each molecule only once during later denatured by heat, arrays of single-stranded fragments size, depending on where the nick occurred. Because only or fluorescence), only the fragments containing that label will be seen following polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and autoradiography. 

1. The 5′ ends of primary transcripts contain a 5′ triphosphate. Internal phosphodiester bond cleavage generates fragments with 5′ monophosphate ends. 

transcripts by degrading mRNA with 5′-monophosphorylated ends. 

2. Remaining transcripts identified by dRNAseq had a 5′ triphosphate. 

RNAseq results of the whole transcript with TEX-treated transcripts using differential RNAseq (dRNAseq) will reveal true primary-transcript start sites. 

12.6 Another regulator of glutamate decarboxylase (Gad) production does not affect the production of gad mRNA, but is required to accumulate Gad protein. What two regulatory mechanisms might account for this phenotype? 

ssDNA only ssDNA plus protein Specific locations of protected segments show the binding site(s) for the protein. 

acid resistance, GadX, binding to the gadA promoter region. The numerals on the right indicate areas protected by GadX. The pink box marks the sequence bound by GadE, the other regulator. 

Gel electrophoresis separates fragments. 

amplified product while the polymerase chain reaction is still running. The higher the starting copy number of the nucleic acid target, the sooner a significant increase in fluorescence is observed. Thus, the time at which fluorescence increases is a reflection of the amount of nucleic acid in the original sample. 

primer (Fig. 12.13). However, Taq 1. The reporter probe contains polymerase also has 5′-to-3′ exonuclea fluorescent dye and a quenching dye, so no ase activity. So, Taq will run into and fluorescence is emitted. cleave the reporter probe, separating the fluorescent dye from the quencher while, primer extension by Taq polymerase continues to the end of the 3. Temperature is lowered to template, and the template is ampli55°C. The reporter probe anneals fied. After each annealing cycle, more Still no fluorescence. reporter probe binds to the newly made templates and is cleaved by Taq polymerase during each round of polyhυ merization. As a result, fluorescence Taq polymerase extends upstream continues to increase as the amount release of the fluorescent dye from of amplified template increases. The the vicinity of the quencher allows fluorescence, which is measured. becomes detectable above background. Starting molecules 107 molecules (RT-qPCR), measures the level of spe10 105 molecules cific mRNA transcripts in the cell. In 104 molecules this procedure, (discussed in Chap103 molecules ter 28) cellular mRNA is converted into No template there are in the initial reaction, the sooner cDNA with reverse transcriptase and becomes detectable cDNA. RT-qPCR was recently used above background. genes are induced by freezing in the Cycle number are algae that grow in freezing temperature and give Antarctic snow an eerie especially in cold environments. The added to the reaction mix. This dye binds to double-stranded colder the environment, the more important these enzymes become, but the harder it is for them to function. Chenlin called TaqMan (Fig. 12.13 ) uses a reporter oligonuclein this organism were significantly induced after 5 hours of otide probe containing a fluorescent dye on its 5′ end and freezing treatment. The authors suggest a prominent role a quencher dye on its 3′ end. As long as the probe remains for these enzymes in the acclimation of Chlamydomonas to intact, the quencher absorbs the energy emitted by the flufreezing temperatures. orescent dye—a process called fluorescence resonance Note: Be careful not to confuse “reverse transcription” and “real-time,” both of which may be found in the literature of a priming oligonucleotide. stands instead for either “reverse transcription” (as in “RT-qPCR”) The priming oligonucleotide and the reporter probe both or “reverse transcriptase”. 

from that gene. Southern blot technology uses labeled presence of that gene. Western blot technology uses antibodies to detect the quantity and size of specific proteins in cell extracts. a DNA-binding protein. Affinity chromatography purifies fusion proteins for biotechnology purposes. and reverse transcriptase to identify the 5′ end of a specific transcript (mapping the transcriptional start site). transcript start sites from an entire genome. 

When a cell encounters a change in its environment, the impact on the cell radiates along and between pathways affecting many different genes and proteins. Tracking these global regulatory influences can show how a species adjusts its physiology to better tolerate, or even flourish in, a new environment. Transcriptomic and proteomic techniques described in Chapters 7, 8, and 10 reveal the global changes in mRNA and protein levels that cells undergo when entering new environments. Here we will show how to reveal interaction networks between proteins and genes, and between proteins and proteins. We will also see how to track protein movements through cells. 

Protein-Protein Interactions 5. The captured are amplified. 

4. Fragments are released and linker oligonucleotides added. 

6. Amplified fragments are identified by sequencing. 

1. DNA-protein interactions are cross-linked by formaldehyde. 

(next-generation sequencing, discussed in Section 7.6). The sequence identifies precisely where the transcription factor bound to the genome and which genes it likely controls. 

7. Locations of transcription factor binding sites are revealed. 

When the proteins fused will be recruited to the promoter of the lacZ reporter gene. The cell will make `-galactosidase. 

From Gareth Butland et al. 2005. Nature 433:531–537. 

can be used as “bait” to find the “prey” proteins expressed by randomly cloned “prey” genes fused to the other fusions are transformed into yeast cells, and the transformants are plated onto a medium containing X-Gal. Colonies that express beta-galactosidase are the result of protein-protein interactions between the bait and prey identify the gene encoding the prey protein. An example Another approach to mapping interactomes uses individual bait proteins to pluck all of a particular protein’s interacting one end of the bait protein will allow the bait protein and its interacting proteins to be purified by affinity chromatography. 

GFP-TBGp3 fusion protein inserted only into the reticulated network of veins. Altering specific residues within the protein via mutation prevented this localization, causing the fusion protein to remain diffused throughout the plant cells. These results suggest that TBGp3 protein helps guide the virus through the plant’s reticulated network. This type of gene fusion technology has been used extensively to trace the movement and final location of numerous proteins delivered into host cells by pathogenic bacteria. of different bacteria forming a biofilm (eTopic 12.2). 

ChIP-seq technology can identify all of the sequences in a genome to which a given protein will bind. Two-hybrid analysis uses hybrid proteins to detect protein-protein interactions, and can be used to build protein interaction maps. 

It is remarkable how many useful products can be imagined and are being developed using the tools of biotechnology (see Chapter 16). You may be surprised to learn that plants have been engineered to produce microbial vaccines, and that vaccines can be delivered not only by injecting a protein, but by have technology that uses a genetically engineered virus to repair a human genetic defect (eTopic 12.4). These are all remarkable additions to our scientific toolbox and are already helping to improve human life. 

Protecting crops such as corn and cotton from hungry insects is an age-old problem. Insects such as moths or beetles can cause widespread damage to a crop in a short period of time. In the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, chemical pesticides were widely used to kill these pests. While generally effective, chemical pesticides can contaminate soil and groundwater and can impact human health. Through bioengineering, we now have a better, safer way. 

Insecticidal proteins are produced and crystallize in the parasporal body. 

Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt), a close relative of Bacillus anthracis, sporulates on the surfaces of plants. In addition to the spore, the sporulating cell makes a separate parasporal body that cradles the spore (Fig. 12.19). The parasporal body contains crystallized proteins that are toxic thuringiensis can produce multiple insecticidal proteins. After the insect or insect larva ingests the insecticidal protein crystals, the alkaline environment in the insect midgut dissolves the crystals, and insect proteases inadvertently activate the proteins. Activated insecticidal proteins insert into the membrane of the midgut cells and form pores that lead to a loss of membrane potential, cell lysis, and death of the insect through starvation. It is also proposed that death is due to septicemia by enteric bacteria that escape the damaged midgut (antibiotic treatment reduces death). Because of its effectiveness, farmers have taken to spreading cells are effective. insects (predators and parasites) and beneficial pollinators well with other natural crop controls. Perhaps the major pets, and wildlife, so it is safe to use on food crops or in other sensitive sites where chemical pesticides can cause adverse even more effective means of delivering the toxin has been developed. The genes encoding insecticidal proteins have been spliced right into the genomes of agriculturally important plants such as cotton and corn. The gene is placed under the control of a plant promoter, so that the transgenic plant makes its own insecticide. As of 2013, over 75% of the cotton and corn planted in the United States contains that foods from these transgenic plants are safe. 

How would you design a transgenic plant to limit the possibility of insects developing resistance? 

or, as with transgenic tobacco crops, they can be a cheap way to grow large amounts of the vaccine protein that can be extracted later and used in more conventional ways. Producing vaccine in edible fruits was an attractive idea because the fruit could be grown locally and distributed to residents of poor countries even without refrigeration. But practical and ethical problems have, so far, prevented implementation. The use of engineered plants to mass-produce and purify vaccine proteins, however, especially for use in animals, is happening. Plants used to make vaccines are listed in Table 12.2. 

Protein of interest fused to g3p Linker peptide 1. The protein of interest is fused to the amino each displaying a different peptide sequence, is exposed to a plate coated with the resistance to 3. When the phage is assembled, the fusion protein is displayed on the phage surface. 

2. Unbound phage is washed away. 3. Specifically bound phage is eluted with an excess of a known ligand for the target or by lowering pH. 

2. The foreign gene is inserted between the sequences encoding the signal peptide and the mature coat protein, g3p, of the phage. 

4. Eluted pool of phage is amplified, and the process is repeated for a total of 3–4 rounds. 

peptides, antibodies cloned from natural sources, or libraries (collections) of mutant enzymes that one wishes to study. Phage display enables scientists to screen for peptide variants with altered properties such as increased affinity for ligand. 3 (g3p)—present in three to five copies—confers phage infectivity. Most phage display libraries have been produced by cloning into gene 3. Peptides displayed on filamentous phages have been used to select peptides, including antibodies, with high affinities for receptors or antigens (see Section 24.2). Recombinant phages that display high-affinity binding peptides are isolated from libraries in a process called biopanning example, a human virus attachment protein—is attached to a plastic plate or other support, and phages displaying random peptides are added. The phages that do not stick to the human virus protein are washed away. Those that do bind are subsequently released by adding free ligand (for example, human virus protein). This process is analogous to the way miners would pan rivers for gold. Several rounds of biopanning are required to obtain high-affinity clones. Following each round, the selected phages are enriched used to identify high-affinity peptides that bind to attachment proteins of some eukaryotic viruses. These virusbinding peptides effectively block viral infection. More recently, phage display was used to identify specific singlechain antibodies that bind to a surface protein uniquely present on cancer cells. The antibody disrupts the function of this protein and significantly decreases viability of the cancer cell. Phage display can also be used for directed evolution projects that retool enzymes (directed evolution is discussed in Chapter 17). Natural enzymes, because they were selected by evolution to sustain life, do not necessarily have the stability or catalytic activity that would make them suitable for more harsh biotechnological applications. Phage display, with its ability to screen millions of mutants, can quickly find the variant with the desired trait. An example of how phage display was used to direct the evolution of a more effective beta-lactamase enzyme that cleaves penicillin is described in eTopic 12.5. Other in vitro evolution techniques—DNA shuffling and site-directed mutagenesis—are described in eTopics 12.6 and 12.7. 

12.10 You have just employed phage display technology to select for a protein that tightly binds and blocks the eukaryotic cell receptor targeted by anthrax toxin. When this receptor is blocked, the toxin cannot get into the target cell. You suspect that the protein may be a useful treatment for anthrax. How would you recover the gene following phage display and then express and purify the protein product? 

In addition to what we describe here, microbes have been genetically engineered for many other applications that we will discuss in later chapters. These applications include the bioremediation of organic wastes (Chapter 13) and inorganic wastes (Chapter 14); mine leaching (Chapter 14); engineering of producer microbes (Chapter 16); and oilspill cleanup, mercury removal, and wastewater treatment (eTopic 22.2). 

in laboratories. To recode the bacterium, they replaced all the archaean Methanocaldococcus jannaschii. The tRNA pocket of the tRNA synthetase was modified to accept the unnatural amino acid p-azido-L-phenylalanine (pAzF). The (peptidoglycan synthesis), and SerS (serine aminoacyl tRNA synthetase). For this strain to grow, the unnatural amino acid pAzF must be incorporated by translation into those three essential proteins. Because pAzF is not found in the environment, any recoded microbe released from the lab will die and not pose a threat. Synthetic auxotrophies like the one just described will allow us to control when and where genetically engineered microbes of unknown risk can grow. 

Genes encoding insecticidal proteins from Bacillus thuringiensis have been engineered into plant genomes to protect crops from insect devastation. Proteins from pathogenic bacteria and viruses cloned into plants may provide a cost-effective means to vaccinate large populations. Genetically engineered viruses are being tested as gene Phage display is a form of in vitro evolution in which into phage capsid protein genes. Phage particles displaying peptides with a desired binding property are pulled from the general phage population by biopanning. Biocontainment strategies are necessary to counteract an accidental release of a genetically engineered microbe into the natural environment. 

These are all goals of synthetic biology. Synthetic biology is the design and construction of new biological parts, devices, and systems for a desired purpose, similar to building electronic circuits. How do we make these new parts or components? All living organisms already contain an instruction set encoded what it does. Humans have been altering the genetic codes of plants and animals for millennia by selectively breeding individual plants and animals with desirable features. Today, scientists easily take pieces of genetic information from one organism and insert them directly into another, bypassing the need to breed. This is the basis of genetic Recent technological advances now allow scientists to manipulations, researchers can take components of genes from several different organisms, link them together like Lego blocks, and design new organisms that do Berkeley) used genes from several species to engineer a new pathway for artemisinin, an important antimalarial the effort required to chemically synthesize a structurally that prevented cancer in mice. The new strain contained the invasin gene from Yersinia pseudotuberculosis and the hemolysin gene from Listeria monocytogenes. The invasin The hemolysin enabled delivery of an inhibitory small in this mouse model. 

We know that bacteria “talk” to each other using signaling molecules, but with synthetic biology can we also train them to keep time? The answer appears to be yes. signal through a population of cells (Fig. 1). The network to contain the luxL gene from Vibrio fischeri and the aiiA gene from Bacillus thuringiensis. LuxL synthase produces glow when the circuit is on. How does it work? shows what happens when these cells are grown as a streak on an agar plate. The system produces a flash of emission that propagates bidirectionally along the streak and then shuts off. The flash starts three circuits in the cell cluster. Those cells then glow (see signal diffuses away from the producing cells, the light wave propagates through the streak. However, the AiiA enzyme at some point in the streak and the migrating flash begins again (the 170- and 180-minute panels). 

(right) and Arthur Prindle examine a culture used for their synchronous-clock experiments. The system was then modified to be a sensor for arsenic. For this purpose, luxR was placed under the control of a promoter repressed by ArsR. Arsenic inactivates the ArsR repressor. In the absence of arsenic, flashing was not seen, because LuxR is needed to activate the luxP-gfp fusion. When even small a message is then transcribed and a protein is made. With activate gene 1 or gene 2, respectively, to make product 1 or product 2 (Pr1 or Pr2). Either of those output signals can you understand how these gates work, you can make any kind of circuit. 

AiiA protein is secreted and degrades only extracellular acyl too low to diffuse back into the cell, so luxL, aiiA, and yemGFP promoters are no longer activated. 

sensors able to detect heavy metals and even pathogens in the field. 

Can you think of a potential pitfall with using the “arsenic alarm” in real life? How might you overcome this problem? Hint: Look up the effect of arsenic on bacterial cells. What does the ArsR protein regulate? genetic “biopixels.” Nature 481:39–44. 

transcription of the repressor 1 gene and the reporter gene. transcribed and the cell lights up. The system is stably toggled on because repressor 1 halts transcription of repressor 2. So, a genetic engineer can control the on/off switch of these cells by adding one or the other inducer. Of course, for this system to toggle, at least a small amount of both repressor proteins must be made at all times—just enough to bind to inducer molecules and have an effect on gene expression. 

gate symbols used in electronics, and their synthetic-biology when inducer is added, the transcript for Pr1 is made. Without inducer, Pr1 is not made. 

engineer could set repressor 1 and repressor 2 protein levels to be exactly equal? Imagine that this is done without either inducer present. 

Repressor 2 inhibits transcription from promoter 2. 

The buffer gate involves a single input inducer molecule alternative proteins, either of which can activate expression of the output gene. 

oscillator switch designed by Jim Hasty’s laboratory at systems discussed in Chapter 10. One component is the gene for the AraC activator protein, which was linked by Hasty’s group to a hybrid operator region that included an ara activator sequence and a LacI repressor control sequence. The next component is the gene encoding the repressor LacI, which was also spliced to the hybrid ara activator/LacI repressor control sequences. The resulting circuit contains negative and positive feedback loops. The lac and ara operons are discussed in Section 10.2. 

repressor 1 and the reporter gfp are transcribed colinearly from promoter 2. Two outputs are possible, depending on which inducer is added. Adding inducer 1 stops fluorescence, whereas adding inducer 2 triggers fluorescence. What happens if you add them both? 

Output 1: Adding inducer 1 relieves repression of promoter 1. Repressor 2 is made, preventing expression from promoter 2. made. No fluorescence. 

increases LacI repressor, which eventually represses araC. allows renewed araC and lacI expression. As shown in oscillation frequency, making the circuit tunable. Special Topic 12.1 presents an example of an oscillatory genetic circuit that keeps time and senses arsenic. Reporter organisms equipped with this circuit could announce the presence of dangerous toxins such as arsenic in water, soil, or a variety of food materials. 

Before we discuss more complex circuits, we should first talk about “noise.” Noise (variance from a mean) is a problem in any electrical circuit but also arises in biological circuits, because of f luctuations of gene expression among single cells in a population (see Section 12.1). The concept of noise in a biological or electrical system might be best explained by the following analogy. Imagine you are at a concert and your friend is trying to talk to you. You can’t understand what she is saying, because the sound of her voice is not rising above the music and all of the background noise. The band would have to go quiet in order for you to hear her. The same is true for anything you want to measure. The less noise there is, the easier it is to measure what rises above it. In bacteria, translation inefficiency is a major contributor to noise, although many factors can inf luence the expression of a gene (Fig. 12.24). To be useful, synthetic biological circuits must operate with transcriptional and translational controls balanced in a way that minimizes noise. Choosing the right ribosome-binding sequence and promoter, or translation, can help to decrease noise. 

riboswitch consists of two parts: a cis-repressed mRNA sequence is linked to an output gene and, by forming a hairpin, hides a ribosome-binding site to prevent translation. The taRNA, once it is made, will promote translation of the output gene by base-pairing with the crRNA. The and translation of the output gene can now be manipulated by whatever activates the promoters used to express the crRNA and taRNA genes. This process can reduce noise in a system. Members of James Collins’s laboratory (Harvard University) designed a series of matched crRNA/taRNA riboswitches and linked them to various promoters and output genes. The design and response of these circuits to various environmental signals is shown in Notice that each riboswitch responded to only one signal. The Collins group then linked these riboswitches to genes encoding carbon metabolism enzymes and placed them all in the same cell, essentially making a metabolic switchboard that could channel carbon flow through alternative metabolic pathways depending on which riboswitch was activated. Metabolic switchboards would have important industrial applications. For instance, the device could simultaneously sense a variety of metabolic states in a large batch fermentation system and maximize the efficiency of an industrially attractive pathway. 

Each circuit is controlled by a different promoter that senses a different environmental parameter: PLuxI (acyl homoserine (iron), or PMgrB (magnesium). Different riboswitch pairs (labeled 42, 10, 12, and 12y) were used to control the translation of the output reporters for each circuit. responded to only a single environmental time 0. The inoculum for the luciferase was active even at time 0. 

only when an analog of tetracycline is present. Tetracycline binds and inactivates TetR, which then releases from the ccd promoter. As a result, the kill toxin gene ccdB is expressed and can kill the cell. The engineers, however, added a fail-safe mechanism to prevent the organism from killing itself too early. They made sure that the translation of CcdB mRNA component of the system, activated by arabinose, encodes the compensatory taRNA that can crRNA-CcdB message. So, both tetracycline and arabinose must be added for the cell to effectively produce CcdB and kill itself. Although this system, as designed, is impractical for realworld use, its success shows that kill switches can be made. How could this kill switch be modified so that it could be used in the real world? What if repression of CcdB was tied to the presence of a toxic product found in the environment? Once the organism destroyed the toxin, the kill switch would be “thrown,” and the bacterium would kill itself. 

annual weekend-long synthetic-biology showdown called the International Genetically Engineered Machine (iGEM) deposited them in the BioBricks Foundation registry at Lego; Fig. 12.28). BioBricks range from those that kill cells to one that makes cells smell like bananas. Despite its potential for good, one concern about synthetic biology is that anyone, theoretically, can do it. In fact, the lure of constructing a new organism, combined with the ever-lowering cost of equipment needed to carry efforts are well-intentioned and could yield useful products as a result of outside-the-box thinking, but we should be mindful, again, of unintended consequences. 

module. The addition of tetracycline relieves TetR repression of which kills the cell. 

Tinkering with gene circuits is one thing, but carrying out a complete genome transplant is another. We have been able to manipulate small pieces of bacterial genomes for many years via mutation, cloning, and recombination techniques. But manipulating an entire genome has been out of reach—until now. Scientists have taken the genome of one bacterial species, Mycoplasma mycoides, moved it to yeast (they added a yeast centromere so that it would replicate), This biotechnological advance is especially exciting because systems and even engineer new species. 

Gut bacteria share their catabolic enzymes. Bacteroides fragilis are prominent Gram-negative bacteria of our colonic microbiome. Colonic bacteria compete intensely for the carbon sources ingested by the host. But Bacteroides species actually release their catabolic enzymes into the community, by pinching off vesicles from the outer membrane. These outer membrane vesicles contain enzymes that break down lipids, carbohydrates, and peptides into small molecules. Vesicle formation increases the surface area for catabolism, but it also makes the catabolites available to unrelated bacteria. This unexpected resource sharing is important for the gut microbiome. Source: Wael Elhenawy et al. 2014. mBio 5:e00909-14. 

What is so exciting about intestinal bacteria exporting catabolic enzymes in vesicles? 

Bacteroides species digest a broad spectrum of polysaccharides in the human gut, including host-derived glycans. We showed that the bacteria selectively secrete a large number of sugar hydrolases via outer membrane vesicles. The liposomal nature of vesicles stabilizes the secreted hydrolases compared to the soluble form. Moreover, the secretion of hydrolases into vesicles enables the bacteria to use out-of-reach nutrients. How do you think our assumptions will change about patterns of catabolism in the microbiome? 

Bacteroides fragilis can regulate the level of hydrolases packed into outer membrane vesicles in response to the kinds of glycans available. These results suggest that outer membrane vesicle secretion is a regulated process that helps Bacteroides adapt to its niche. Other researchers have shown that Bacteroides vesicle hydrolases also target key molecules in the host signaling pathways. In addition, vesicle sulfatases play a fundamental role in the inflammatory response triggered by Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron during colitis. 

Maltose sensor and regulator: transcriptional activation of the sus operon. 

Current Research Highlight). The outer membrane (discussed in Chapter 3) contains enzyme complexes that break down polysaccharides to oligosaccharides (short sugar chains) and transport the oligosaccharides to the periplasm (Fig. 13.1). These enzymes and transporters comprise the oligosaccharides are further degraded to monosaccharides, which then cross the inner membrane to the cytoplasm. At the same time, some of the outer membrane pinches off to form outer membrane vesicles. These vesicles include some of the SusD starch-binding proteins, as well as glycosidases (sugar breakdown), lipases (fat digestion), and peptidases (protein breakdown). Their breakdown products diffuse back to Bacteroides cells, as well as to other bacteria. Why share catabolic enzymes? Amazingly, Bacteroides different types of polysaccharides, such as those with sulfated sugars. Suppose two different species possess enzymes for different steps of a pathway. Individually, the two bacteria might not digest a certain substrate, but together they may complete its breakdown. The surprising nutritional cooperation of our microbiome is discussed further in Chapter 21. Chapter 13 explains how catabolism and other kinds of energy-yieldLipase ing reactions enable microbes to do the work of growing new cells. The energy released from a reaction is transferred by enzymes to other reactions that build simple molecules into a complex cell. Chapter 14 explores electron transfer through pathways of organic respiration (oxidation of organic nutrients), lithotrophy (oxidation of inorganic nutrients), and photosynthesis. The energy from all these pathways is used to build cells by anabolism (biosynthesis), which is the focus of Chapter 15. Finally, Chapter 16 explores comSusB mercial applications of microbial metabolism to produce food and beverages, as well as industrial products and pharmaceuticals. 

within the Bacteroides envelope. Blowup: The outer membrane vesicle carries catabolic enzymes. 

or cell growth. Energy is used to organize proteins, maintain ion gradients, and build biomass (Fig. 13.2). Yet the second law of thermodynamics tells us that systems tend to become less ordered and that entropy—the disorder, or randomness, of the universe—always increases. For life to build order out of disorder, cells need energy. 

Collectively, microbes use more diverse energy sources than do multicellular organisms (Table 13.1). Recall from Chapter 4 that an organism may gain energy from chemical rearrangement of molecules (prefix “chemo-”) or from light absorption (prefix “photo-”). Chemotrophy yields energy from electron transfer between chemicals, yielding products that are more stable. Chemotrophy in which organic compounds donate electrons to yield energy is known as organotrophy or chemoorganotrophy. Organic compounds include the foods we eat—which our intestinal bacteria help catabolize. Most organotrophs are also heterotrophs, organisms that use preformed organic compounds for biosynthesis (a process called heterotrophy). But chemotrophy also includes lithotrophy or chemolithotrophy (literally “rock eating”), obtaining energy from inorganic reactions. For example, the archaeon Pyrodictium occultum gains energy by oxidizing hydrogen gas with sulfur. Phototrophy yields energy from light absorption. Phototrophs such as marine cyanobacteria are autotrophs. 

proteobacteria, practice photoheterotrophy, in which energy from light supplements chemotrophy. Phototrophy and lithotrophy are discussed in Chapter 14. But all sources of energy pose the challenges of how to obtain the energy, how to avoid losing it, and how to convert it for cell growth and function. 

Organo- Organic molecules donate electrons. 

causing entropy to increase. In other words, the local, temporary gain of energy enables a cell to grow. Continued growth requires continual gain of energy and continual radiation of heat. We see this release of heat, for example, in Similarly, throughout Earth’s biosphere, the total metabolism of all life must dissipate energy as heat. Biological heat production is not always obvious, because soil and water provide a tremendous heat sink. But overall, Earth’s biosphere behaves as a giant thermal reactor (Fig. 13.3). As solar radiation reaches Earth, a small fraction is captured by photosynthetic microbes and plants. The fraction captured is largely in the range of visible light (Fig. 13.4), the wavelengths at which photon energies are appropriate for the controlled formation and dissociation of molecular bonds. Some bacteria conduct photosynthesis using ultraviolet and near-infrared radiation. At shorter wavelengths (X-rays), chemical bonds are broken indiscriminately; at longer wavelengths (microwaves and radio waves), the quantum energy is too low to drive chemical reactions. Microbial and plant photosynthesis generates biomass, which is catabolized by consumers and decomposers. The consumers store a small fraction of their energy in biomass. At each successive level, the majority of energy is lost, radiated from Earth as heat. Thus, despite the growth of living organisms on Earth, the universe as a whole becomes more disordered. The complex roles of microbial metabolism in global ecosystems are discussed in Chapters 21 and 22. 

The principles of energy change, discussed next, apply to all the reactions of Table 13.1. These reactions are covered in detail in Chapters 13 and 14. 

Order increases. 

Order decreases. 

Solar radiation reaches Earth, where a small fraction is captured by photosynthetic microbes and plants. The microbial and plant biomass enters heterotrophs and decomposers, which convert a small fraction to biomass at each successive level. At each level, the majority of energy is lost, radiated from Earth as heat. 

The Sun radiates across the spectrum, but the intensity of solar radiation reaching Earth peaks in the range of visible light. 

Entropy is based on the number of states of a system, such as the number of possible conformations of a molecule. If a cellular reaction splits one molecule into two, all else being equal, entropy increases; the system negative and increases the potential energy yield of a reaction. 

a living organism, whose development entails increasing where temperature rises. Similarly, all living organisms and communities lose heat. 

1 kilojoule (kJ) = 1,000 joules. Another unit commonly used is the kilocalorie (kcal). The conversion factor is: 1 kJ = 0.239 kcal. 

Do you think this reaction releases greater energy as heat, or by change in entropy? Explain. 

Large quantities of lactic acid are formed, with relatively small growth of bacterial biomass. Why do you think biomass is limited? Cheese making usually runs more efficiently at high temperature; why? 

■ Calorimeter for animal feed. prepared for a feeding test within a large-animal calorimeter at the test will show how much energy the cow and its digestive microbes obtain from feeding on ground corn. 

Living cells can never grow exactly at equilibrium organisms must form biomass very slowly, but if no other metabolism is available, they may outgrow competitors. The discovery of low-ΔG energetics has opened new possibilities for environmental remediation previously thought impossible, such as the anaerobic digestion of complex organic pollutants in contaminated soil (see Section 13.6). Some of the near-zero anaerobic pathways involve syntrophy, an intimate metabolic relationship between two species. Jessica Sieber at the University of Illinois and Michael McInerney at the University of Oklahoma, Norman, show the syntrophic reaction. Analogous partnerships may link many catabolic reactions of gut bacteria (see Chapter 21). 

Have you ever wondered how to clean up polluted soil and water? Michael McInerney at the University of Oklahoma, Norman, thinks about cleanup from the point of view of microbial energetics (Fig. 1). As the son of a wastewater treatment engineer in Chicago, he learned early on about pollution in the Great Lakes. Later, in Oklahoma, he realized that there was a growing problem of water supplies contaminated by sewage and waste petroleum. He began to study how microbes catabolize sewage components, such as the short-chain acids collaborates on syntrophy with Michael McInerney at the University of Oklahoma, Norman. 

propionate and butyrate, and aromatic oil compounds such as the lack of oxygen. The molecules seep into the depths of soil or water, where any oxygen is quickly used up by microbes capable of respiration. Jessica Sieber, as a postdoctoral fellow, took up the challenge of elucidating anaerobic pathways to degrade aromatics. Since her move to the University of Illinois, Sieber has kept her focus on anaerobic life, tweeting as As microbes use up the long-chain components of sewage or oil, the remaining short-chain molecules and aromatic rings can be broken down only by transferring leftover electrons they cannot go forward to yield energy. So how can these product. Once the equations are balanced, negative values of oxidize hydrogen using alternative electron acceptors such as bicarbonate (the archaeal methanogen Methanospirillum), Hydrogen-producing bacteria have evolved to grow in close proximity to the hydrogen-oxidizing bacteria or archaea. 

Benzoate is to acetate. 

is stained with fluorescent markers for the H2-producing bacteria (red) and their partner methanogen (yellow). In order for by processes that are not yet understood. Genomic analysis of Syntrophus aciditrophicus reveals genes for flagellar motility, suggesting that flagellar motility helps the cell find its partner Under laboratory conditions, Sieber and McInerney demonstrated syntrophic growth in the presence of defined concentrations of reactants and products (Table 1). Their calculations showed that cells grew with negative values of free energy change. Yet even in the presence of the syntrophic partner, these anaerobic pathways have free energy changes that are remarkably low (about –20 kJ/mol), often below –60 kJ/mol). Such extremely low energy levels require special arrangements called “reverse electron transport,” in which electrons are transferred from one carrier to the next, tron transfer must be coupled with a compensating reaction Syntrophic partnerships are considered “thermodynamic Nonetheless, these organisms are of global importance because they play an essential role in recycling the smallmolecule products of anaerobic catabolism. Furthermore, they present exciting industrial applications. For instance, the methanogenic partnership between H2-producing bacteria and Methanococcus maripaludis might be used to attack unextractable oil residues and convert the carbon into methane for recovery as natural gas. Other syntrophic interactions may be used to increase the efficiency of sewage mineralization during water treatment. How do hydrogen and formate transfer enable environmental bacteria to digest fatty acids? What would happen to an environment where none of the fatty acids got catabolized? 2014. The importance of hydrogen and formate transfer for syntrophic fatty, aromatic and alicyclic metabolism. Environmental Microbiology 16:177–188. 

13.3 The thermophilic bacteria Thermus species grow and hydrogen gas: actual conditions, do you think the reaction yields energy? Assume concentrations of 150 mM formate, 20 mM bicarbonate ion, and 10 mM hydrogen gas. 

So far, our discussion of energy has assumed an isotropic system, in which concentrations are the same everywhere. But a living cell needs to obtain its molecules from outside, such as sugars, amino acids, and inorganic ions (discussed in Chapter 4). Suppose a blood pathogen needs to obtain a scarce substance such as iron (Fe2+). How does the microbe move the iron “uphill” against its concentration gradient? distribution of molecules at uniform concentration represents the state of greatest entropy. Diffusion in the environment ultimately brings nutrients into contact with microbial cells, even cells that lack chemotactic motility to hunt for food. For example, sugars in the food we eat diffuse through our saliva to reach the bacteria growing in biofilms on our teeth. The cell membrane contains transporters for useful molecules, allowing nutrient molecules to cross. Entropy favors their movement from higher to lower concentration obtain these molecules from outside, the bacterial cell must transport them against their gradient—that is, from lower to higher concentration—increasing the concentration difference and thus decreasing entropy. Uptake against a concentration gradient requires an energy source to power transport proteins embedded in the membrane (as shown in Chapter 4). Alternatively, a transmembrane gradient of ions can store energy for the cell. The most important ion motive force (to be explained in Chapter 14). 

Energy is required to move molecules up the gradient. 

molecules diffuse to uniform concentration throughout the solution: molecules move from a compartment with high concentration to one with low concentration. Energy is required to move molecules up their concentration gradient. 

stability of reactants and products, and the entropy change associated with product conversion to reactants. 

Within living cells, energy-yielding reactions are coupled with energy-spending reactions. The measurement of energy flow under changing conditions requires calculations more complex than those shown here. down their concentration gradient unless energy is applied to reverse the flow. Gradient energy can be interconverted with energy from chemical reactions. 

Electron Transfer such as glucose oxidation. If all the energy were released at once, however, it would dissipate as heat without building biomass. In living cells, glucose is never oxidized in one step. Instead, the energy yield is divided among a large number of stepwise reactions with smaller energy changes. In this way, the cell can be thought of as “making change” by converting a large energy source to numerous smaller sources that can be “spent” conveniently for cell function and biosynthesis. The “spending” of energy is controlled by enzymes that couple all of the energy-providing reactions to specific energy-spending reactions. 

Many of the cell’s energy transfer reactions involve energy that gain and release small amounts of energy in reversible reactions. Energy carriers are used to transfer energy in a wide range of biochemical reactions. 

molecule that transfers, or “donates,” electrons to another molecule is called an electron donor or a reducing agent; a molecule that receives, or “accepts,” electrons is called receives the electrons; it then becomes the electron donor from reduced food molecules to a terminal electron acceptor such as oxygen (see Chapter 14). Energy carriers that transfer electrons are needed for all energy-yielding pathways and for biosynthesis of cell components such as amino acids and lipids (see Chapter 15). Note that in living cells, all energy transfer reactions are coupled by enzymes to specific biochemical processes. Without enzyme coupling, energy dissipates and would be lost from the living system. 

The reaction requires stabilized by binding a magnesium ion plus a water molecule. 

cesses in three different ways: hydrolysis releasing phosphate, hydrolysis releasing pyrophosphate (diphosphate), and phosphorylation of an organic molecule. Each process serves different functions in the cell. 

couple the phosphorylation of a sugar to its transport across the cell membrane; consequently, these enzymes make up play a critical role in determining which nutrients from the environment some microbes can acquire and catabolize (discussed in Chapter 4). 

lost as heat and entropy—in this case, –1,700 kJ/mol may be approached by highly efficient systems such as concentrations of reactants and products, the actual efficiency may be greater than 50%. Under conditions such as are made per molecule of glucose. For comparison, the efficiency of a typical machine, such as an internal combustion engine, is about 20%. Thought Question 13.6 In the microbial community of the bovine rumen, the to acetate: thermodynamic efficiency of energy gain? Where does the lost energy go? 

Heteroaromatic ring has higher energy. accepts electrons. transfer its electrons to one of a series of electron carrier molecules known as also called the electron transport chain be used to generate electricity for comO in Chapter 14). Examples of are shown in the “tower of power” in Table 13.4. For example, adding two electrons that the reaction requires energy input. 

Reduction potentials, electron transport, and proton motive force are discussed further in Chapter 14. 

Other energy carriers that transfer electrons. Different its extra phosphate attached to the 2′ carbon of adenine nucleotide; the amount of energy carried is the same. Some other enzymes use only one or the other. 

Regulation and specificity. Specific energy carriers can of cell components such as amino acids and lipids. 

In living cells, each reaction must occur only as needed, in the right amount at the right time. The rate of a reaction is needed to generate the high-energy transition state on the way to products (Fig. 13.11). Most biochemical reactions require an activation energy that exceeds the average kinetic energy of the reactant molecules colliding. Thus, no significant rate only when the activation energy is lowered by interaction with a catalyst, an agent that participates in a reaction without being consumed. 

transition state. In the presence of an enzyme, the activation energy of the reaction is decreased, allowing rapid conversion of reactants to products. 

Catabolic pathways organize the breakdown of large in the form of phosphodiester bonds. 

required to reach the transition state. They couple energy transfer reactions to specific reactions of biosynthesis and cell function. 

In the early twentieth century, it was thought that microbes could catabolize a limited subset of naturally occurring organic molecules, such as sugars. Molecules not known to be catabolized were termed “xenobiotics,” especially if they were “synthetic” products of human industry. We have since found that virtually any organic molecule can be catabolized by a microbe that has evolved the appropriate enzymes. Catabolism by microbes in our own digestive system helps us digest complex food molecules. Catabolism also plays key roles in microbial disease; for example, the causative agent of acne, Propionibacterium acnes, degrades skin cell components such as lipids. 

The allosteric regulator changes the enzyme conformation to allow substrate binding. 

Besides releasing energy, the breakdown of organic food molecules provides substrates for biosynthesis. Biosynthesis is covered in Chapter 15. 

polysaccharides were originally defined as “fiber”—that is, polymers indigestible by humans. We now know that partial digestion of fiber contributes significant caloric content to the human diet. Members of the gut microbiome are so important that human breast milk contains specific types of carbohydrates to feed them. Plant-derived polysaccharides are long molecules that cannot be taken up by cells. Instead, microbes secrete enzymes that initiate extracellular digestion (see Fig. 13.1). Sugar chains are broken down by microbial enzymes, first to short chains (oligosaccharides), then to two-sugar units (disaccharides), and then to monosaccharides such as glucose or fructose. In some sugars, the aldehyde is replaced by a hydroxyl (sorbitol, mannitol) or a carboxylate (gluconate, glucuronate). Polysaccharides are hydrolyzed to products that enter central catabolic pathways such as glycolysis (Fig. 13.14). 

from sources such as milk, animal fats, and nuts. The oxidation of lipid catabolites causes the rancid odor of spoiled meat or butter (issues of food microbiology, discussed in Chapter 16). Microbes catabolize lipids by hydrolysis to glycerol and fatty acids (Fig. 13.14). 

Carbohydrates are broken down by specific enzymes to disaccharides and then to monosaccharides such as glucose. Glucose and sugar acids are converted to pyruvate, which releases acetyl groups. Acetyl groups or acetate are also the breakdown products of fatty acids, amino acids, and complex aromatic plant materials such as lignin. 

Glycerol, a three-carbon triol (a compound with three–OH groups), can be considered a three-carbon sugar; it commonly enters catabolism as an intermediate of glycolysis. Alternatively, other pathways break down glycerol to acetate. Fatty acids, more highly reduced than glycerol, acceptor is available; alternatively, they enter fermentation or anaerobic syntrophy. 

Peptides. We commonly think of proteins as essential parts of a cell. However, when present in excess, proteins can be catabolized to provide energy. Initially, proteins are broken Peptides are then hydrolyzed to individual amino acids (Fig. 13.14). Some pathogens catabolize specific amino acids as part of the disease process. For example, Legionella pneumophila, the cause of legionellosis, catabolizes threonine. Threonine catabolism is required for the pathogen to grow within macrophages, a type of white blood cells. 

Today, the environment contains increasing amounts of human-made aromatic compounds, produced for herbicides and other industrial uses, that are highly toxic pollutants. These include halogenated aromatics, such as polychlorinated biphenyls, the source of highly toxic dioxins. Halogenated aromatics turn out to be catabolized by a number of soil microbes, which are promising candidates for bioremediation of polluted environments (described in Section 13.6). Other types of aromatic molecules catabolized by microbes are polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs). Found in petroleum, the multiple fused rings of with time, microbes can catabolize them and remediate the soil (see Section 13.6). 

bacteria gain energy from light while using organic carbon substrates for catabolism and/or biosynthesis. 

of organic molecules with electron transfer to a terminal electron acceptor such as oxygen. Respiration yields far more energy from catabolism than does fermentation. For humans, respiration is synonymous with breathing; but in acceptors such as nitrate (see Chapter 14). 

■ Lettuce and tomatoes are made of xyloglucans. Theresa Rogers, now at California Lutheran with side chains of xylose (Xyl), galactose (Gal), and fucose (Fuc). In tomatoes, xyloglucan side chains also have arabinose (Ara). 

sans air (“life without air”), fermentation is the partial breakdown of organic food without net transfer of electrons owing to breakdown of a large molecule to several smaller products, which are usually more stable as well. Examples of fermentation pathways include ethanolic fermentation producing alcoholic beverages, and lactate fermentation by lactic acid bacteria producing cheese and yogurt. (We will discuss more examples; also see Table 13.5). 

polysaccharides; these comprise, for example, 18% of the genome of Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron. In a complex environment, with numerous potential substrates for catabolism, how does a given microbe decide what to eat first? Organisms select substrates on the basis of their availability and energy efficiency. Substrate selection involves gene regulation, as discussed in Chapter 10. lactose permease (lacY). But in the presence of glucose, a preferred carbon source, lac transcription is halted. Halting lac transcription enables preferential catabolism of glucose. The process of prioritized consumption of substrates is known as catabolite repression (presented in Chapter 10). As we saw in the products of catabolism of many diverse substrates ultimately funnel into a few common pathways of metabolism. The remainder of this chapter presents key pathways in detail: glycolysis and the catechol pathway of benzoate catabolism. These pathways play key roles in medical microbiology and in industrial fields such as bioremediation. 

The carboxylic acid intermediates of metabolism exist in equilibrium with their dissociated, or ionized, forms, identified by the suffix “-ate.” For example, lactic acid dissociates to lactate; acetic acid dissociates to acetate. We use the “-ate” terms for acids whose ionized form predominates under typical cell conditions (around pH 7). 

Fermentation and respiration complete the process of catabolism. In fermentation, the catabolite is broken Catabolism of complex substrates requires specialized enzymes and transporters. Different bacteria contain carbon sources. 

Lipids and amino acids are catabolized to glycerol and acetate, as well as other metabolic intermediates. Aromatic compounds such as lignin and benzoate derivatives are catabolized to acetate through different pathways, such as the catechol pathway. 

glycolysis, is the form of glucose catabolism most commonly studied in introductory biology; it is central for pathway, one molecule of D-glucose undergoes stepwise breakdown to two molecules of pyruvic acid (or its anion, pyruvate) (Fig. 13.18). Glucose is broken down in two stages. In the first stage, the glucose molecule is primed for as we saw for glucose 6-phosphate formation in Table 13.3. The phosphoryl groups tag two sides of the glucose molecule for subsequent splitting into two three-carbon In the second stage, each glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate Each conversion of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate to pyruvate glucose, the net gain of energy carriers from each glucose is Most of the conversion steps are associated with a small on the concentrations of substrates or products; thus, some individual steps are reversible. In the cytoplasm, however, as intermediate products form they are quickly consumed by the next step, so the pathway flows in one direction. The spending energy. 

fructose 6-phosphate to fructose 1,6-bisphosphate. 

In Chapters 13–16, every substrate conversion shown are shown, but for other pathways, the enzyme names are omitted. 

three-carbon glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate is directed into an energy-yielding pathway to pyruvate (Fig. 13.19, right). 

This oxidation of the aldehyde represents the major source of energy in glycolysis—the step at which the energy inorganic phosphate, Pi) to the carboxylate, generating In subsequent steps, the added phosphoryl group will from each glucose molecule are as follows: (breakdown) and anabolism (biosynthesis) are called The amphibolic pathway of glycolysis includes enzymes that can run in either direction, such as phosphoglucose isomerase. The direction of the pathway at a given time is determined by key enzymes that operate only in the catabolic direction or in the anabolic direction. For example, in is catalyzed by the enzyme phosphofructokinase, whereas in biosynthesis this step is reversed by a different enzyme, as inorganic phosphate—a step yielding energy and thus driving the whole pathway in reverse (toward biosynthesis of sugar). The two enzymes are regulated differently; the a signal of energy need, whereas the biosynthetic enzyme is inhibited by such signals. 

on gluconate from mucous secretions (fluorescence micrograph). and genetic analysis to dissect the role of the Entner-Doudoroff pathway in the enteric bacterial catabolism of sugar acids from intestinal mucus. 

Sugar acids from intestinal mucus are catabolized by enteric bacteria. 

Pentose phosphate pathway of glucose catabolism. Like the Entner-Doudoroff pathway, the pentose phosphate 5-phosphate for purine synthesis or erythrose 4-phosphate to synthesize aromatic amino acids. 

Alternative pathways from pyruvate and phosphoenolpyruvate to end products, many of which we use for food or industry. Different species conduct different portions of the pathways shown. 

by pyruvate kinase (see Fig. 13.19). Much of the energy available from glucose remains unspent or is lost as heat. Nevertheless, fermentation is essential for microbes in environments such as anaerobic soil or animal digestive tracts. Even aerated cultures of bacteria start fermenting once their demand for oxygen exceeds the rate of oxygen dissolving in water. Microbes compensate for the low efficiency of fermentation by consuming large quantities of substrate and excreting large quantities of fermentation products. An advantage of fermentation is that the rapid accumulation of acids or ethanol can inhibit growth of competitors. Mixed-acid fermentation. Numerous pathways have evolved to dispose of the waste in different forms (Fig. 13.23). main gases passed by the human colon. gases can cause problems for medical procedures such as colonoscopy. For colonoscopy, the colon may need to be flushed with a carbohydrate solution, which bacteria may ferment, releasing hydrogen. When a polyp is removed from the colon by electrocautery (high-frequency electric current), the gas may ignite, causing an explosion. Colonic explosion can be avoided by flushing out the gases before During mixed-acid fermentation, the proportions of products vary with pH. Low pH favors ethanol and lactate (which minimize acidification) over formate and acetate. Clostridium species produce alcohols (butanol, isopropanol); Porphyromonas gingivalis, a cause of periodontal disease, produces short-chain acids (propionate, butyrate). 

Incorporation of water restores the hydrogen to the thiol of then be excreted by the cell. Note that the excreted acids and alcohols are readily recovered by cells when an electron acceptor becomes available for oxidation or when these fermentation products are needed as building blocks for biosynthesis. Alternatively, the excreted “wastes” may be utilized by other species capable of metabolizing them furH gut bacteria through mixed-acid ferO mentation can be oxidized to water by the gastric pathogen Helicobacter can be used by gut methanogens to yield energy with release of methane. 

In soil ecosystems, various other fermentations have evolved to utilize available substrates (see Table 13.5). Clostridium species generate butanol and other solvents of great industrial value. Other species ferment pairs of amino acids, in a type of mechanism called the Stickland reaction. Fermenting a pair of amino acids avoids generating the pumping of sodium ions across the cell membrane. The sodium pump stores energy (discussed in Chapter 14). 

Glucose catabolism is reversible, enabling cells to build glucose from small molecules. to pyruvate or its products in reactions that generate Fermentation has applications in food, industrial, and diagnostic microbiology. 

and his colleagues at Sheffield University, England, studied catabolism by observing the oxidizing activities of crude enzyme preparations from sources such as pigeon breast ancestors used. 

from that acetyl-CoA is also generated from many other catabolic pathways, including those for breakdown of fatty acids, amino acids, and lignin fragments in cycle by condensing with the four-carbon intermediate in whole or in part, is found in all microbial species except for degenerately evolved pathogens that are dependent on host metabolism, such as Treponema pallidum, the cause of syphilis (eTopic 13.3). 

Acetyl phosphate is a global signal of the nutritional environment. 

13.10 If a cell respiring on glucose runs out of oxygen and other electron acceptors, what happens to the electrons transferred from the catabolic substrates? 

Bacteria and archaea use at least ten known variations on environmental conditions. You will no doubt be relieved to hear that we present only one: the Krebs pathway, which is found in most Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria, and in most eukaryotes. Other pathways are detailed Pyruvate is converted to acetyl-CoA through removal decarboxylation. The oxidative decarboxylation of pyruvate, coupled to CoA incorporation, is performed by an unusually large multisubunit enzyme called the pyruvate molecular player to direct sugar catabolism into respiration. have a high metabolic rate, such as heart and brain, causing reaction mechanism, are shown in eTopic 13.4. 

via the intermediate acetyl phosphate (Fig. 13.27). Acetyl phosphate is a global signaling molecule that indicates to the cell the quantity and quality of carbon source available. As glucose decreases, the cell starts to reclaim acetate, converting it back to acetyl-CoA for entry into the gene expression is repressed by carbon starvation and by low levels of oxygen. 

13.11 Compare the reactions catalyzed by pyruvate dehydrogenase and pyruvate formate lyase (see Section 13.5). What conditions favor each reaction, and why? 

(Figs. 13.27 and 13.28). First, the acetyl group condenses with oxaloacetate, a four-carbon dicarboxylate (double acid). The condensation forms citrate, a six-carbon tricarboxylate. An advantage of intermediates with two or more acidic groups is that the concentration of the fully protonated form is extremely low; thus, the molecule is unlikely to be lost from the cell by diffusion across the membrane, as are monocarboxylic acids, such as acetate. Through the rest of the cycle, citrate loses two carbons (Fig. 13.28). HS-CoA yields energy to condense acetate with oxaloacetate, forming citrate. Step 2. Citrate undergoes two rearrangements (with little energy change) to form isocitrate. Isocitrate then undergoes oxidative decarboxylation. As we 2-oxoglutarate (alpha-ketoglutarate). Step 3. 2-Oxoglutarate undergoes decarboxylation to case, CoA is incorporated, making succinyl-CoA. Step 4. Succinyl-CoA releases CoA, yielding energy a reaction involving negligible free energy change. donation from succinyl-CoA does not yield enough Step 5. Fumarate incorporates water across its double bond, forming the hydroxy acid malate. The increasing stability from fumarate to malate and from malate to oxaloacetate yields enough energy to form the final of the cycle, which again accepts the next acetyl-CoA. 

Can you predict what will happen to the level of radioactivity number of rounds of the cycle. 

1. Hydrolysis of acetyl-CoA provides energy for condensing the acetyl group with oxaloacetate. 

carbon skeleton, the glucose breakdown is now complete. But do we have a completed metabolic pathway? No, because all their electrons onto a terminal electron acceptor. proteins and cofactors, as in the examples in Table 13.4. 

Some of the membrane proteins use the energy of electron transfer to pump protons, generating a gradient of hydrogen ions across the membrane (Fig. 13.29)—a process discussed in detail in Chapter 14. 

glyoxylate bypass incorporates a second molecule of acetyl-CoA, producing succinate plus within mouse macrophages. For glucose biosynthesis, some glycolytic enzymes act in reverse. 

evolved to provide substrates for building amino acids (see 2-oxoglutarate (alpha-ketoglutarate) is aminated to form glutamate, which leads to glutamine. The amine group comes from nitrogen gas fi xed to ammonium ion (discussed with biosynthesis in Chapter 15). Oxaloacetate is aminated to form aspartate, entering pathways to purines enzymes to build their sugars and amino acids, as discussed in Chapter 15. Others, such as Treponema pallidum, the host organism (see eTopic 13.3). 

by cell fractionation (discussed in Chapter 3) and analyzed host lipids via the glyoxylate bypass, diverting much of the carbon to build sugars and amino acids for bacterial cell growth. Thus, key enzymes of the glyoxylate bypass, and their regulators, offer targets for new antibiotics. 

Okere incubated soil samples with phenanthrene substrates containing 14C-radiolabeled carbons. The incubation was found that over 10–30 days, microbes degraded as much as higher at higher temperatures; thus, the catabolic microbes matic compounds, such as toluene (methylbenzene), chlorobenzoate, and nitrobenzene, can be catabolized via sequential oxidation steps, requiring the presence of an pathways, enzymes must remove substituents such as chlorides or nitrates. The methyl group of toluene is oxidized breakdown step. Aerobic degradation commonly proceeds through the intermediate catechol, a benzene ring bearing two adjacent hydroxyl groups. Each benzene derivative is converted to catechol by a specific dioxygenase, an The intermediate catechol then undergoes another key oxidation by a catechol dioxygenase, which adds two more oxygens while cleaving the ring. In different bacterial species, the enzyme may oxidize catechol at either the 1,2 positions or the 2,3 positions, as shown in Typical products are succinyl-CoA and acetyl-CoA, which details of benzene catabolism vary among bacterial species, and many diverse mechanisms continue to be discovered. introduction of hydroxyl groups. How can microbes catabolize benzene and benzoate derivatives without oxygen? 

Benzene derivatives are catabolized through catechol, a central intermediate. 

Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 9:803. 

the cell to iron (Fe3+) or to a metal electrode. Jessica Smith and Derek Lovley showed that Geobacter metallireducens grow—a form of syntrophy based on electricity. Interspecies electron transfer may help bioremediation of organic wastes and the generation of bioelectricity in fuel cells. Source: Geobacter.org; Jessica Smith et al. 2015. Front. Microbiol. 6:121. Photo: Eye of Science/Science Source. 

icrobes transfer energy by moving electrons— the equivalent of an electric current. Electrons move from reduced food molecules onto energy carriers, from energy carriers onto membrane proteins called cytochromes, and from cytochromes onto oxygen or oxidized minerals. Bacteria use electron flux to drive protons across the membrane and generate a proton motive force. The proton motive force stores power our own mitochondria and plant chloroplasts. In Earth’s crust, lithotrophic bacteria use electron flow to deposit iron and gold. 

Geobacter species are ubiquitous in the environment. They have the ability to transfer electrons located on the outer cell surface to extracellular electron acceptors such as insoluble metal oxides and oxidized metals. These microorganisms can produce electricity by transferring electrons to anodes in microbial fuel cells, thereby earning them the title of “electric microbes.” How do you think our assumptions will change about redox metabolism in environmental microbial communities? Geobacter can transfer electrons to partner species through direct electrical connections—a process known as direct of the process and its role in anaerobic environments will help us devise better strategies for wastewater digestion or methane emission control in environments such as landfills, rice paddies, and animal intestinal systems. The potential for discovery promises an “electrifying” future! 

a microbe. Microbial electron transfer reactions, and the ion potentials they generate, have profound consequences for ecosystems; they acidify or alkalinize soil and water, and they can contribute or remove nitrogen and minerals. 

Litho-: Inorganic molecules donate electrons. 

Lithotrophy (or chemoautotrophy) is the oxidation use organic electron acceptors such as fumarate. Some chemoorganotrophs that catabolize many substrates are “facultative lithotrophs”—for example, oxidizing sulfur compounds. But many lithotrophs are obligate autotrophs, These specialist organisms are called chemolithoautotrophs. For example, the bacterium Nitrosomonas europaea obtains nearly all its energy by oxidizing ammonia. 

Phototrophy involves light capture by chlorophyll, usually also capture light energy to supplement catabolism, which provides electron donors (photoorganotrophy). 

The term respiration refers to metabolism in which donors (organotrophy). The use of inorganic electron donors for oxygen through breathing. In ecology, “respiration” refers to carbon flux in an ecosystem, or throughout the atmosphere. 

The bacterium extends vesicles of outer membrane, which lengthen into nanowires. Inset: Fluorescence microscopy, with a membranespecific fluorophore. 

less potential to do work. At moderate temperatures per electron when there is a tenfold ratio of products to reactants. Thus, a tenfold ratio of products to reactants (increases energy yield). 

The cytoplasmic membrane and cell wall are surrounded by periplasm through the cell. The mitochondrial outer membrane (blue) encloses inner membrane organized in pockets called cristae (other colors). 

Absorption peaks shift between the oxidized and reduced forms of a cytochrome from the electron transport system of Haloferax volcanii, a halophilic archaeon. 

each step providing a small amount of energy to the organism (Fig. 14.5). The electron transport proteins are called oxidoreductases because they oxidize one substrate (removing electrons) and reduce another (donating electrons). Thus, they couple different half reactions in the electron tower (see Table 14.1). Oxidoreductases consist of multiprotein complexes that include cytochromes as well as noncytochrome complexes are discussed in Section 14.3. 

for electron transfer through cytochromes. Each cytochrome in sequence receives electrons from a stronger electron donor and transfers them to a stronger electron acceptor. 

Concentrations of electron donors and acceptors in two compartments. Two aqueous compartments must be cytochromes and noncytochrome proteins. Cytochromes are colored proteins whose absorbance spectrum shifts with a change in redox state. 

The charge difference Δψ includes and Na+. These ions are pumped or exchanged by ion-specific membrane transport proteins. 

The pH difference ΔpH is affected by metabolic generation of acids, such as fermentation acids, or by pH changes outside the cell. Permeant acids can run down the gradient through the membrane, collapsing the ΔpH to zero. 

Overall, the cell uses its various membrane pumps and metabolic pathways to adjust and maintain its proton not so great as to disrupt the membrane. 

a proton pump in the bacterial cell membrane drives efflux of antibiotics such as tetracycline? 

an internal pH of 7.6 are placed in a solution at pH 6. What do you predict will happen to the cell’s flagella? What does this demonstrate about the function of Δp? 

Protonated acid and unprotonated acid cross the membrane, equalizing both charge and pH levels. 

as amino acids or efflux of molecules such as antibacterial drugs. Drug efflux pumps are a major problem in hospitals, where the pump proteins are encoded by genes carried on plasmids that spread among virulent strains (Chapter 9). 

Bottom: An uncoupler crosses the membrane in both protonated and unprotonated forms, cyclically acidifying the cell and dissipating the charge difference (electrical potential, Δψ). 

(Δp). The force is usually directed inward, driving protons into the cell. functions, such as ion transport and flagellar rotation. The proton potential (Δp, measured in millivolts) is composed of the electrical potential (Δψ) and the hydrogen ion chemical gradient (ΔpH): Δp = Δψ – 60ΔpH. 

then dissociate on the other side (Fig. 14.9, top) (discussed ■ Uncouplers are molecules taken up by cells in both protonated and unprotonated forms. Uncouplers can protons through the membrane until the ΔpH is dissipated. collapse the entire proton potential, thus uncoupling resOther weak acids cross the membrane in both charged and dissociates to an anion whose charge is relatively evenly distributed around the molecule; thus, it remains hydrophobic enough to penetrate the membrane (Fig. 14.9, bottom). Because both protonated (uncharged) and unproATP formation by tonated (negatively charged) forms cross the tons into the cell and collapse both Δψ and plers because they uncouple electron are highly toxic to bacteria, as well as to Drug efflux human cells. All cells need to maintain ion gradients and potentials. 

We now discuss the carrier molecules and proteins that respiration. For aerobic bacteria, and for the mitochondrial membrane-embedded carriers harvests the reducing potential of electrons in small steps. 

The side chains of the ring vary among hemes, yielding different levels of redox potential. to ubiquinol. 

transitions are mediated by cofactors, small molecules that associate with the protein. shows the protein structure of a cytochrome from the pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The protein, cytochrome c, transfers electrons for nitrate respiration. Its reddish color derives from the buried cofactor called heme, a ring of conjugated double bonds surrounding an iron ion (Fe2+ or Fe3+). The heme plays a key role in acquiring and transferring electrons, such as Geobacter may make over a hundred different types of cytochromes in its envelope, where electrons accumulate until the bacterium finds an oxidant to accept them. 

often coordinated by sulfur atoms of cysteine residues [2Fe-2S] and [4Fe-4S]. Transition metals make useful electron carriers because their outer electron shell has several closely spaced energy levels, facilitating small energy transitions. 

The major protein complexes of electron transport each have one or more redox centers containing either [4Fe-4S]—the metal atoms provide the site for a small by a transferred electron converts the iron to Fe2+. The branching of side chains on the ring varies among different Some electron carriers are small molecules that associate loosely with a protein complex and then come off to which can be reduced to quinols: Quinols carry electrons and protons laterally within the membrane between the proton-pumping protein complexes to the next protein complex, quinols revert to quinones, capable of accepting electrons again. 

Dehydrogenases, reductases, and oxidases are all oxidoreductases, which oxidize one substrate (remove electrons) and reduce another (donate electrons). Oxidoreductases that accept because their reaction releases hydrogen ions. 

in a reaction that lacks sufficient energy to pump extra protons. 

Four protons are pumped across transmembrane alpha helices. 

The hydrogen ions leak through the outer membrane, effectively outside the cell. The second heme of the oxidase (heme o3) Each oxygen atom receives two electrons and or outside Note that the oxidase is conventionally 2 e– shown as obtaining two electrons from the cytoplasm and donating them to an atom of Heme o3 cycle of cytochrome bo quinol oxidase actually Heme b Besides cytochrome bo quinol oxidase, bacCytoplasm teria express different terminal oxidases that differ with respect to the ratio of cytoplasmic protons pumped to electrons transferred. For example, the alternative cytochrome bd quinol periplasm (or outside the bacterial cell). The 2e from the quinols are transferred pleting the respiratory circuit. Thus, the bd oxiBased on the structure determined by Jeff Abramson et al. 2000. Nat. Struct. Biol. 7:910–917. habitats such as the mammalian intestine. 

from an organic substrate donates electrons to an initial oxidoreductase; (2) the electrons are transferred to a quinone, which is reduced to a quinol; (3) the quinol transfers electrons enzymes and quinones show considerable complexity and diversity among different species in different environments. protons obtained from catabolized food molecules. The two The exact number depends on cell conditions, such as the a terminal oxidase complex, such as the cytochrome bo the cell, while the 2e – enter the oxidase, reducing the two of protons generates a proton potential Δp. 

ductase transferring electrons to a pool of mobile quinones, which then reduce the terminal reductase (cytochrome complex)? Why does each oxidoreductase not interact directly with a cytochrome complex? 

14.7 In why are most electron transport proteins fixed within the cell membrane? What would happen if they “got loose” in aqueous solution? 

described represents optimal conditions, when food and oxygen are unlimited. What happens when food (that is, expressing alternative oxidoreductases. For example, at low but pumps fewer protons. Thus, the bacteria will gain less energy, but they will still be able to grow. Environmental Bacteria also have alternative oxidoreductases to serve different electron donors and acceptors. Some enzymes take example, succinate dehydrogenase catalyzes the one step acceptors, such as nitrate (anaerobic respiration, discussed in Section 14.4). Yet another alternative is to oxidize inorganic electron donors (lithotrophy, discussed in Section 14.5). 

uniform intracellular environment (Fig. 14.16). Protected by the eukaryotic cytoplasm, mitochondria do not need to complexes has evolved so as to maximize the energy the cells of animals, plants, and most eukaryotic microbes. 

Homologous complexes have numerous extra subunits. Mitochondria have evolved additional nonhomologous subunits specific to eukaryotes. For example, the homologous subunits of cytochrome c oxidoreductase are enveloped by a series of eukaryotic proteins. 

cycle of oxidative phosphorylation, in which hydrogen use the proton potential generated by lithotrophy (see forms of life, the complex is a target for antibiotics. For the cause of tuberculosis, is inhibited specifically by bedaquiline, an antibiotic approved in 2012 for patients whose disease resists all other drugs. inner membrane, and the chloroplast thylakoid membrane. 

While a proton potential provides primary energy storage for most species, some bacteria generate an additional potential to the proton motive force in that it includes the electrical potential Δψ plus the sodium ion concentration gradient (log ratio of the Na+ concentration difference across the membrane). For extreme halophilic archaea, which grow in “haloarchaea” make use of the high external Na+ concentration to store energy in the form of a sodium potential. 

Electron carriers containing metal ions and/or conjugated double-bonded ring structures are used for electron transfer. For example, cytochrome bo quinol oxidase has two hemes and three copper ions. 

Protons are consumed by combining with the terminal electron acceptor, such as combining with oxygen to protons drive each F1Fo cycle, synthesizing one molecule by Na+. 

Nearly all multicellular animals and plants require electron transport to oxygen. Likewise, some bacteria are a terminal electron acceptor; examples include important nitrogen-fixing bacteria, such as Sinorhizobium meliloti and Azotobacter vinelandii. However, other organotrophic acceptors, including metals, oxidized ions of nitrogen and sulfur, and chlorinated organic molecules. This anaerobic respiration generally takes place in environments where ■ Quinones receive electrons from the substrate dehyoxygen is scarce, such as wetland soil and water, and the drogenase and become reduced to quinols. Typically, human digestive tract. tases to reduce alternative electron acceptors (Fig. 14.19). to an electron acceptor complex. These enzymes, although comparable to cytochrome ■ Protons are pumped by substrate dehydrogenases (oxiquinol oxidases, are conventionally termed “reductases” doreductases) and terminal oxidases. The number of tor. Some of the electron acceptors are inorganic, such as environmental conditions, such as the concentrations of substrate and terminal electron acceptor. can be reduced to succinate. Organic electron acceptors play important roles in food decomposition. For example, the substance trimethylamine oxide, used by fish as an osmoprotectant against sea salt, is reduced by bacteria to trimethylamine—the main cause of the “fishy” smell. (or substrate oxidoreNADH ductases) receive electrons from different organic electron donors, as well as enzymes “connect” to various termiCyxAB nal oxidoreductases through the pool of quinones. Note that the various electron donors differ greatly in their coli can oxidize various foods (electron donors) while reducing various electron acceptors. reduction potential and hence in their Each electron donor may use alternative substrate oxidoreductases, depending on the capacity to generate proton potential environmental conditions. 

Each nitrogen state requires a specialized reductase, such are removed and combined with protons to form water. in producing the nitrogen gas of Earth’s atmosphere (discussed in Chapter 22). An alternative option for many soil bacteria, such as Bacillus species, is to reduce nitrite to ammonium ion Dissimilatory nitrate and nitrite reduction to ammonium ion can increase the soil pH. The high pH will precipitate metals such as iron. The presence of a particular reductase can be used as a diagnostic indicator for clinical isolates of bacteria. For example, the chemical test for nitrate reduction is a key step in the diagnosis of Neisseria gonorrhoeae, the causative several closely related species test positive. 

inflammation and activates white blood cells (discussed in can use tetrathionate as a terminal electron acceptor for its the host’s native microbiome and cause disease. 

1. Salmonella invades gut epithelial cells. 

4. Neutrophils convert thiosulfate to tetrathionate. 

2. Inflammation oxygen radicals. 

■ Anaerobic respiration in a lake water column. As each successive terminal electron acceptor is used up, its reduced form appears. The next-best electron acceptor is then used, generally by a different species of microbe. 

In natural biofilms, bacteria transfer electrons to metals and even between neighboring bacteria. What if we could harness bacterial electron transfer to power our own electrical The concept of bacterial electric power is surprisingly recent. Up to 20 years ago, it was thought that bacteria could reduce only soluble ions such as nitrate. But Nealson, like the famous nineteenth-century microbial ecologist Sergei Winogradsky, was fascinated by the metal transformations he observed in wetlands and lake sediments. Nealson was particularly intrigued by the high levels of reduced manganese (Mn2+) found in Lake Oneida, New York. He reasoned that only microbial activity could account for so much reduced manganese, compared to other lakes where manganese is in the oxidized form (Mn4+, as the insoluble mineral MnO2). In 1988, Nealson and his colleague Charles Myers discovered a bacterium that could respire anaerobically by donating electrons to MnO2, releasing soluble Mn2+. The bacterium, named Shewanella number of different cytochromes. The cytochromes help the bacterium donate electrons to different kinds of metals, even insoluble forms such as iron and cobalt embedded within clay. How can bacteria reduce a substance outside their cell envelopes? Nealson’s colleague Mohamed El-Naggar found that Shewanella bacteria transfer electrons via nanowires (see Fig. 14.2). The nanowire extensions of periplasm help bacteria connect with each other in a biofilm, and transfer a current to the metal electron acceptor. In an electrolytic fuel cell, the bacteria form a biofilm on the anode (electron-attracting cause charge separation between electrons and hydrogen ions. The electrons then pass within a current to the cathode. 

nitrate is used up, other species reduce manganese (Mn4+ → the bottom of the lake or sediment, methanogenic archaea reduce carbon dioxide to methane (see Section 14.5). Microbial reduction of minerals plays a critical role in every ecosystem and participates in the geochemical cycling of elements throughout Earth’s biosphere (discussed in Chapter 22). 

14.9 The proposed scheme for uranium removal requires injection of acetate under highly anoxic conditions, with less than 1 part per million (ppm) dissolved oxygen. Why must the acetate be anoxic? 

The hydrogen ions migrate through a polymer membrane, whereas the electrons enter the anode leading to an electrical wire. The remaining carbon and oxygen atoms of the fuel acceptor is an electrode made of graphite. To complete the circuit, the electrons from the wire current ultimately react with oxygen and hydrogen ions to form water, as in aerobic So far, microbial fuel cells have been able to generate milliamps of current, enough to drive small devices, such as clocks and marine data sensors. Microbial fuel cells offer a clean way to make electricity, with inexpensive fuel. The main challenge is generating larger currents. Many researchers are working to ramp up the currents and make the dream of bacterial electricity a reality. 

California (http://mfc-muri.usc.edu). 

The geochemistry of natural environments is shaped largely by anaerobic bacteria and archaea. 

Under conditions of high ammonium and extremely low oxygen, nitrite oxidation of ammonium ion supports growth of bacteria. Known as the anammox reaction, anaerobic ammonium oxidation plays a major role in wastewater treatment, where it eliminates much of the ammonium ion from sewage breakdown. In the oceans, anammox bacteria cycle as much as half of all the nitrogen gas returned to the atmosphere. 

a toxic molecule that gets trapped in the anammoxosome may be pumped by the hydrazine synthase complex. 

Anammox is conducted by planctomycetes, irregularly shaped bacteria with unusual membranous organelles a high-energy compound that engineers use for rocket fuel; the substance is highly toxic, so the planctomycete keeps it sequestered within the specialized anammoxosome membrane. hydrazine oxidation enzyme obtains additional electrons from catabolism of organic substrates. Thus, anammox bacteria are examples of microbes whose metabolism combines lithotrophy and organotrophy. 

Distinguish between lithotrophy (oxidation of reduced (reduction of oxidized minerals, usually by organic food molecules). 

Major sources of lithotrophic electron donors are minerals containing reduced sulfur, such as hydrogen sulfide and sulfides of iron and copper. As we saw for nitrogen compounds, each sulfur compound that undergoes partial oxidation may serve as an electron donor and be further oxidized. 

in the Dark,” starship officers encounter an imaginary creature, called the Horta, that tunnels through rock by producing corrosive portrayed an imaginary alien creature, the Horta, that produced corrosive acid in order to eat its way through solid beyond the size of a microbe are yet known to grow in sulfuric acid. But archaea such as Sulfolobus species oxidize hydrogen sulfide to sulfuric acid and grow at pH 2, often in even a cell wall to maintain shape; how it protects its cytoplasm from disintegration is not yet understood. Microbial sulfur oxidation can cause severe environmental acidification, eroding concrete structures and stone monuments. The problem is compounded by sulfur oxidation in the presence of iron, such as in iron mine drainage. For example, the sulfur-oxidizing archaeon Ferroplasma acidarmanus was discovered in the abandoned mine Iron Mountain, in northern California, by Katrina Edwards (1968–2014; University of Southern California) and colleagues from the University of Wisconsin–Madison. Ferroplasma oxidizes ferrous disulfide (pyrite) with ferric iron (Fe3+) and water: This reaction generates large quantities of sulfuric acid. The acidity of the mine water is near pH 0—one of the most acidic environments found on Earth. As Ferroplasma grows, it forms biofilms of thick streamers in the mine drainage, which poison aquatic streams. 

Iron is corroded by anaerobic oxidation; FeS is deposited on the surface as it forms. 

than most organic foods, so it can be oxidized with the full range of electron acceptors. It is available in anaerobic communities as a fermentation product. 

Desulfitobacterium sp. 

Because both sides of the equation contain a weak electron energy for growth. But the presence of sufficient carbon dioxide and hydrogen supports enormous communities of methanogens. Such conditions prevail wherever bacteria grow by fermentation and their gaseous products are trapped, such as in landfills, where methane can be harvested as natural gas, as well as in the digestive systems of cattle and humans. Variants of methanogenesis also include two-carbon molecules, such as methanol, methylamine, and acetic acid. Diverse methanogens are found in all kinds of environments (discussed in Chapter 19). hydrogenation, and each oxygen is reduced to water. The increasingly reduced carbon is transferred through a series methanogenesis are presented in Chapter 19. 

Earth. Where does all the hydrogen come from to be used for hydrogenotrophy and methanogenesis? 

archaea that oxidize methane using nitrite or sulfate. This anaerobic methane oxidation may be critical for the global carbon cycle, since it suggests a mechanism for removal of deep-sea methane (discussed in Chapters 21 and 22). 

Underwater view of the underside of ice showing yellow-green algae illuminated by sunlight. 

On Earth today, the ultimate source of electrons driving metabolism is phototrophy, the use of photoexcited electrons to power cell growth. Every year, photosynthesis converts more than 10% of atmospheric carbon dioxide to biomass, most of which then feeds microbial and animal heterotrophs. Most of Earth’s photosynthetic production, especially in the oceans, comes from microbes (discussed in Chapter 21). Even the frigid seas of Antarctica support vast beneath pack ice (Fig. 14.29). In phototrophy, the energy of a photoexcited electron kinds of phototrophy include the bacteriorhodopsin proton dopsin is a small membrane protein commonly found in halophilic archaea (or haloarchaea) such as Halobacterium salinarum, a single-celled archaeon that grows in evaporating salt flats containing concentrated NaCl (discussed in Chapter 19). For many years, bacteriorhodopsin-like proton pumps were thought to be limited to extreme halophilic archaea. As bacterial genomes were sequenced, however, homologs of the protein appeared in several species of proteobacteria; the homologs were termed proteorhodopsin. The proteorhodopsin genes appear to have entered bacteria by horizontal transfer from halophilic archaea. In 2005, Oded Béjà and colleagues from Israel, Austria, Korea, and the United States surveyed the genomes of unculturable bacteria from the upper waters of the Mediterranean and Red seas. They found that 13% of the marine bacteria contain proteorhodopsins, accounting for a substantial—and previously unrecognized—fraction of marine phototrophy. 

Retinal is joined to bacteriorhodopsin lysine residue. 

nevertheless illustrates several principles that apply to more complex forms of phototrophy: electron to a higher energy level, followed by return to the ground state. 

The photocycle (absorption and relaxation of the lightabsorbing molecule) is coupled to energy storage in the form of a proton gradient. 

Overview of photolysis. The energy for photosynthesis derives from the photoexcitation of a light-absorbing pigment. Photoexcitation leads to photolysis, the light-driven separation of an electron from a molecule coupled to an to those of respiratory electron transport, and they share common electron carriers such as iron-sulfur clusters. In plant chloroplasts and in cyanobacteria, photolysis is known as the “light reactions,” coupled to the “lightindependent reactions” of carbon dioxide fixation. Note, however, that many of the sulfur- or organic-based bacterial phototrophs, such as Rhodospirillum rubrum, combine At the same time, lithotrophic bacteria such as Nitrospira oxidation instead of photolysis. In this chapter we focus on with other biosynthetic pathways later, in Chapter 15. 

Chlorophyll has a heterocyclic chromophore with a magnesium ion coordinated to four nitrogens. Different chlorophyll types differ mainly in small substituents of the chromophore; for example, an aldehyde replaces the chlorophyll b. 

chlorophyll b, and carotenoid accessory pigments. The middle range includes bacteriochlorophyll and carotenoids. 

facing parallel to membrane. 

antenna complex of Rhodopseudomonas viridis contains 9 chlorophylls with chromophores facing parallel to the membrane (gold) and 18 with chromophores facing out from the ring (red). 

The infrared radiation absorbed by bacteriochlorophylls small organic molecules; many are photoheterotrophs. On the other hand, infrared rays are available in water below the oxygenic phototrophs absorbing red and blue. Thus, anaerobic phototrophs grow at depths where their more high-powered oxygenic relatives do not. 

Topologically, the membrane separates the cytoplasm (stroma) showing the stacked thylakoids. 

electrons associated with hydrogens and in chloroflexi (filamentous green bacteria). 

alphaproteobacteria, “purple nonsulfur” bacteria, and other proteobacteria. 

by reverse electron flow. 

found in cyanobacteria and in the chloroplasts of green nearly all the oxygen we breathe. 

redox cycle. The single-electron intermediate states of quinones are not shown in s 14.37, 14.38, and 14.40. 

The Chlorobium antenna complex consists of a membrane chlorosome may contain 200,000 molecules of bacteriochlorophyll, harvesting photons with nearly 100% efficiency. The chlorosome is so sensitive that some chlorobia actually harvest thermal radiation from deep-sea thermal vents. When any one bacteriochlorophyll absorbs a photon, the energy transfers among the photopigments until it reaches sufficient energy to donate the high-potential electron to a high-potential quinone: phylloquinone/phylloquinol an FeS protein. Ferredoxin transfers the electron to the enzyme ferredoxin-NAD+ reductase; two of these electrons Chapter 15). is supplemented by lithotrophy, the donation of electrons alphaproteobacteria such as Rhodospirillum rubrum and Rhodopseudomonas palustris are typically found in wetlands and streams, where they capture light not used by other phototrophs. Their antenna complex was shown earlier, in The peak wavelength absorbed palustris conducts photoheterotrophy and fixes nitrogen, while producing hydrogen through photosynthesis but obtain electrons from organic molecules, which also provide carbon to build biomass. Excess electrons are used by nitrogenase to generate Nat. Biotechnol. 22:55–61; and from Harwood. 2011. Microbe 6:345. 

Organic food provide carbon and electrons. 

Nitrogen is fixed to ammonium while releasing hydrogen gas. 

The cycle for a single electron is shown. 

Photon energy transfers among antenna pigments. 

Thought Question 14.12 Suppose you discover bacteria that require a high concentration of Fe2+ for photosynthesis. Can you hypothesize what the role of Fe2+ may be? How would you test your hypothesis? 

Actinomycetes make antibiotics. Hee-Jeon Hong tests actinomycete extracts for novel activity. In the extracts, a cell wall–attacking antibiotic stimulates expression of a cell wall stress gene. Extracts from various actinomycetes (white disks) are placed on an agar medium containing kanamycin, which prevents growth of a Streptomyces tester strain. The tester strain expresses the stress gene fused to a kanamycin resistance reporter gene. The extract-induced kanamycin resistance enables Streptomyces to grow, forming a ring of red colonies. The known antibiotic teicoplanin generates a ring of Source: Andrew Truman et al. 2014. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 58:5687. 

ow do microbes build their cells? Some bacteria and archaea build themselves entirely from carbon dioxide and nitrogen gas, plus a few salts. The cell assimilates carbon and nitrogen into small molecules and then assembles more complex structures using many enzymes. How do cells organize their biosynthesis to build precisely the forms they need? How do bacteria avoid wasting energy on excess production? New genomes reveal new microbial capacities for biosynthesis, ranging from antibiotics and pesticides to surgical materials. 

What is the most interesting thing about a new actinomycete producing the antibiotic ristocetin? 

The new actinomycete we discovered provides the first known gene sequences for enzymes responsible for ristocetin production. Discovery of the cluster is a proof of principle for our two-step bioassay system, verifying that it is actually working in a real-world screening for glycopeptide natural products. What new discoveries about antibiotics do you expect to see? 

functions in the food web. Microbial enzyme factories build remarkably complex biomolecules, including vitamins and antibiotics important for human health. Industrial applications of microbial biosynthesis are described in Chapter 16. 

Biosynthesis is the building of complex biomolecules, also known as anabolism, the reverse of catabolism. presents an overview of anabolism, or biosynthesis, and how it relates to catabolic pathways we saw in Chapter build up carbon skeletons, incorporating nitrogen to form amino acids. Ultimately, sugar monomers and amino acids are assembled to form polysaccharides, polypeptides, and the cell wall material, peptidoglycan. Besides the biomass of the cell proper, cells synthesize and secrete products such as antibiotics, toxins for pathogenesis, quorum signals for cooperation, and matrix for biofilm (eTopic 15.1). All this biosynthesis requires substrates and energy. 

Essential elements. Biosynthesis requires carbon, oxygen, hydrogen, nitrogen, and other essential elements. made by other organisms (heterotrophy). Autotrophy assembles carbon and water into small molecules such as acetyl-CoA, which then serve as substrates or building blocks for the cell. By contrast, heterotrophy breaks down larger molecules such as carbohydrates and peptides to release acetyl-CoA and other small substrates. In metals for metal-containing enzymes. 

Energy. Building complex structures, with or without reduction, requires energy. Biosynthetic enzymes spend energy by coupling their reactions to the hydrolysis of a transmembrane ion gradient. 

Acetyl-CoA is a key substrate for biosynthesis. 

Thus, many common metabolites are available both to autotrophs and to heterotrophs, as well as to microbes capable of mixed metabolism. 

use the same enzymes or different ones? Explain why some enzymes might be used in both directions, whereas other steps require different enzymes for catabolic and anabolic directions. 

Competition and predation. Free-living bacteria secrete antimicrobial agents that inhibit or kill competitors. The victors scavenge the spoils for raw materials. Actinomycetes, such as those discussed at the start of the chapter, possess large genomes that commonly encode enzymes for multiple antibiotics. High nutrient levels inhibit antibiotic production, but as the bacterial filaments grow more slowly in stationary phase, they start producing antibiotics. 

Regulation. Biosynthesis is regulated at multiple levels, such as gene transcription, protein synthesis, and allosteric enzyme control. In general, energy-expensive products block the expression or function of their biosynthetic enzymes. For example, as we saw in Chapter 10, if the cell’s tryptophan concentration increases, the molecule binds a corepressor to block transcription of the genes for tryptophan biosynthesis; and the aminoacyl-tRNA stalls the ribosome midtranslation. In this way, microbes avoid making more than they need under given conditions. Microbes regulate their biosynthesis at the levels of transcription and translation of enzymes, as well as through feedback inhibition of enzyme activity. An important example of molecular regulation is nitrogen fi xation, discussed in Section 15.5. 

strains connect with nanotubes to obtain the amino acid each lacks but the other strain overproduces. 

Oxygenic phototrophic bacteria (cyanobacteria) and the chloroplasts of algae and multicellular plants fi x photosynthesis. Cyanobacteria are believed to generate the majority of the oxygen gas in Earth’s atmosphere. 

are fixed and split into six molecules to six glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate are consumed during sugar exchange carbon atoms per molecule. 

phosphorylated; one of glucose. 

Kamen (1913–2002) in 1940 revolutionized biochemistry, enabling the discovery of all kinds of cellular metabolism (eTopic 15.2). Another key technique was paper chromatography, a means of separating labeled compounds based on differential migration in a solvent. This technique reveals short-lived intermediate compounds of a cycle. Calvin used paper chromatography for his Nobel-winning experiments to figure out the cycle that bears his name (eTopic 15.3). shows an overview of the key steps of the from the pentose phosphate cycle. This reaction is catalyzed by the enzyme Rubisco (ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase), believed to be the most abundant protein on Earth. (Further details of the Calvin cycle biochemistry, including sugar regeneration, appear in ) five-carbon sugar ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate. The resulting enter the biosynthetic pathways of amino acids, vitamins, and other essential components of cells. Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate is the fundamental unit of carbon assimilation into biomass. 

the cycle, available to be used in the biosynthesis of sugars and amino acids. Thus, three fixed carbons lead to one three-carbon product. 

different multiples of the small and large subunits: eight (in lithotrophs, green phototrophs, and some algae), six be similar. to give an unstable six-carbon intermediate that remains both molecules dissociate from the enzyme, they enter the the cycle. six per complex) in plant chloroplasts is 4 mM—about the efficiency of carbon fixation by Rubisco is lowered by to 2-phosphoglycolate instead of 3-phosphoglycerate. This oxygenation reaction is called photorespiration. The function of photorespiration has been studied intensively, but remains unclear. 

15.2 Speculate on why Rubisco catalyzes a competing reaction with oxygen. Why might researchers be unsuccessful in attempting to engineer Rubisco without this reaction? 

nine-carbon molecule splits to form a five-carbon sugar (xylulose 5-phosphate) and a four-carbon sugar (erythrose 4-phosphate). Xylulose 5-phosphate rearranges to ribulose 5-phosphate. 

(rearranged to dihydroxyacetone 3-phosphate) to make a seven-carbon sugar (sedoheptulose 7-phosphate). 

Why would a cycle have evolved requiring so many enzymatic steps to so many different intermediates? First, a cycle nearer to equilibrium, the more energy is conserved in the conversion. Second, the multiple different intermediates provide substrates for biosynthesis. For example, some molecules of erythrose 4-phosphate and ribose 5-phosphate are withdrawn from the cycle to build aromatic amino acids and nucleotides. 

15.3 Why does ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate have to contain two phosphoryl groups, whereas the other intermediates of the Calvin cycle contain only one? 15.4 Which catabolic pathway (see Chapter 13) includes some of the same sugar-phosphate intermediates that the Calvin cycle has? What might these intermediates in common suggest about the evolution of the two pathways? 

cmpA genes show especially high induction, whereas the constitutive system (ndhF4) shows no induction. Source: Patrick McGinn et al. 2003. Plant Physiol. 132:218. 

the purple phototroph Rhodobacter sphaeroides has two unlinked operons, each encoding a different set of work best. 

with ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate. The Calvin cycle is used by cyanobacteria and chloroplasts and by some lithotrophs and photoheterotrophs. 

the standpoint of evolution and phylogenetic distribution, the most ancient pathways are the reductive, or reverse, fixation play essential roles in soil, aquatic, and wetland ecosystems, as well as in the digestive systems of animals such as cattle. 

Furthermore, all organisms, including humans, fix small are called anaplerotic reactions. Common anaplerotic and the formation of malate from pyruvate, catalyzed by malic enzyme. 

biosynthesis. For example, acetyl-CoA can assimilate builds up to glucose and related sugars by gluconeogenesis Alternatively, acetyl-CoA can enter biosynthetic pathways to produce fatty acids or amino acids. 

used by anaerobic soil bacteria, such as Clostridium thermoaceticum, and by most autotrophic sulfate reducers, such as Desulfobacterium autotrophicum. It also provides the The substrates and ultimate products of the acetyl-CoA The acetyl-CoA pathway is slightly more efficient than the Nevertheless, the order of the pathway and its intermediate cycle. The reductive acetyl-CoA pathway is linear, with no recycled intermediates. 

4. Methylmalonyl-CoA is converted to succinyl-CoA, then to malyl-CoA. 

fixed by other microbes into fermentation acids assimilated by the rumen. Beef production would then release less of the greenhouse gas methane. 

The green photoheterotroph Chloroflexus aurantiacus fixes also used by archaea, such as the thermoacidophile Acidianus brierleyi and the aerobic sulfur oxidizer Sulfolobus metallicus. methylmalonyl-CoA, followed by several intermediates to acetate incorporation into the metabolism of Chloroflexus Malyl-CoA releases a molecule of acetyl-CoA to renew the cycle, plus glyoxylate. Glyoxylate condenses with a third biosynthesis of sugars and amino acids. Thus, in all, the pyruvate. Pyruvate then serves as a substrate to build carbohydrates and amino acids. 

The 3-hydroxypropionate cycle in Chloroflexus and generating the intermediate 3-hydroxypropionate. 

The biosynthesis of cell parts begins with small, versatile substrates such as acetyl-CoA. Acetyl-CoA is a product of catabolic pathways such as glycolysis and benzoate catabolism (see Sections 13.5 and 13.6). The acetyl group also fatty acids. Fatty acids then condense with glycerol to form the phospholipids of cell membranes and the lipid components of envelope proteins. Fatty acid biosynthesis provides targets for antimicrobial drugs such as triclosan, an inhibitor of enoyl-ACP reductase. Related condensation pathways yield materials such as polyesters and polyketide antibiotics, such as tetracycline. The repeating form of fatty acids, polyketides, and polyesters enables long-chain molecules to be synthesized with a relatively small number of different enzymes. By contrast, other cell components, such as amino acids, have more complex nonrepeating structures whose biosynthetic enzymes require long operons (presented in Section 15.6). 

Fatty acids exemplify the construction of cell components from repeating units (Fig. 15.16). The construction of molecules based on repeating units requires a cyclic pathway that feeds its products back repeatedly as substrates for further synthesis. The advantage of a cyclic process is that large polymers can be made with a limited number of enzymes; for example, the mycolic acids of Mycobacterium tuberculosis are extended to lengths of over 100 carbons. While fatty acid structures used by cells include many different forms (discussed in Chapter 3), their synthesis always begins with the successive addition of two-carbon acetyl groups. Thus, most fatty acids contain an even number of carbon atoms. The fatty acid synthase complex. The cyclic process of fatty acid synthesis is managed by the fatty acid synthase complex. The complex contains all the enzymes and component binding proteins bound together in proximity, so that all steps proceed in one place without “losing” the unfi nished molecule. The main bacterial version of this essential for viability and thus are potential drug targets. Analogous multienzyme complexes are used by actinomycete bacteria to synthesize other long-chain products, such as polyketide antibiotics. 

n times 3. Acetyl-ACP or growing chain condenses with (β-ketoacyl-ACP synthase). 

Fatty acid acid. Units of acetyl-CoA are carboxylated to malonyl-CoA, and then successively condense to form the long chain of a fatty acid. Each two-carbon unit requires during chain extension. The double bond then forms between the third and fourth carbons, rather than the second and third. In this position, the double bond escapes reduction as the chain lengthens through subsequent cycles of malonyl addition. 

acetyl-ACP or a longer-growing chain. The process of from the front end of the growing chain. The growing Once hydrogenated, the chain is ready to take on the step 3). Successive addition can continue many times to build a saturated fatty acid. 

Acetyl-CoA carboxylase represses its own transcription. Transcription of an operon encoding two subunits of acetyl-CoA carboxylase (AccB, AccC) is repressed by one of its subunits, protein AccB. As AccB increases in concentration, it binds the promoter of the accBC always limited by the amount of AccB and AccC enzyme subunits that are present. 

Starvation blocks fatty acid biosynthesis. Starvation for carbon sources blocks fatty acid biosynthesis through the “stringent response.” Blockage is mediated by the polyphosphorylated nucleotide ppGpp (guanosine tetraphosphate), the global regulator of the stringent response (discussed in Section 10.2). 

Temperature regulates fatty acid composition. Bacterial fatty acid composition is regulated by environmental favors unsaturated fatty acids because they are less rigid and maintain membrane flexibility. Low temperature induces expression of the gene fabA encoding the dehydratase enzyme that desaturates the fatty acid bond. As the dehydratase activity is increased, more unsaturated fatty acids are made. 

15.5 For a given species, uniform thickness of a cell membrane requires uniform chain length of its fatty acids. How do you think chain length may be regulated? 

Cyclic pathways of elongation comparable to fatty acid biosynthesis are used to build other kinds of polymers for energy storage. For example, many bacteria synthesize polyesters such as polyhydroxybutyrate. The term “polyester” indicates the multiple ester groups that are formed by repeated esterification of the carboxylic acid group of the chain with the hydroxyl group of a new alkanoate unit. Polyesters are insoluble in water, so they collect as storage granules within the bacterial cell, ready to release stored energy when needed. Polyester granules are synthesized by human pathogens such as Legionella pneumophila, the units. Commercially, polyesters produced by soil bacteria such as Ralstonia eutropha are used to manufacture biodegradable surgical sutures. 

The cyclic biosynthesis of fatty acids provides clues to the biosynthesis of a famous family of antibiotics, the broad-spectrum antibiotic prescribed for bacterial pneumonia and chlamydia infections (Fig. 15.17). Erythromycin blocks bacterial translation at the step of peptide elongation (see Chapter 8). Polyketides are secondary products produced by actinomycetes, as discussed earlier. The synthesis of polyketide antibiotics involves cyclic elongation by an enormous enzyme complex called a modular enzyme, which consists of multiple modules that add similar but nonidentical units to a growing chain. Like amides to aromatic rings, some of which undergo secondary reactions and interconnections. modular enzyme contains a series of active sites, or modules, each of which catalyzes the addition of one of a series of units. Each module contains all the enzyme activities consist of a complex of several protein subunits. Either the multidomain enzyme or the complex acts as an assembly line to generate the specific polyketide. but specialized to accept one component of the polyketide. 

acyl group, whereas subsequent sets of domains constitute “extender modules” that each add a different R-malonyl group. Extender modules can include secondary activities with diverse antibiotic properties. The precursor requires additional enzymes (not shown) to add extra components, including two sugars (glycosylation). Sugar addition completes the erythromycin. Another remarkable class of antibiotics formed on modular enzymes consists of polypeptides made without a ribosome. An example of a nonribosomal peptide antibiotic is ristocetin (see the Current Research Highlight). The biosynthesis of an important nonribosomal peptide antibiotic, vancomycin, is presented in eTopic 15.4. Modular enzyme biosynthesis of peptide antibiotics offers exciting prospects for the design of new drugs (see Special Topic 15.1). 

The growing acyl chain is hydrogenated. Each added unless an unsaturated kink is required. Some fatty acids are partly unsaturated. An unsaturated kink may be generated by a special dehydratase, which generates the alkene double bond between the third and fourth carbons. Fatty acid biosynthesis is regulated by the levels of acetyl-CoA carboxylase and by the stringent response to carbon starvation. Bond saturation is regulated by temperature and other environmental factors. 

Bacteria and archaea play essential roles in global cycling of nitrogen, sulfur, and phosphorus. The geochemical cycling of these elements is discussed in Chapter 22. 

Polyesters for energy storage are synthesized by cyclic elongation of alkanoates. 

To fix nitrogen into biomass, bacteria or archaea must pH 7, ammonia is mostly protonated to ammonium ion form in complex biomolecules. Inorganic forms, such as invading pathogens (see Chapter 23) or as signaling molecules. In macromolecules, however, virtually all the nitrogen is reduced; organic compounds containing oxidized nitrogen are generally toxic. nitrogen, several oxidized or reduced forms are found in the environment, produced by living organisms (Fig. 15.18). nitrogen-fixing legume symbionts, such as Rhizobium, can use nitrate. 

Polyketide antibiotics are synthesized by modular enzymes. Nonribosomal peptide antibiotics are also made by modular enzymes. 

nucleic acids, cell walls ■ Nitrogen assimilation. Different oxidation states of nitrogen require different amounts of reducing energy for assimilation into biomass. 

Bacteria synthesize a vast array of peptide products that serve the functions of development, communication, and combat. These peptides have unique modifications that depart from the standard 20 amino acid residues. Some peptides are translated by ribosomes and then modified, whereas others, the nonribosomal peptides, are synthesized entirely by modular enzymes comparable to those that make polyketides. Nonribosomal peptides include powerful antibiotics such as vancomycin (eTopic 15.4) and immunosuppressant drugs such as cyclosporine. As resistance evolves, in our arms race with pathogens, we always need more new antibiotics. The stendomycins are an emerging class of lipopeptides (peptides attached to lipid) that have antifungal activity (Fig. 1). Where do we find them? We can mine the genomes of the ever-evolving strains of bacteria in our environment, which undergo their own arms races with each other. The challenge is (1) to detect previously unknown antibiotics within cells—a chemical “needle in the haystack”—and (2) to reveal the genes encoding their biosynthetic enzymes. The genes can then be cloned in an engineered fermenter strain (discussed in Chapter 16). So which clues come first—the peptide or the biosynthetic genes? Either the peptide or the gene sequence may offer a clue, which then serves to interrogate the other side. 

Sequence tag from mass spectrometry matches middle peptide. 

■ Pieter Dorrestein discovers new antibiotic peptides by peptidogenomics. 

The genomic cluster shown in encodes three modular enzymes for stendomycin biosynthesis, one of which synthesizes the tag peptide. What do the other two enzymes synthesize? How could you test this question using guided genome mining approach for natural product peptidogenomics. Nature Chemical Biology 7:794–802. 

2. Fragments predict peptide sequences. 

4. Genes encoding enzymes sequence to predict complete peptide. 

The first nitrogen fixers, discovered by Martinus Beijerinck and colleagues in the late 1800s, were soil and wetland bacteria such as Beggiatoa and Azotobacter. Species of Rhizobium were discovered to fix nitrogen as endosymbionts of leguminous plants (see Chapter 21). only by a few special bacteria in the soil or in symbiotic plant bacteria. But in the 1940s, Martin Kamen and colleagues noticed that phototrophs such as Rhodospirillum rubrum produce hydrogen gas—a known by-product of nitrogen fixation. Nitrogen fixation was hard to demonstrate reliably in the laboratory because at that time fixation is repressed by the presence of alternative nitrogen sources, such as ammonia. When traces of ammonia and other nitrogen sources were eliminated, Kamen’s student Herta Bregoff found that these photosynthetic bacteria actually fix nitrogen. Nitrogen is now known to be fixed by most phototrophic bacteria (green and purple bacteria, as well as aquatic cyanobacteria such as Anabaena develop special cells called heterocysts, in which photosynthesis is turned off to maintain anaerobic conditions (Fig. 15.19). Land ecosystems require nitrogen-fixing bacteria and archaea in the soil, often in mutualistic relationships with plants. For example, the bacterium Bradyrhizobium japonicum associates with the roots of soybean plants, causing them to grow nodules. The nodules contain “bacteroids,” forms of the bacteria that grow within the root cells. The bacteroids release extra nitrogen into the soil; for this reason, farmers alternate soy crops with nitrogen-intensive crops such as corn. Nitrogen-fixing mutualism is discussed in Chapter 21. Bacterial nitrogen fixation, however, has not sufficed to drive modern high-yield agriculture. Industrial nitrogen fixation uses the Haber process, in which nitrogen gas is hydrogenated by methane (natural gas) to form ammonia, under extreme heat and pressure. Scientists estimate that of Earth’s other processes combined. While this amount of nitrogen represents a small fraction of the atmosphere, the environmental effects are huge, polluting waterways and causing marine areas of hypoxia called “dead zones” (discussed in Chapters 21 and 22). The anthropogenic (human-caused) influx of nitrogen into the biosphere is an astonishing example of the influence of human society on our planet. 

pyruvate, or obtained through photosynthesis. molecules as shown. That makes 12 + 16 = 28 from oxidation of glucose. The production of Hydrogen loss results from initiating the cycle of nitrogen reduction (discussed shortly). Some bacteria have secondary reactions to reclaim the lost hydrogen with part of its lost energy. 

donors. The electrons are subsequently channeled down through cluster (Fe7S9Mo) is held in place by coordination with a molecule of homocitrate plus two amino acid residues of nitrogenase: His 442 and Cys 275. 

organisms (and their plant hosts, for leguminous symbionts) require the element molybdenum for growth. Some bacteria make an alternative nitrogenase that substitutes vanadium for molybdenum. 

Four cycles of reduction. Nitrogen fi xation requires four reduction cycles through nitrogenase (Fig. 15.21). ferredoxin to Fe protein. The reduced Fe protein transfers each electron to the FeMo center, with energy supplied by In the next reduction cycle, two electrons are transferred to Fe protein, where they reduce the iron. The reduced Fe protein transfers each electron to the FeMo center, near the which nitrogen regulation has been much studied, gives off In leguminous rhizobial symbionts such as Sinorhizobium can affect the efficiency of plant growth. Nitrogen fixation is expensive, both in terms of protein bacteria capable of nitrogen fixation repress the process in the presence of other nitrogen sources, such as nitrate organic molecules acquired from dead cells. 

Protective proteins. Aerobic Azotobacter species synthesize protective proteins that stabilize nitrogenase and prevent attack by oxygen. For rhizobia, on the other hand, the plant hosts produce leghemoglobin (named for “legume” plants), a form of hemoglobin that sequesters oxygen away from the bacteria. Temporal separation of photosynthesis they do not conduct photosynthesis and thus release no oxygen. 

NtrC and other forms of nitrogen regulation in the Gram-negative soil bacterium Klebsiella pneumoniae. low, NtrC is phosphorylated and activates expression of nifLA. Expression is coactivated by the nitrogen starvation sigma factor, sigma-54. The NifA protein (and sigma-54) activates expression of nif genes encoding nitrogenase. When oxygen levels are high, however, nitrogen fixation cannot occur, so NifA is blocked by binding NifL. (Numbers refer to positions upstream of the translation site.) nitrogen-fixing cells called heterocysts (see Fig. 15.19). The heterocysts lose their photosynthetic capacity entirely and specialize in nitrogen fixation. Heterocyst development is directed by a complex genetic program induced by nitrogen starvation. In natural environments, the heterocysts leak organic acids that attract heterotrophic bacteria, which use up all the oxygen around the heterocyst, generating ideal anaerobic conditions for nitrogen fixation. 

NtrB-P then phosphorylates NtrC, forming NtrC-P, the nitrogenase activator. The NtrC-P phosphoprotein binds an upstream enhancer sequence to activate expression of nifLA, making NifL and NifA proteins. Expression of nifLA is coactivated by sigma-54. Sigma-54 and the NifA protein together activate expression of nifHDKTY to make nitrogenase. Thus, unphosphorylated. The nifLA operon is not transcribed, no activators bind the nifHDKTY promoter, and the nitrogen fixation genes are not expressed. Nitrogenase activity is stopped by oxygen, so high oxygen levels block expression of the gene. When oxygen is high, NifA binds NifL and is prevented from binding the nitrogenase promoter. Low oxygen allows NifA to bind the promoter and express nitrogenase to fix nitrogen. Overall, NtrC to oxygen. Being responsive to multiple environmental signals is typical of energy-expensive biosynthetic pathways. 

NtrB and NtrC also regulate nitrogen usage at the level of biosynthesis of amino acids, glutamate and glutamine (discussed in next section). 

Oxidized or reduced forms of nitrogen, such as nitrate, nitrite, and ammonium ions, can be assimilated by bacteria and plants. Assimilation competes with dissimilatory reactions that obtain energy. 

Nitrogenous Bases molecules from their environment through membraneembedded transporters. But competition for such valuable nutrients is high, especially for free-living microbes in soil or water. Most free-living microbes and plants have the ability to make all the standard amino acids and bases of the genetic code, as well as nonstandard variants used for cell walls and transfer RNAs. We can use microbial biosynthesis of amino acids in the industrial production of food supplements, for ourselves and for farm animals. 

of reducing energy. These compounds pose additional challenges because of their unique and diversified forms, which cannot be made by the cyclic processes that generate molecules from repeating units. Synthesis of complex, asymmetrical molecules such as amino acids requires many different conversions, each mediated by a different enzyme. Nevertheless, some economy is gained by an arrangement of branched pathways in which early intermediates are utilized to form several products (Fig. 15.23). For example, oxaloacetate is converted to aspartate, which can be converted to four other amino The carbon skeletons of amino acids arise from diverse intermediates of metabolism (see Fig. 15.23). As in fatty acid biosynthesis, precursor molecules are channeled into amino acids arise directly from key metabolic intermediates (for example, glutamate from 2-oxoglutarate), whereas others must be synthesized from preformed amino acids (for example, glutamine, proline, and arginine from glutamate). 

■ The Murchison meteorite. Fragments of a meteorite that fell in Murchison, Australia, in 1969 were shown to contain the five fundamental amino acids of biosynthetic pathways (glutamate, aspartate, valine, alanine, and glycine). 

ancient in cell evolution than those requiring more complex pathways. Five of these “ancient” amino acids—glutamate, aspartate, valine, alanine, and glycine—are the same as those detected in meteorites, whose composition resembles that of prebiotic Earth (Fig. 15.24). These same five amino acids also appear in early-Earth simulation experiments in which methane, ammonia, and water are heated under reducing conditions and subjected to electrical discharge. Thus, we speculate that the first amino acids that early cells evolved to make were the same as those that arose spontaneously in the prebiotic chemistry of our planet. amino acid composition of proteins based on the energetic cost of biosynthesis. Proteins that are secreted or that project outside the cell cannot be recycled; their amino acids are ultimately lost to the cell. Thus, secreted and externally projecting proteins have evolved to contain the “cheaper” amino acids—that is, the amino acids whose synthesis This effect can be seen in the diagram of a bacterial flagellum and its attached motor, which contains extracellular as well as cytoplasmic components, colored on a scale based on biosynthetic “expense” (Fig. 15.25). The external and secreted components favor less expensive amino acids, compared to the cytoplasmic components. 

External proteins and proteins extending outside the cell use less expensive amino acids. Diagram of flagellar proteins (FlgE, FlgK, FlgL, FlgG, FliC) attached to the motor complex. The external and secreted structures (FlgE, FliC, FlgM) are composed of amino acids that are less energy-expensive. Source: Modified from Daniel Smith and Matthew Chapman. 2010. MBio 1:e00131. 

to form glutamate. Glutamine can combine with oxoglutarate to produce two molecules of glutamate. These reactions provide sources of nitrogen to feed other pathways of amino acid synthesis. 

second glutamate transfers an amino group to the arginine precursor (step 2), while its own carbon skeleton cycles back as 2-oxoglutarate (alpha-ketoglutarate). This transfer of transamination. The original acetyl group from acetylCoA is then hydrolyzed, producing ornithine. Ornithine is a central intermediate, used by cells to synthesize proline and various polyamines, as well as arginine. 

Biosynthesis of aromatic amino acids. Aromatic amino acids are assembled by operons of contiguous genes, aro and trp. 

Aromatic amino acids. The complexity of aromatic amino acids requires particularly energy-expensive biosynthesis. The number of different enzymes required, however, is minimized by the presence of a common core pathway branching to several different amino acids (Fig. 15.29). The three aromatic amino acids—phenylalanine, tyrosine, and tryptophan—each require a common precursor, chorismate. The pathway to chorismate starts with simple glycolytic intermediates (phosphoenolpyruvate and erythrose 4-phosphate), but its synthesis requires 10 enzymes encoded in a single operon, aroABCDEFGHKL. From chorismate to phenylalanine or tyrosine requires three additional enzymatic steps. From chorismate to tryptophan, the most complex amino acid specified by the genetic code, requires another five enzymes, expressed by trpABCDE. Thus, at least 15 enzymes encoded by different genes are required to make tryptophan out of simple substrates. Not surprisingly, the presence of tryptophan in the cell represses expression of its own biosynthetic enzymes. Repression of the trp operon includes two mechanisms: the Trp Attenuation involves the destabilization of the transcription complex by formation of a specific stem loop on the nascent Medal of Science in 2003. Several other amino acids commonly show attenuGlutamine ation in bacteria—particularly histidine, threonine, phenylalanine, valine, and leucine. 

15.7 Which energy carriers (and how many) are needed to make arginine from 2-oxoglutarate? 

Carbamoyl phosphate provides a way to assimilate one nitrogen plus one carbon into a structure. intermediate, yields arginine. 

Pyrimidine Synthesis purines and pyrimidines, the essential coding components requires accurate synthesis of these bases. Besides their role in serve as energy carriers. 

then converted to deoxyribonucleotides as necessary? What does this order suggest about the evolution of nucleic acids? 

In addition to the standard amino acids used by ribosomes, there exist hundreds of different amino acids used by cells for functions such as the cross-bridges of peptidoglycan (discussed in Chapter 3). Some of these are made by one-step modification of standard amino acids, such as carbon skeletons, including unsaturated bonds and threemembered rings. Both standard and nonstandard amino acids are used by actinomycetes to build secondary metabolites with antimicrobial activity. These secondary metabolites are called nonribosomal peptide antibiotics because their peptide backbone is constructed by an enzyme without ribosomes. Nonribosomal peptide antibiotics are synthesized by modular “assembly-line” enzymes, analogous to those that build polyketides. An example is vancomycin, the main antibiotic used against the lethal hospital-borne pathogen Clostridium difficile. Vancomycin biosynthesis is presented in eTopic 15.4. Amino acids also serve as precursors to form larger structures such as vitamins. For example, bacteria may assemble eight molecules of glutamic acid into a giant ring structure called a tetrapyrrole. Tetrapyrrole derivatives include essential cofactors of energy transduction biosynthesis and its control by riboswitches are described in eTopics 15.5 and 15.6. 

Amino acid biosynthesis requires numerous different enzymes to catalyze many unique conversions. Structurally related amino acids branch from a common early cycle initiate amino acid biosynthetic pathways. 

to another, such as glutamine transferring ammonia to 2-oxoglutarate to make aspartate. 

Aromatic amino acids are built from a common pathway that branches out. Their biosynthesis is regulated tightly at both transcriptional and translational levels. Purines are built as nucleotides attached to a ribose phosphate. Several single-carbon groups are assimilated, pathway. Pyrimidines are made from aspartate, and then Nonribosomal peptide antibiotics are built by modular enzymes analogous to those that build polyketides. 

All pathways of energy acquisition and biosynthesis occur together, sharing common substrates and products. For example, acetyl-CoA is produced by glycolysis or by fatty acid degradation; it is then utilized by pathways that synthesize fatty acids, amino acids, and nucleobases. Other through catabolism. The microbial cell regulates these competing needs on an extremely rapid timescale: Within seconds of the disappearance or appearance of a nutrient, such as an amino acid, its biosynthesis is turned on or shut off. can by the most efficient means available. For a pathogen growing within a host, this means using preformed host compounds for rapid growth and replication. Free-living microbes, however, face intense competition for organic nutrients; so, in addition, they need to fix essential elements into readily accessible forms. Marine microbes build complex biological molecules out of single-carbon and single-nitrogen sources, but they also obtain molecules such as vitamins from their community. In the soil, actinomycetes build antibiotics to eliminate competitors and extract their nutrients. Those antibiotics offer powerful tools for human medicine. Microbial metabolism has many applications in food preparation and preservation, and in industrial production of pharmaceuticals. Food and industrial microbiology are discussed in Chapter 16. Later, in Chapters 21 and 22, we will see how microbial metabolism contributes to communities of organisms, and ultimately to Earth’s global cycles. 

icrobes have nourished humans for centuries, generating cheese, bread, wine and beer, tempeh, and soy sauce. Yet from the moment of harvest, microbes on the food’s surface or from the air colonize the food. Their growth can render food rancid or putrid. The need for food preservation has led to drying, salting, smoking, and adding spices, all of which retard microbial growth. The principles of food microbiology extend to a growing field of industrial microbiology. Industrial microbiology includes the development of microbial antibiotics and enzymes. Giant fermentors grow transgenic microbes that make human proteins such as insulin and anti-inflammatory factors. 

What is the most exciting thing about working at a biotechnology company? 

Working in the biotechnology private sector gives me an opportunity to apply cutting-edge advances in science directly to issues that impact our environment and our health. Watching these discoveries become solutions that society can immediately apply to impact the world is very meaningful and fulfilling. What advances do you foresee for microbial products? The development of “omics” technologies and the rapid lowering of sequencing costs provide scientists, both public and private, the tools to explore the intricacies between microbes and their environment. The results will lead to increased understanding of the microbes and their effects on humans, plants, and the environment, and provide targeted treatments or amendments for diseases, improved health, sustainable crop production, and a healthier planet. 

fermentation apparatus for growing microbes to produce enzyme products, at GeneFerm Biotechnology Co., Ltd., in Taipei, Taiwan. 

contact lens cleansing agents to fashion finishes for denim at manufacturing centers around the world. The fermentation industry originated from long-standing microbial associations with human food. Until the relatively recent invention of steam-pressure sterilization, all foods contained live microbes. Microbial metabolism could spoil food—or it could improve the food by adding flavor, preserving valuable nutrients, and preventing growth of pathogens. As we learned in Chapter 1, one of the first great microbiologists, Louis Pasteur, began his career as a chemist investigating fermentation in winemaking. In Chapter 16 we see how the many kinds of microbial biochemistry presented in Chapters 13–15 give rise to the characteristics of food so familiar to us—from the taste of cheese and chocolate to the rising of bread dough and the physiological effects of alcoholic beverages. Industrial research continues to improve food through food biochemistry, discovering the molecular basis for the flavor and texture of microbial foods; food preservation, eliminating undesirable microbial decay by preservative methods; and food engineering, improving the quality, shelf life, and taste of microbial foods. 

Certain kinds of microbial bodies have long been eaten as food, especially the fruiting bodies of fungi and the fronds of marine algae. Single-celled algae and cyanobacteria are also used as food supplements. These microbes can provide important sources of protein, vitamins, and minerals. 

Flammulina velutipes (enoki mushrooms), with long, thin, white stalks and delicate flavor. 

■ Commercial mushroom production. Farming of Agaricus bisporus mushrooms on horse manure compost, by Penn State graduate student Kelly Ivors. 

Several kinds of seaweed (marine algae) are cultivated, most notably in Japan. The red alga Porphyra, a eukaryotic “true alga” (discussed in Chapter 20), forms large multicellular fronds cultured for nori (Fig. 16.3). Nori is best known for its use in wrapping rice, fish, and vegetables to form sushi. Another edible alga, kelp, is the source of alginate, an important food additive (see Section 16.6). For nori production, the red algae are grown as “seeds,” or starter cultures, in enclosed tanks. The starter cultures are then distributed on nets in a protected coastal area, usually an estuary. The cultures grow until they hang heavy from the nets, when they are harvested for processing into sheets. The sheets are toasted, turning dark green. 

while killing those unlucky enough to consume varieties that were poisonous. Less than 1% of mushrooms are poisonous, Edible Bacteria and Yeasts amanita typically die of liver failure. Other kinds of mushSince prehistoric times, consumption of single-celled fungi rooms actually invite consumption in order to disperse their or yeasts has provided a supplemental source of protein and spores. For example, the underground truffles prized in vitamins. Yeasts such as Saccharomyces species were grown European cooking produce odorant molecules that attract to high concentration in fermented milks and grain bevanimals to dig them up. Truffle odorants include sex pheroerages. Traditional beers contained only a low percentage mones such as androstenol, found in human perspiration. of alcohol with a thick suspension of nutrient-rich yeasts. Many varieties of edible mushrooms are farmed and marketed for human fare. shows the culturessential substance for the human diet that cannot be ing of Agaricus bisporus, the mushroom variety most comobtained from plant sources. monly sold in the United States as button mushrooms and Few bacteria are edible as isolated organisms, mainly portobellos. Button mushrooms are harvested at an early because their small cells contain a relatively high proporstage, whereas portobellos are harvested later, when the gills are fully exposed and some of the moisture has evapoproblem because nucleic acids contain purines, which the rated. The decrease in moisture in portobellos concentrates human digestive system converts to uric acid. Because we the flavor and gives them a dense, meaty texture; the mushhumans lack the enzyme urate oxidase, the uric acid cannot rooms are often served in gourmet sandwiches as a vegbe metabolized. Consumption of more than 2 grams per etarian alternative to hamburger. Agaricus culture was first day of nucleic acids causes uric acid to precipitate, resulting developed around 1700 in France, where the mushrooms were grown in underground caves. In modern mushroom farms, Agaricus mushrooms are cultured on composted horse manure or chicken manure in chambers controlled for temperature and humidity. Other mushroom varieties from China and Japan are grown on logs or wooden blocks. Wood-grown mushrooms include the strongFIGURE 16.3 ■ Nori production for sushi. forest mushroom, or shiitake), sheets of nori wrap rice, vegetables, and fish to Pleurotus (oyster mushrooms), and make sushi. 

Edible algae include nori (toasted red algae, used to wrap sushi) and kelp. Spirulina is an edible cyanobacterium, a source of singlecelled protein. Most bacteria, however, are inedible in isolation because of their high concentration of nucleic acids. Yeasts have been grown as an economical protein and vitamin supplement. 

To preserve food. Certain microbes, particularly the lactobacilli, metabolize only a narrow range of nutrients before their waste products build up and inhibit further growth. Typically, the waste fermentation products that limit growth are carboxylic acids, ammonia (alkaline), or alcohol. Buildup of these substances renders the product stable for much longer than the original food substrate. 

To improve digestibility. Microbial action breaks down fibrous macromolecules and tenderizes the product, making it easier for humans to digest. Meat and vegetable products are tenderized by fermentation. 

To add nutrients and flavors. Microbial metabolism flavor molecules such as esters and sulfur compounds. 

Different societies have devised thousands of different kinds of fermented foods. Examples are given in Table 16.1. 

Lipids are relatively stable under anaerobic conditions of fermentation. 

Many food fermentations produce acids or bases. An acid or base serves as an effective preservative because the pH change is unlikely to be reversed, and because animal or plant bodies grown at near-neutral pH are unlikely to support growth of acidophiles or alkaliphiles, which grow at extreme pH conditions. 

The conversion of milk to solid or semisolid fermented products dates far back in human civilization. The practice of milk fermentation probably arose among herders who collected the milk of their pack animals but had no way to prevent the rapid growth of bacteria. The milk had to be stored in a portable container such as the stomach of a slaughtered animal. After hours of travel, the combined action of lactic acid–producing bacteria and stomach enzymes caused the coagulation of milk proteins into curd. The curd naturally separated from the liquid portion, called whey. Both curds and whey can be eaten, as in the nursery rhyme “Little Miss Muffet.” The curds, however, are particularly valuable for their concentrated protein content. 

mal (usually cow, sheep, or goat) in which the milk protein coagulates to form a semisolid curd. Curd formation results from two kinds of processes: acidification, usually as a result of the microbial production of lactic acid; and treatment by proteolytic enzymes such as rennet. The curd may then be separated and processed to varying degrees, depending on the type of cheese. How does milk coagulate? The major organic components of cow’s milk are butterfat (about 4% unless skimmed), protein (3.3%), and the sugar lactose (4.7%). Milk starts out at about pH 6.6, very slightly acidic. At this pH, the milk proteins are completely soluble in water; otherwise they would clog the animal’s udder as the milk came out. Fermentation generally begins with bacteria cheese. Bacterial species include Lactobacillus helveticus (rods, 2.0–4.0 µm in length) and Streptococcus thermophilus (cocci). 

such as Lactobacillus and Streptococcus (Fig. 16.6). As bacteria ferment lactose to lactic acid, the pH starts to decline. The dissociation constant of lactic acid (pK a = 3.9) allows greater deprotonation than with other fermentation products, such as acetate (pK a = 4.8). Thus, lactic acid rapidly acidifies the milk product to levels that halt further growth of bacteria. Halting bacterial growth minimizes the oxidation of amino acids, thereby maintaining food quality. Milk contains micelles (suspended droplets) of hydrophobic proteins called caseins. As the pH of milk declines below pH 5, the acidic amino acid residues of caseins become protonated, eventually destabilizing the tertiary structure. As the casein molecules unfold (or “denature”), they expose hydrophobic residues that regain stability by interacting with other hydrophobic molecules. The intermolecular interaction of caseins generates a gel-like network throughout the milk, trapping other substances, such as droplets of butterfat. This protein network generates the semisolid texture of yogurt, a simple product of milk acidified by lactic acid bacteria. In most kinds of cheese formation, an additional step of casein coagulation is accomplished by proteases such as rennet. Rennet derives from the fourth stomach of a calf, although modern versions are made by genetically engineered bacteria. Calf rennet includes two proteolytic enzymes: chymosin and pepsin. Chymosin specifically cleaves casein into two parts, one of which is charged and water-soluble, the other hydrophobic. The hydrophobic portion forms a firmer curd than intact casein and results in the harder texture of solid cheeses. The water-soluble portion, about one-third of the total casein, enters the whey and is lost from the curd. Processing of some cheese varieties includes exposure to high temperature, which denatures even the whey protein, so it is retained in the curd. 

Soft, unripened cheeses, such as cottage cheese and ricotta, are coagulated by bacterial action, without rennet. The curd is cooked slightly, and the whey is partly drained, but their water content is 55% or greater. These cheeses spoil easily; there are no steps of aging, or Semihard, ripened cheeses, such as Muenster and Roquefort, include rennet for firmer coagulation, and the curd is cooked down to a water content of 45%–55%. The cheese is aged for several months. Hard cheeses, such as Swiss cheese and cheddar, are concentrated to even lower water content. Extra-hard varieties, such as Parmesan and Romano, have a water content as low as 20%. These cheeses are aged for many months, even several years. 

Brined cheeses, such as feta, are permeated with brine (concentrated salt), which limits further bacterial growth and develops flavor. Harder cheeses, such as Gouda, may be brined at the surface. 

Mold-ripened cheeses are inoculated with mold spores that germinate and grow during the ripening, or aging, process to contribute texture and flavor. The mold may be inoculated on the surface, to form a crust (as in Brie and Camembert), or it may be spiked deep into the cheese (as in blue cheese or Roquefort). 

which determines the ultimate shape of the cheese. Before ripening (or aging), the cheese may be floated in brine to with a Penicillium mold. The ripening period then allows flavor to develop. Texture also changes; for example, where “eyes,” or holes. 

16.3 In an outbreak of listeriosis from unpasteurized cheese, only the refrigerated cheeses were found to cause disease. Why would this be the case? 16.4 Cow’s milk contains 4% lipid (butterfat). What happens to the lipid during cheese production? 

floated in brine to form the characteristic rind of Gouda cheese. The cheese then dries and ripens on the shelf. 

modern production includes flash pasteurization (brief traditional cheeses continue to be made from unpasteurized milk. Unpasteurized milk in cheese has been linked to illness, particularly from Listeria, bacteria that grow at typical refrigeration temperatures. The fermenting microbes are added as a starter culture a sample of previous fermentation, in which case the flora were undefined. Commercial cheese production now uses defined species. In all but the soft cheeses, bacterial coagulation and curd formation are supplemented by rennet or by genetically engineered proteases. The solid curd is then cut, or cheddared (hence the the more whey that can be pressed out and the harder the cheese produced. Curd is then heat treated, with or without the whey; if whey is included, more protein is retained. Brining at this stage leads to a salty cheese, such as feta. 

microbial metabolism generates by-products that confer a characteristic aroma and flavor. In some cases, particular species confer distinctive flavors; for example, Propionibacterium ferments lactate or pyruvate to propionate, a flavor component of Swiss cheese. All bacteria generate a surprising range of side reactions, forming trace products that confer distinctive flavors. For example, while Lactobacillus converts most of the lactose to lactic acid, a small fraction of the pyruvate is converted to acetoin, acetaldehyde, or acetic acid, which contributes flavor. Most amino acids are retained intact, but traces are converted to flavorful alcohols, esters, and sulfur compounds (Fig. 16.10). desirable flavor of cheddar cheese. Lipids are not significantly metabolized by Lactobacillus, but in mold-ripened cheeses such as Camembert, Penicillium oxidizes a small amount of the lipids to flavorful methylketones, alcohols, and lactones. 

into peptides and amino acids, which are taken into the bacterial cell by membrane transporters. The amino acids are fermented to volatile alcohols and esters. In some cases, they combine with sulfur to form methanethiol and other sulfur-containing odorants characteristic of cheese. 

ous leaf vegetables are fermented by traditional societies, originally as a means of storage over the winter months. In Europe and North America, the best-known fermented products include sauerkraut and pickles. Sauerkraut production involves heterolactic fermentation by Leuconostoc mesenteroides. In heterolactic fermentation, each fermented sugar molecule yields lactic acid, as well as ethanol and carbon dioxide. The culture is used to inoculate shredded cabbage, which is layered in alternation with salt. The salt helps limit the number of species and the extent An important food based on brine-fermented cabbage is Korean kimchi (Fig. 16.12). Kimchi is prepared from Chinese cabbage, salted and layered with radishes, peppers, onions, and other vegetables. The vegetables are covered with a paste of fish, rice, and chili peppers. Pickled seafoods such as shrimp or oysters may be included. The entire mixture is stored in a pot, traditionally buried underground for several months. The main fermentation organism is Leuconostoc mesenteroides, although Streptococcus and Lactobacillus species participate. 

are layered alternating with chili paste containing salted fish and for 2 months. 

pulp (pH 3.6). The acidity favors growth of yeasts, including Candida, Kloeckera, and Saccharomyces. The yeasts consume sugars and citric acid, increasing pH. They also degrade pectin into glucose and fructose, allowing the pulp to liquefy. As the liquefied pulp drains, yeast ferments the mixed acids such as acetate. The reactions release heat, increasing the temperature and accelerating metabolism. But the acetate, a permeant acid (discussed in Chapter 13), crosses the yeast cell membrane, where it lowers cell pH and inhibits growth. The ethanol and acetate also penetrate the bean embryo, killing the cells and releasing enzymes that generate key flavor molecules of chocolate. 

penetrates the bean, oxidizing key components such as polyphenols. Polyphenol oxidation generates the brown color of cocoa and contributes flavor. After fermentation and pulp drainage, the beans are dried and roasted. The roasting process completes the transformation of cocoa substances that contribute flavor. Cocoa liquor and cocoa butter are extracted from the beans and then recombined with sugar and other components to make “cocoa mass” (Fig. 16.15). The cocoa mass is stirred for several days to achieve a smooth texture; then it is molded into the decorative forms known 2. Lactobacillus ferments sugars to lactate and acetate. 

covered by plantain leaves. Fruit pulp ferments, liquefies, and drains away, while the beans acidify and turn brown. 

1. Yeasts degrade pectin; ferment sugars and citrate to ethanol and acetate. 

beans for her research on cocoa beans encased in mucilage. 

■ Chocolate manufacture. Cocoa mass contains cocoa butter and liquor extracted from the cocoa beans, mixed with sugar and other ingredients. 

as chocolate. But without the preceding fermentation process, no flavor would develop. Schwan and other researchers are working to develop a defined starter culture, a community of microbes to produce a predictable high quality of flavor. At present, however, one of the world’s most refined and highly prized commercial food products still depends on the indigenous microbial fermentation of cocoa pulp. 

In Western countries, food-associated fermentation is almost synonymous with acidification. In Southeast Asia and in Africa, however, many food products involve increased pH. Such fermentations typically release small amounts of ammonia, which raises the pH to about pH 8, ant bacteria. The fermenting bacteria are usually Bacillus, aerobic species tolerant of moderate alkali and capable of extensive proteolysis and amino acid decomposition. The fermentation needs to be controlled to limit the loss of protein content, but the end result is a highly stable food product. 

duck eggs coagulated by sodium hydroxide and fermented by Bacillus species. One egg here is cut open, revealing the transformed yolk, which develops a greenish color. 

pidan, duck eggs are covered with a mixture of brewed lime and sodium carbonate react to form NaOH, which penetrates the eggshells, raising pH and coagulating the egg white proteins. The eggs are buried in mud for several months, during which time the combined action of alkali and Bacillus fermentation generates dark colors and interesting flavors. 

The most prominent yeast used is Saccharomyces cerevisiae, known as baker’s yeast or brewer’s yeast (Fig. 16.17). shelf for home use and is genetically tractable for fundamental research. The yeast has been studied since the time major model system of cell biology, yielding the molecular secrets of human cancer and other diseases. Bread making depends on carbon dioxide to generate air spaces that leaven the dough, making its substance easier to chew and digest. The small amount of ethanol produced is eliminated during baking. For alcoholic beverages, however, ethanol is the key product, accompanied by carbon dioxide bubbles for “fizz,” known as carbonation. 

Vegetables are fermented and brined to make sauerkraut and pickles. Cabbage and supplementary foods are fermented and brined to make kimchi. Cocoa fermentation for chocolate requires complex fermentation of cocoa beans within the fruit pulp, including anaerobic fermentation by yeast and lactic acid bacteria, and aerobic respiration by Acetobacter species. Alkali-fermented vegetables include the soy product natto, the egg product pidan, and the locust bean product dawadawa. The main fermenting organisms are Bacillus species. 

the function of human proteins such as alpha-synuclein (green fluorescence), which plays a role in Parkinson’s disease. Yeast cells engineered to express one copy of the gene (left panel) show the protein normally within their cell membrane. Two gene copies (right panel) cause the protein to clump and kill the cells. 

Modern bread sold commercially is produced on an industrial scale. The dough is made in huge vats and then cut into regular chunks that are placed into the bread pans. The loaves are baked under hot-air convection, a method that greatly decreases the baking time. In the United States, most commercial bread is sliced mechanically—an invention that dates back to 1912. Sliced bread, however, has a shorter shelf life unless preservative chemicals prevent growth of mold on the exposed interior. 

Thought Question in the production of cheese and bread. 

yeast. Later, bread makers learned to include yeast left over from wine or beer production as a starter culture. Yeast bread production. The preparation of all forms of culture of yeast is included in the dough. The yeast can be commercial baker’s yeast, or it can be sourdough starter, an undefi ned microbial population derived from a previous batch of dough. Analysis of sourdough shows mainly yeasts and lactobacilli, which release acids that favor the growth of the yeasts. The dough is kneaded to develop a fi ne network of air pockets and allowed to rise, expanding with production of the carbon dioxide gas (Fig. 16.19). The fi nest-textured breads are made from wheat flour, which contains gluten, a protein complex that forms a fi ne molecular network supporting the rising dough. 

Ethanolic fermentation of grain or fruit was important to early civilizations because it provided a drink free of waterborne pathogens. Traditional forms of beer also provided essential vitamins in the unfiltered yeasts. Ethanol is unique among fermentation products in that it provides a significant source of caloric intake, but it is ethanol enters the human circulation naturally from intestinal flora, equivalent to a fraction of a drink per day. The human liver produces the enzyme alcohol dehydrogenase, which detoxifies ethanol. This enzyme in a healthy liver can metabolize small amounts of alcohol without harm. 

■ Alcoholic fermentation in beer and wine. Yeast fermentation generates ethanol in substantial quanti- ties. The biosynthesis of amino acids generates by-products that contribute both desirable flavors (long-chain alcohols) and offflavors (acetaldehyde and diacetyl). 

The wine is seeded with Oenococcus oeni bacteria, which ferment L-malate (deprotonated L-malic acid). As in beer production, yeast fermentation of wine produces numerous minor products contributing flavor, such as long-chain alcohols and esters. At the same time, overgrowth of yeast or the growth of undesired species can produce excess amounts of these compounds, such as sulfides and phenolics, giving rise to off-flavors. Some undesired species require oxygen exposure, whereas others can grow during storage and bottling. The balance of microbial populations is challenging to control and has a major role in determining the quality of a given wine vintage. 

Bread is leavened by yeasts conducting limited ethanolic fermentation, producing enough carbon dioxide gas to expand the dough. Injera bread dough undergoes more extensive fermentation by indigenous organisms and, as a result, generates multiple flavors. Beer requires alcoholic fermentation of grain. Barley grains are germinated, allowing enzymes to break down the starch to maltose for yeast fermentation. Secondary products of grain fermentation, such as long-chain alcohols and esters, generate the special flavors of beer. 

We humans have always competed with microbes for our food. When early humans killed an animal, microbes commenced immediately to consume its flesh. Because meat perished so fast, it made economic sense to share the kill immediately and consume it all as soon as possible. Vegetables might last longer, but eventually they succumbed to mold and rot. Later societies developed preservation methods, such as drying, smoking, and canning, that enabled humans to survive winters and dry seasons on stored food. Modern food preservation depends on antimicrobial agents (chemical substances that either kill microbes or slow their growth), as well as physical preservative measures, such as treatment with heat and pressure. These general principles of microbial control are described in Chapter 5. Here we focus on microbial contamination and food preservation from the perspective of the food industry. 

Limited proteolysis tenderizes meat. Plants after harvest undergo other changes; for example, in harvested corn the sugar rapidly converts to starch. That is why vegetables taste sweetest immediately after harvest. 

Chemical reactions with the environment. The most common abiotic chemical reactions involve oxidation by air—for example, lipid autooxidation, which generates rancid odors. Much research addresses oxidation, and the development of technologies to prevent it (Fig. 16.24). For example, produce may be packaged under an anaerobic atmosphere, in a film that prevents oxygen transmission. 

For red wine, the grapes are fermented with the skins at a temperature that increases extraction of color and tannins. Right: For white wine, the skins are removed before addition of yeast starter, and the temperature is kept low to retain volatile flavors. Both kinds of wine usually undergo malolactic fermentation by Oenococcus oeni, special lactic acid bacteria that consume malic acid. 

Bhagwat withdraws a gas sample from bagged lettuce, to test an anaerobic packaging method. 

others later in succession—generating a wide range of chemical products. In meat, internal organs of the digestive tract are an important source of microbial decay. Microbial activity can aid food production, but it can also have various undesirable effects. Two different classes of microbial effects are distinguished: food spoilage and food contamination with pathogens. Food spoilage refers to microbial changes that render a product obviously unfit or unpalatable for consumption. For example, rancid milk or putrefied meats are unpalatable and contain metabolic products that may be deleterious to human health, such as oxidized fatty acids or organic amines. Even in these cases, however, the definition of spoilage depends partly on cultural practice. What is sour milk to one person may be buttermilk to another; what one society considers spoiled meat, another may consider merely aged. Different pathways of microbial metabolism lead to different kinds of spoilage. Sour flavors result from acid fermentation products, as in sour milk. Alkaline products generate bitter flavor. Oxidation, particularly of fats, causes rancidity, whereas general decomposition of proteins and amino acids leads to putrefaction. The particularly noxious odors of putrefaction derive from amino acid breakdown products that often have apt names, such as the amines cadaverine and putrescine and the aromatic product skatole. 

“Food contamination,” or food poisoning, refers to the presence of microbial pathogens that cause human disease—for example, rotaviruses that cause gastrointestinal illness. Other pathogens, such as Clostridium botulinum, produce toxins with deadly effects (discussed in Chapter 25). Pathogens usually go unnoticed as food is consumed, because their numbers are very low, and they may not even grow in the food. Even the freshest-appearing food may cause serious illness if it has been contaminated with a small number of pathogens. Since our intestines are full of beneficial bacteria, what makes a pathogen? Enteric pathogens are often closely related to members of our gut microbiome, which normally outcompete invaders (discussed in Chapters 21 and 23). Nevertheless, a pathogen may overcome our defenses, either by use of its virulence factors (see Chapter 25) or by taking advantage of host weakness due to immunosuppression or to antibiotics depleting the normal microbiome. 

Lactic acid bacteria produce proteases that destabilize casein and lower pH, causing coagulation. 

Pseudomonas and other aerobes degrade amino acids, producing amines and sulfides. 

Anaerobic psychrophiles such as Photobacterium convert trimethylamine oxide to trimethylamine. 

Pseudomonas and other Gram-negative species degrade amino acids, producing amines and sulfides. 

Plant pathogens, most commonly fungi such as Alternaria, Aspergillus, and Penicillium. 

Acid- and heat-tolerant spore former, Alicyclobacillus sp., produces 2-methoxyphenol (guaiacol). 

Meat also contains fat, or adipose tissue, but the lipids are largely unavailable to microbial action because they consist of insoluble fat (triacylglycerides). Instead, meat lipids commonly spoil abiotically by autooxidation (reaction with oxygen) of unsaturated fatty acids, independent of microbial activity. Thus, when meats are exposed to air during storage, they turn rancid—particularly meats such as pork, which contains highly unsaturated lipids. Autooxidation can be prevented by anaerobic storage, such as vacuum packing, which also prevents growth of aerobic microorganisms. The absence of the suppressed organisms, however, favors growth of lactic acid bacteria and facultative anaerobes such as Brochothrix thermosphacta. These organisms generate short-chain fatty acids, which taste sour. In industrialized societies, the most significant factor determining microbial populations in meat spoilage is the practice of refrigeration. Refrigeration prolongs the shelf life of meat because contaminating microbes are predominantly mesophilic (grow at moderate temperatures, as discussed in Chapter 5). But ultimately, the few psychrotrophs initially present do grow; typically, these are Pseudomonas species. The pseudomonads are also favored by the low pH of meat (pH 5.5–7.0), which results from the accumulation of lactic acid in the muscle. 

by the red bacterium Serratia marcescens, is believed to have been the source of the “blood” observed in communion bread during a Catholic mass in the Italian town of Bolsena in 1263—an event that became known as the Miracle of Bolsena. 

Intestinal pathogens spread readily because microbes can be transmitted through food without any outward sign usually spread through water or food. Thus, one in four Americans experiences gastrointestinal illness in a given year. In 2013, under President Obama, the Food and Drug Administration implemented new controls and rules as part of the 2011 Food Safety Modernization Act, the largest laws require, for example, that crop irrigation water be free of pathogens and that agricultural workers have access to bathroom facilities. An example of food contamination is the 2008 outbreak of Salmonella enterica from peanut products. Peanuts contaminated at one processing plant led to an epidemic that sickened 700 people across the United Most infected individuals developed diarrhea, fever, and abdominal cramps 12–72 hours after infection, and symptoms lasted 4–7 days. Over the next 6 months, cases were a single-source epidemic, in which all infections are ultimately traced back to one source. (Epidemics are discussed in Chapter 28.) histories of ill persons against matched controls. They found a statistical association between illness and intake of peanut butter, eventually narrowed to a specific brand of peanut butter sold to institutions. As the epidemic grew, cases emerged in which the contaminated food product was crackers filled with peanut butter cream. Ultimately, the peanut butter and cream were traced back to peanuts from a single factory in Georgia. At the food plant, the source of Salmonella contamination could not be identified, but the plant records showed that product samples had tested positive for Salmonella. Instead of discarding the product, the plant had retested the samples until they “tested negative.” Numerous health violations were cited, including gaps in the walls and dirt buildup throughout the plant. 

Salmonella bacteria are very common pathogens. Did all of the cases of illness result from a common strain? The differ at key restriction sites generate cleavage fragments of differing length, which are separated by pulsed-field patients showed the same fragment lengths as Salmonella sample (1) was different from that of another infected peanut butter sample (2); the bacterium in (2) proved unrelated to the Salmonella outbreak. 

This case illustrates several troubling features of food contamination in modern society. It shows the consequence of a food production plant’s failure to follow regulations, and the failure of health inspection to enforce them. The contaminated product shipped out to a diverse array of institutions such as schools and to secondary producers such as cookie manufacturers, who incorporated the peanut butter cream ingredient. The bacteria then remained viable in contaminated food products for many months, sickening people long after the contamination event occurred. 

dehydration. By contrast, the spore-forming pathogen Clostrid4.5 ium botulinum causes only about 100 cases of botulism per year. The incidence is relatively low, but if untreated, the fatality rate is 50%. In this case, the low incidence of botulism actually enhances its dan0 ger because the condition is likely to go undiagnosed. What distinguishes a patho1 from a spoilage organism? Pathogens possess highly specific mechanisms for host colonization, Rainfall (cm) as discussed in Chapter 25. shows intestinal crypt cells covered with Escherichia coli forming units (CFUs) from the surface of tomatoes increase with increasing rainfall. pathogen first recognized in 1982 in fast-food hamburgers. Since nate spinach and other vegetables. The bacteria can actumanure, temperature, and rainfall. An example of her ally grow as endophytes (plant endosymbionts) within the plant transport vessels. By 2010, six lesser-known strains of was tested for colony-forming units of coliforms (intestiE. coli had sickened people through contaminated lettuce nal bacteria) resistant to the antibiotics ampicillin, chloror beef. amphenicol, and streptomycin. With increasing rainfall, Bacterial factors that contribute to disease are often the tomatoes showed increasing numbers of drug-resistant encoded together in the genome in a region known as a colonies. Thus, rainfall is identified as a factor to consider when assessing produce contamination. The growing presence of drug resistance is concerning for the future biosafety of our food. Food-borne pathogens can arise from a surprising variSilage ety of sources. Consider for example the transmission routes of Listeria monocytogenes, a psychrotrophic pathogen that invades the cells of the intestinal epithelium, Other meatcausing listeriosis (Fig. 16.27). Psychrotrophic organisms producing animals and fish grow optimally at moderate temperatures but also grow manure then cycles it back to soil. From cattle, the pathogen contaminates milk and meat, where it can eventually infect human consumers. Because Listeria is a psychromilk troph, it outcompetes other food-borne bacteria under Equipment and Processed food of food-borne illnesses by their incidence and/or severity (Table 16.3). For example, the Norwalk-type viruses, or noroviruses, infect 180,000 Americans per year; their spread is very difficult to control, especially in close quarters, such as a cruise ship, where an outbreak can easily infect a large proportion of passengers. The course of illTransmission occurs through various routes, including passage through ness is usually short, but it can lead to complications from food products. Colored arrows indicate transmission of disease. 

grew previously in improperly sterilized food. The botulinum toxin has a highly specific effect, inhibiting synaptic vesicle fusion in the terminals of peripheral motor neurons (Fig. 16.30). Synaptic inhibition prevents activation of muscle cells, causing flaccid paralysis. Microbial toxins are discussed further in Chapter 25. 

Cultural practices and cuisines have long evolved to limit food spoilage. Such practices include cooking (heat treatment), addition of spices (chemical preservation), and fermentation (partial microbial digestion). In modern commercial food production, spoilage and contamination are prevented by numerous methods based on fundamental principles of physics and biochemistry that limit microbial growth (discussed in Chapter 5). 

as shown in an experiment comparing bacterial growth in ground beef at different temperatures (Fig. 16.31). Nevertheless, refrigeration also selects for psychrotrophs, such as Listeria. Freezing halts the growth of most microbes, but preexisting contaminant strains often survive to grow again when the food is thawed. This is why deep-frozen turkeys, for example, can still cause Salmonella poisoning, especially if the interior is not fully thawed before roasting. 

Controlled or modified atmosphere. Food can be packed under vacuum or stored under atmospheres atmospheres limit abiotic oxidation, as well as microbial effective for extending the shelf life of liquid foods with consistent, well-understood microbial flora, such as milk and fruit juices. 

Canning. In canning, the most widespread and effective means of long-term food storage, food is cooked under pressure to attain a temperature high enough canning effectively eliminates microbial contaminants, except in very rare cases. The main drawback of canning is that it incurs some loss of food value, particularly that of labile biochemicals such as vitamins, as well as loss of desirable food texture and taste. 

Ionizing radiation. Exposure to ionizing radiation, known as food irradiation, effectively sterilizes many kinds of food for long-term storage. The main concerns about food irradiation are its potential for unknown effects on food chemistry and the hazards of the irradiation process itself for personnel involved in food processing. Nevertheless, irradiation has proved highly effective at eliminating pathogens that would otherwise cause serious illness. 

Often, two or more means of preservation are used in combination, such as acid treatment and refrigeration. For example, shows results of a typical experiment measuring the effect of pH on microbial survival in eggplant salad. Note the critical threshold pH required to decrease bacterial counts. At pH 4.0, about the pH of lemon juice, the bacteria show a steep exponential death curve, whereas at pH 4.5 the bacteria remain viable for many days. 

may take longer, but food quality is likely to remain high, because the sterilizing temperature is lower. 

Acids. While microbial fermentation can preserve foods by acidification, an alternative approach is to add acids directly. Organic acids commonly used to preserve food include benzoic acid, sorbic acid, and propionic acid. The acids are generally added as salts: sodium benzoate, potassium sorbate, sodium propionate. These acids act by crossing the cell membrane in the protonated form and then releasing their protons at the higher intracellular pH. For this reason, they work best in foods that already have moderate acidity (pH 5–6), such as dried fruits and processed cheeses. 

Other organic compounds. Numerous organic compounds, both traditional and synthetic, have antimicrobial properties. For example, cinnamon and cloves contain the benzene derivative eugenol, a potent antimicrobial agent. 

Inorganic compounds. Inorganic food preservatives include salts, such as phosphates, nitrites, and sulfites. Nitrites and sulfites inhibit aerobic respiration of bacteria, and their effectiveness is enhanced at low pH. These substances, however, may have harmful effects on humans; nitrites can be converted to toxic nitrosamines, and sulfites cause allergic reactions in some people. 

16.9 Is it possible for physical or chemical preservation methods to completely eliminate microbes from food? 

Food spoilage refers to chemical changes that render food unfit for consumption. Food spoils through degradation by enzymes within the food, through spontaneous chemical reactions, and through microbial metabolism. 

Food contamination, or food poisoning, refers to the presence of microbial pathogens that cause human disease, or toxins produced by microbial growth. Food harvesting, food processing, and shared consumption are all activities that spread pathogens. 

product, such as an antibiotic, is generally developed from a naturally occurring microbe. The genes encoding product biosynthesis may then be cloned into an industrial vector. 

Scaling up production in quantity. The producer microbial strain must be grown on an industrial scale, and the product must be isolated and purified. 

Developing a business plan. The scientist-entrepreneur must obtain partners skilled at industrial management, finance, and marketing. Patents must be filed to protect intellectual property rights. 

Safety and efficacy testing. Human consumption, environmental introduction, or consumer use requires many levels of testing prior to commercialization, including, in some cases, approval by government agencies. 

Dairy products can be soured by excessive fermentation or made bitter by bacterial proteolysis. Meat and poultry are putrefied by decarboxylating bacteria, which produce amines with noxious odors. Fish and other seafood spoil rapidly because their unsaturated fatty acids rapidly oxidize; they harbor psychrotrophic bacteria that grow under refrigeration; and their trimethylamine oxide is reduced by bacteria to the fishy-smelling trimethylamine. Vegetables spoil by excess growth of bacteria and molds. Plant pathogens destroy food crops before harvest. Food preservation includes physical treatments, such as freezing and canning, as well as the addition of chemical preservatives, such as benzoates and nitrites. 

The production and preservation of food is only one field of industrial microbiology, the commercial exploitation of microbes. Industrial microbiology is commonly understood to include a broad range of commercial products derived from microbes, including vaccines and clinical devices; industrial solvents and catalytic enzymes; bioinformatic analysis of genomes; and genetically modified plants and animals using microbial vectors. Other important fields of industrial microbiology are wastewater treatment, bioremediation, and environmental management, covered in Chapters 21 and 22. 

Failure at any of the preceding tasks spells doom for the product. Thus, a prudent business plan includes having multiple alternative products in development. Although the failure rate of new products is high, all the products we use had to overcome these risks. How does a bench scientist convert a microbial concept into a profitable product? Some scientists acquire partners to found their own company. Others join a mature company that offers many kinds of expertise in business and production. 

Genetic stability and manipulation. The industrial system by which vectors can introduce genes of interest into its genome. 

Inexpensive growth requirements. Industrial strains must grow on low-cost carbon sources with minimal special needs, such as vitamins, and at easily maintained conditions of temperature and gases. 

Safety. Industrial strains must be nonpathogenic and must not produce toxic by-products. 

High level of product expression. The strain or recombinant vector must possess an efficient gene expression system to generate the desired product as a high proportion of its cell mass. 

Ready harvesting of product. Either the product must be secreted by the cell or, if the product is intracellular, the cells must be easily breakable to liberate the product. 

growth factors can impact production costs and profit margin. Another major concern is to avoid contamination by other organisms. The fermentor is the core of the first half of industrial production, known as upstream processing (Fig. 16.36, top). Upstream processing refers to the culturing of the industrial microbe to produce large quantities of product or cell mass. All aspects of the process must be controlled to maximize the final concentration of product, which in most cases peaks at a specific time in the microbial growth cycle. Following microbial growth, the culture must be harvested and the product purified. These processes constitute downstream processing (Fig. 16.36, bottom). The first step of downstream processing is to separate the microbial cells from the culture fluid, by centrifugation or by filtration. Next, the primary recovery of product follows one of two different pathways, depending on whether the product is maintained within the cells or secreted into the culture fluid. Many kinds of subsequent purification and finishing steps are necessary before the product has acceptable quality for its desired use. Again, failure of any detail can render the entire product unusable. 

Products designed for human consumption or use in the environment face formidable hurdles in clinical testing, toxicological studies, and, finally, approval by the still fail one of these late-stage hurdles and never come to market. Not surprisingly, a company must research thousands of potential products before achieving one that makes a profit. The consumer cost inevitably includes the development costs not only of the one successful product, such as recombinant insulin, but also of all the products that failed. Despite all the hurdles to overcome, companies such as Novozymes sell hundreds of products and make billion-dollar profits. Examples of commercially successful products are described in Special Topic 16.1. 

Some products require subtle processing that occurs correctly only within eukaryotic cells. For example, protein products may require posttranslational modifications such as glycosylation (attachment of polysaccharide chains). 

cleaning, the cellulase cleaves frayed ends of material, removing the fuzzy appearance and improving the garment’s color. 

Asparaginase converts asparagine into aspartic acid. Without the action of asparaginase, asparagine combines with sugar at high temperature (the Maillard reaction) and then releases acrylamide. 

the enzyme asparaginase, which deaminates asparagine to aspartic acid. They obtained the asparaginase gene from a strain of the fungus Aspergillus. An industrial organism was engineered to produce the enzyme in quantity, and marketed as Acrylaway. outlines the use of Acrylaway to avoid acrylamide production in French fries. The enzyme is added to potato strips during the dipping step, before the potatoes are dried and fried. Because the enzyme is completely “natural,” it introduces no new toxin. Industrial trials completed in 2012 confirmed that Acrylaway effectively protects many kinds of food from carcinogenic acrylamide. 

The Novozymes product Acrylaway solves a particular problem for a specific industry. Search on the Internet for another industrial problem that might be solved by a microbial enzyme. Outline the steps you might take to develop such an enzyme Robert, Jörg Hau, et al. 2002. Food chemistry: Acrylamide from Maillard reaction products. Nature 419:449–450. 

traits of interest, such as herbicide resistance, into plant plasmid for engineering plant cells, called the Ti plasmid (tumor-inducing plasmid). The Ti plasmid is the source of the genetic material that gets transferred into a plant cell through a process mediated by bacterial proteins, similar to conjugation (see Section 9.1). The Ti plasmid includes the vir operons, which encode a virulence system, as well be transferred to the host plant and recombined into its auxin synthesis genes, as well as enzymes for biosynthesis of a carbon and nitrogen source called an opine. Opines are specialized amino acids made by a one-step synthesis tumefaciens typically provides one type of opine synthesis enzyme and has the ability to metabolize the corresponding opine. 

1. VirA detects inducer and phosphorylates 2. VirG-P activates transcription of vir operon (virA, virG). 

6. Plant expresses recombinant protein. 

1. VirA detects inducer and phosphorylates 6. Plant makes opines. Opine-producing cells proliferate as a tumor. 

2. VirG-P activates transcription of vir operon. 

VirD2 cuts. 

gene is transferred to plant nucleus. 

16.11 Why would an herbicide resistance gene be desirable in an agricultural plant? What long-term problems might be caused by microbial transfer of herbicide resistance genes into plant genomes? 

Industrial microbiology includes the production of vaccines and clinical devices, industrial solvents and pharmaceuticals, and genetically modified organisms. Bioprospecting is the mass screening of new microbial strains for promising traits and potential use in a product. Thermophiles and psychrophiles are particularly important sources of new strains with potentially interesting new properties. Microbial products must be competitive with alternative technologies. Developing a competitive new molecular product requires identifying a useful molecule, isolating and developing a fermentation technique to produce it, scaling up for production in quantity, developing a business plan, and testing for safety. 

This phosphate-solubilizing inoculant improves growth for a variety of crops. Another microbial product is Actinovate, a biological fungicide used for the suppression of root rot and damping-off fungi, as well as the suppression or control of leaf fungal as a mutualist associated with the roots of crop plants. The bacteria feed off plant exudates while secreting antimicrobial substances that suppress pathogens. These examples are the start of a growing field of microbial applications for improving agriculture in an environmentally sustainable manner. 

Escherichia coli or Bacillus subtilis, are often used to incorporate the newly discovered genes into an industrially useful microbe. Upstream processing refers to the culturing of the industrial microbe to produce large quantities of product. Downstream processing involves product recovery and purification. Posttranscriptional processing may be required for human or plant gene products. Microbes may be developed as products such as a fungicide or a microbial mutualist. 

Bacteria evolve before our eyes. Two Escherichia coli clones compete, marked by genetic traits that make colonies appear red or white with an indicator dye. The proportion of colonies with each color shows which clone outcompetes the other. For example, if red colonies can metabolize citrate in the growth medium, whereas white colonies do not, then the red colonies will outnumber the white colonies, indicating greater fitness. This competition assay measures the relative Turner discovered that some clones evolved a cooperative relationship in which one clone obtains nutrients produced by a different clone that catabolizes citrate. 

icrobial life appeared as early as 3.8 billion years ago, soon after our planet, Earth, formed out of dust surrounding the young Sun. Since then, microbes have evolved into forms adapted to diverse ways of life, from psychrophiles beneath the ice of Antarctica to anaerobes in the human colon. All living plants and animals, including ourselves, are descendants of those early microbes. How did microbes originate and evolve? How did their evolving metabolism shape the chemistry of Earth’s crust and atmosphere? 

How did citrate-minus bacteria persist in the presence of bacteria that evolved to use citrate? The persistence of the citrate-minus bacteria is remarkable because the citrate-plus bacteria had such a big advantage. They had sole access to a large pool of resources. To me, the survival of the citrate-minus bacteria is a beautiful example of the power of ecology—how having a distinct ecological niche (metabolizing waste products of citrate catabolism) can allow organisms to coexist. 

In the future, what other novel phenotypes do you think might emerge from the Long-Term Evolution Experiment? What other new traits might the bacteria evolve? Could they evolve some means of genetic exchange? Might the withinpopulation competitive interactions ever take a turn toward predation? Who knows? Only time will tell—and only if we allow time, the bacteria, and future generations of scientists to do the work of evolution and science. 

Living organisms generate offspring of their own kind—but life-forms, such as the core macromolecular apparatus of tion, a few genes mutate, yielding diverse progeny. Some of ongoing microbial evolution emerge from laboratory experthe mutants reproduce more than others, either by chance or iments (discussed in Section 17.4). We present: because certain genetic traits work better in the given envi■ The origin of life on Earth and the nature of the earliest ronment. The more successful variants show greater fitness, for the environment tested. This process of evolution gener■ The divergence of microbes from common ancestors, ates all the different kinds of life on Earth. Amazingly, evomodified by gene transfer and symbiosis. lution continues today, in every living organism. Bacteria rapidly generate large populations, which allow us to watch ■ The mechanisms of microbial evolution, as it unfolds in evolution as it happens. The Current Research Highlight nature and in the laboratory. with slightly different traits. Even a small fitness difference, over many generations, can reshape the traits of a population. If fitness advantage determines traits, how do organisms ever evolve to cooperate? Caroline Turner’s discovery For centuries, observers of the natural world have wonin Richard Lenski’s lab shows one way in which cooperation dered where life came from. Medieval alchemists in Europe may evolve. In the Long-Term Evolution Experiment, some argued that life arose spontaneously from inert matter— clones had unexpectedly evolved the ability to metabolize the medium’s citrate buffer (see Section 17.4). Turner found that a different clone evolved to use organic acids released by the citrate the environment for any given individual includes other members of the population. If other members possess a trait useful to the first individual—such as excretion of a food molecule—the individual may sustain reproductive success, as long as the partner members are present. Such relationships explain, where the enteric bacteria feed on sugars released by Bacteroides spe1 cm cies that break down complex polyC. Fossil mat, Australia, 3.48 Gyr old 21). Often, such cross-feeding relationships turn out to be reciprocal. For example, marine cyanobacteria release organic molecules that attract aerobic respirers to consume the oxygen produced by photosynthesis. Their aerobic respiration Layers of actually helps the cyanobacteria get rid of toxic oxygen. Chapter 17 explores evidence 1 cm for the origin of the earliest cells, reveal deep similarities among all 3.48 billion years (Gyr) ago. Source: Nora Noffke. 

Chapter 1). Others argued against spontaneous generation and devised experiments to show that even microbes have “parents.” Today, genetic evidence overwhelmingly confirms that all life on Earth, including microbes, arises from preexisting life. But these experiments do not address the origin of the very first living cells—or how early life gave rise to multicellular plants and animals. As early as 1802, the naturalist Erasmus Darwin, grandfather of Charles Darwin, wrote: Organic life beneath the shoreless waves Was born and nurs’d in ocean’s pearly caves; First forms minute, unseen by spheric glass, Move on the mud, or pierce the watery mass; These, as successive generations bloom, New powers acquire and larger limbs assume. Thus, nineteenth-century biologists developed the idea that “minute” life-forms arose in the ocean—and that all organisms evolved from microbes, perhaps even from cells too small to be seen with the “spheric glass” of a microscope. Even without the tools of genetics, thoughtful observers recognized the commonalities among all living cells, such as the membrane-enclosed compartment of cytoplasm and common metabolic pathways like sugar metabolism. Today, lines of evidence from geology, biochemistry, and genetics overwhelmingly support the microbial origin of life. What might the first life-forms have looked like? 

life. But in the austral summer (January), temperatures rise above zero and glacier melt trickles into streams. Longdormant cyanobacteria come to life, painting the streams cyanobacteria can grow into thick masses of biofilm, called Jessica Trout-Haney, Dartmouth College, study what happens to microbial mats as the climate warms. Antarctic microbial mats bear a striking resemblance to Australian fossils that date to 3.48 billion years (gigayears, Dresser Formation, Pilbara Craton, were identified by geologist Nora Noffke, from Old Dominion University. The fossils formed as silicate grains sedimented in the mat and gradually replaced its organic structure. The sedimentary layers and wrinkled surface remain visible after billions of years. Remarkably, similar rock formations appear on Mars, offering evidence that our neighbor planet, too, supported ancient microbial life (shown in Chapter 1). 

by still lower layers of bacteria. This shared metabolism is another kind of cross-feeding, like that shown by Caroline Turner in the Long-Term Evolution Experiment. Stromatolites today grow mainly in tidal pools whose high salt concentration excludes predators, as in Hamlin Pool, Shark Bay, Australia. But 3 billion years ago, stromatolites covered shallow seas all over Earth. Fossil stromatolites appear in Pilbara Craton’s 3.4-Gyr granite microbial mats, similar to living stromatolites. Thought Question 17.1 Evolution by natural selection is based on competition, yet the earliest fossil life shows organized structures such as a stromatolite built by cooperating cells. How could this be explained? 

Main-sequence star such as the Sun carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen. 

Continual source of energy. The generation of life requires continual input of energy, which ultimately is dissipated as heat. The main source of energy for life is nuclear fusion reactions within the Sun. 

Temperature range permitting liquid water. Above to life depends on the nature of our Sun, our planet’s distance from the Sun, and the heat-trapping capacity of our atmosphere. 

For life to arise and multiply, elements such as carbon and oxygen needed to be available on Earth. The planet Earth coalesced during formation of the solar system 4.5 Gyr ago. Central to the solar system is our Sun, a “yellow” star of surface temperature generates electromagnetic radiation across the spectrum, peaking in the range of visible light. As we learned in Chapter 13, the photon energies of visible light are sufficient to drive photosynthesis but not so energetic that they destroy biomolecules. Thus, the stellar class of our Sun makes organic life possible. The Sun’s surface temperature and luminosity are generated by nuclear fusion reactions in which hydrogen nuclei fuse to form helium nuclei. (Be careful to distinguish nuclear reactions, involving nuclei, from chemical reactions, involving electrons.) Besides hydrogen and helium, 2% of the solar mass consists of heavier elements, such as carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen, as well as traces of iron and other metals—elements that compose Earth, including its living organisms. Where did these heavier elements come from? To answer this question, we must look to other stars in the universe at different stages of their development (Fig. 17.3). 

Elements formed in supernova become incorporated in new stars. 

Stellar origin of atomic nuclei that form living organisms. In young stars, hydrogen nuclei fuse to form helium. In older stars, fusion of helium forms carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, and all the heavier elements up through iron. Massive stars explode as supernovas, spreading all the elements of the periodic table across space. These elements are picked up by newly forming stars, such as our own Sun. 

major elements of biomolecules were formed within stars that aged before our solar system was born. The later nuclear reactions of aging stars generate heavier nuclei, as large as that of iron. The aging star expands, forming a red giant (see Fig. 17.3). When a star of sufficient mass expands (becoming a supergiant), it explodes as a supernova. The explosion of a supernova generates in a brief time all the heaviest elements and ejects the entire contents of the star at near light speed. Billions of years before our Sun was born, the first stars aged and died, spreading all the elements of the periodic table across the universe. Some of these elements coalesced with our Sun and formed the planets of our solar system. In effect, all life on Earth is made of stardust, the remains of stars long gone. 

17.2 What would have happened to life on Earth if the Sun were a different stellar class, substantially hotter or colder than it is? 

■ Geological composition of Earth. This cross section of Earth shows the core, the mantle, and the thin outer crust. The core and mantle are rich in iron; oxygen content increases toward the crust. The crust is composed primarily of silicates such as quartz (SiO2). Crustal rock supports endolithic bacteria and archaea. 

is given by organic molecules specific to a particular lifeform. Certain organic molecules may last within rock for of molecules consists of membrane lipids. Recall from of four or five fused rings of hydrocarbon with side groups that vary depending on the kind of bacteria. The hopanoid derivative 2-methylhopane is found in sedimentary rock of the Hamersley Basin of Western Australia, dated to 2.5 Gyr ago. This biosignature offers evidence that some kind of bacteria existed by the end of the Archaean eon. 

Fe2O3 precipitates in sediment. 

Fe2+ moves to upper water layers, where phototrophic microbes oxidize it. 

ancient Earth, photosynthetic oxidation of Fe2+ to Fe3+, or “photoferrotrophy,” could have occurred in cycles until the marine iron was all oxidized, generating sedimentary layers of iron oxides and iron oxyhydroxides. Today, photoferrotrophs thrive in deep anoxic lakes that resemble the anoxic Archaean ocean. By 2.3 Gyr ago, the prevalence of oxidized iron and other minerals indicates the steady rise of oxygen from photosynthesis in Earth’s atmosphere. Most of the dissolved Fe2+ from the ocean floor was oxidized, leaving the oceans in the iron-poor state that persists today. As the most efficient electron acceptor, molecular oxygen enabled the evolution of aerobic respiratory bacteria. Aerobic bacteria gave rise to mitochondria, which enabled the evolution of eukaryotes and, ultimately, multicellular organisms (Fig. 17.11). Remarkably, modern cells still consist mainly of reduced molecules, highly reactive with oxygen—a relic of the time when our ancestral cells evolved in the absence of oxygen. The conditions under which such cells may have evolved can be simulated in the laboratory. Conditions resembling our model of early Earth spontaneously generate some of life’s most common molecules, such as adenine and simple amino acids (presented earlier, in Special Topic 1.1). These simulation experiments can never prove the actual conditions under which life began, but they can suggest testable models with intriguing implications. 

Newman proposes that early iron phototrophs caused the iron oxide deposition generating banded to Fe3+ may have generated sedimentary layers of Fe2O3 and FeOx(OH)y. 

Elements of life were formed through nuclear reactions within stars that exploded into supernovas before the birth of our own Sun. Earth’s interior. Oxidized minerals are found only near the surface. 

provide evidence for 34 32 sulfate reduction by microbes. 

Hopanoids provide evidence for bacteria. 

■ Proposed time line for the origin and evolution of life. The planet designate periods when evidence for given life-forms is uncertain. 

Archaean rocks show evidence for life based on fossil stromatolites, isotope ratios, and chemical biosignatures. Fossil stromatolites appear in chert formations formed 3.4 Gyr ago. Isotope ratios for carbon indicate photosynthesis at 3.7 Gyr ago. Bacterial hopanoids appear at 2.5 Gyr ago. Microfossils of filamentous and colonial prokaryotes date to 2.0 Gyr ago. At 1.2 Gyr ago, larger fossil cells resemble those of modern eukaryotes. Banded iron formations reflect the cyclic increase and decrease of oxygen produced by cyanobacteria and consumed through reaction with reduced iron. After all the ocean’s iron was oxidized, oxygen increased gradually in the atmosphere. 

from the air and water and reduced minerals in the sediment, upwelling photosynthesis may have resembled that of haloarchaea, whose bacteriorhodopsin absorbs light in the central range of sunlight (green-yellow, 500–600 nm) between the blue and red chlorophylls of cyanobacteria and DasSarma, University of Maryland. 

the atmosphere in the absence of the ozone layer. Sulfur such as the bacteriorhodopsin of haloarchaea (halophilic archaea), could have conducted the fi rst kind of phototrophy. The absorption spectrum of bacteriorhodopsin of cyanobacteria and anoxygenic bacteria, which absorb the outer ranges of blue and red. Perhaps these chlorophyllusing bacteria evolved in the presence of haloarchaea, fi lling the unexploited photochemical niches. Methanogenesis. Climate models of early Earth suggest a methane atmosphere, produced by methanogenic archaea. genomes—a fi nding that suggests early evolution of their common ancestor. Their biochemistry and evolution (discussed in Chapter 19) are consistent with proposed models of ancient life. 

The first biomolecules may have formed as a result of lightning triggered by volcanic eruption. 

Side chain is modified. 

acid complexed to a dinucleotide. This dinucleotide could later have evolved into the first two nucleotides of the codon specifying the amino acid. 

by protein subunits. Thomas Cech, Sidney Altman, and cells evolved by acquiring proteins to enhance stability. The complexes, such as the ribosome, still maintain their ribozymes; for others, perhaps all that remains are one or two in enzymes today, perhaps representing vestigial remnants The RNA-world model explains the central role of origin yet addresses all the requirements for a living cell— metabolism, membrane compartmentalization, and hereditary material. Each model does, however, offer important insights into the evolutionary history and mechanisms of life today. 

17.3 Outline the strengths and limitations of each model of the origin of living cells. Which aspects of living cells does each model explain? 

lived on Earth at least 2.5 Gyr ago, possibly 3.7 Gyr ago, and that bacteria with anaerobic metabolism evolved as early or earlier. Many intriguing questions remain. We outline here three unresolved questions regarding the temperature of early Earth, the role of methane in the early atmosphere, and the actual source of Earth’s first cells. Thermophile or psychrophile? The apparent existence of life so soon after Earth cooled suggests a thermophilic origin. Thermophily is supported by the fact that in the domains Bacteria and Archaea, the deepest-branching clades (that is, kinds of organisms that diverged the earliest from others in the domain) are thermophiles. Such organisms could have thrived at hydrothermal vents, which offer On the other hand, after meteoric bombardment abated, early Earth should have become glacially cold. In the Archaean, solar radiation was 20%–30% less intense than it habitat would support psychrophiles. Psychrophiles might were methanogens (methane producers). Methanogens are one of the most widely divergent groups of organisms and persist today in environments ranging from anaerobic sediment to the human intestine. Methanogenesis requires only carbon dioxide and hydrogen gas, which would have been plentiful in early anoxic sediment. The production of methane, an extremely potent greenhouse gas, could have greatly increased Earth’s temperature during the Archaean eon. Thus, methanogenesis could explain how Earth escaped the permanent freeze of Mars. Overheating would have been halted when the oxygen gas produced by cyanobacteria enabled growth of methanotrophs, bacteria that oxidize methane. The decline of methane and the rise The debate over the temperature and climate of early Earth has interesting implications for Earth today, when we again face the prospect of massive global climate change. Human agriculture favors explosive growth of methanogens, which threaten to accelerate global warming faster than the biosphere can moderate it. Understanding the climate of early Earth may help us better understand and manage our own climate, discussed in Chapter 22. Origin on Earth or elsewhere? Emerging evidence from fossils and geochemistry has inexorably pushed back the earliest known dates for several kinds of metabolism closer to 3.7 Gyr ago (see Fig. 17.11). This implies that as soon as Earth cooled to a temperature suitable for life, all the fundamental components of cells evolved almost immediately. How could life, with all its diverse kinds of metabolism, have arisen so quickly? The idea that life-forms originated elsewhere and “seeded” life on Earth is called panspermia. Theories of panspermia remain highly speculative. One hypothesis is that microbial cells originated on Mars and were then carried to Earth on meteorites. As the solar system formed, Mars would have cooled sooner than Earth, and because it is also smaller than Earth, Mars’s weaker gravity would have generated less bombardment by meteorites. Martian rocks ejected into space by meteor impact have reached Earth, and calculations based on simulated space habitats show that however, gains us only about half a billion years; it does not really explain the origin of life’s complexity and diversity. Did life-forms come from still farther away, perhaps borne on interstellar dust from some other solar system? modern cells (discussed in Chapter 11). If early cells with evolved and diverged faster than cellular organisms that we know today. Thought Question on Mars. How might such a find shed light on the origin and evolution of life on Earth? 

Thermophile or psychrophile? Classic models of early life assume thermophily, but Earth may actually have been cold when the first cells originated. greenhouse effect, warming Earth and enabling evolution of other kinds of life. Origin on Earth or elsewhere? Isotope ratios suggest the presence of complex metabolism by 3.7 Gyr ago, shortly after Earth cooled (4.0 Gyr ago). Simpler cells existing before 4.0 Gyr ago may have evolved much faster first evolved on another planet. 

The unifying assumption of modern biology is genetic relatedness, or molecular phylogeny. Phylogeny generates a series of branching groups of related organisms called clades. Each clade is a monophyletic group—that is, a group of organisms that share a common ancestor not shared by any kind of organism outside the clade. Each monophyletic group then branches into smaller monophyletic groups, and ultimately species, the fundamental kind of organism (discussed in Section 17.5). The full description of branching divergence of a species is called its phylogeny. Phylogeny, however, consists of more than branching divergence; the ancestry of all life-forms includes horizontal gene transfer (discussed in Chapter 9). Both vertical gene flow (parent to offspring) and horizontal gene transfer shape all life-forms, including humans. 

Populations of organisms diverge from each other through several fundamental mechanisms of evolution. These rare mistakes (in bacteria and archaea, typically one out of a million base pairs) as the chromosome replicates (discussed in Chapter 7). Replication errors result in mutation. Most mutations are neutral; that is, they have no effect on gene function. 

(discussed in Section 17.4). Genes encoding traits under selection pressure may show mutation frequencies much higher or lower than those generated by the random mutation rate. Natural selection enables a population to adapt to a changing environment. 

Reductive evolution (degenerative evolution). In the absence of selection for a trait, the genes encoding the trait accumulate mutations without affecting the organism’s reproductive success. Because mutations that decrease function are more common than mutations that improve function, accumulating mutations without selection pressure leads to decline and ultimately degenerative evolution). 

An important conceptual advance of the twentieth century was that information contained in a macromolecule such The temporal information contained in a macromolecular sequence is called a molecular clock. Molecular clocks have revolutionized our understanding of the emergence of all living organisms, including human beings. The first hybridization, were developed in the 1960s. Subsequently, Carl Woese to reveal the divergence of three domains of life. The rRNA sequence is particularly useful because ribosome structure and function are highly similar across all organisms. Genome sequences now offer many other genes to measure divergence at different levels of classification. 

The gene has the same function across all types of organisms compared. That is, all versions are orthologous; they have not evolved to serve different functions. Functional difference may lead to different rates of change. The generation time is the same for all organisms compared. Shorter generation times (more frequent reproductive cycles) lead to overestimates of the overall time of divergence because of the increased opportunity The average mutation rate remains constant among organisms and across generations. If different kinds of life mutate at different rates, then organisms with more rapid rates of mutation will appear to have diverged over a longer time than is actually the case. 

Minimum number of changes. The best alignment between two sequences is that which assumes the smallest number of mutational changes. 

Functional sequences change more slowly. Sequences that encode essential catalytic portions of the gene product are maintained by selection pressure and change more slowly than portions of the molecule without essential function. 

Third-base codon positions show more random change. In a protein-coding gene, many codons have multiple anticodons that differ at the third base, so third-base changes are least likely to change the amino acid. Thus, third-base nucleotides offer the best molecular clock information. 

Maximum parsimony. Evolutionary distances are computed for all pairs of taxa based on the numbers of nucleotide or amino acid substitutions between them. reconstructed. All possible trees comparing relative time of divergence from the common ancestor are computed. The “best fit” tree is defined as the one requiring the fewest mutations to fit the data (that is, the one that reconstruction is that more than one tree may produce results consistent with the data. 

Maximum likelihood. For each possible tree, one calculates the likelihood (probability) that such a tree The probability of given mutations is based on complex statistical calculations. Maximum-likelihood methods require large amounts of computation but obtain the most information from the data, usually generating one tree or a small set of probable trees. 

Obsidian Pool, a thermal spring at Yellowstone National the phylogeny of selected bacteria from the human intesPark. The sequences were analyzed by Susan Barns and coltine, within a larger clade (the gammaproteobacteria, preleagues at Indiana University in the laboratory of Norman sented in Chapter 18). The phylogenetic tree is based on a Pace, a pioneering investigator of extreme habitats. Note set of protein sequences of “housekeeping” genes—that is, that some of the Obsidian Pool samples are known species, genes encoding functions essential for all cells, and ususuch as the thermophile Pyrodictium occultum, whereas ally transmitted vertically (parent to offspring). Escherichia, others are uncharacterized organisms given alphanumeric Shigella, and Salmonella are closely related genera, includdesignations, their existence known only by the rRNA ing pathogenic strains, as well as normal members of the sequences reported here. In fact, any microbial habitat surgut microbiome. The genus Klebsiella includes species that ously unknown species (as in the shower curtain biofilm luminescens is a nematode bacterium that helps its host pardescribed in eTopic 17.2). asitize insects. Erwinia carotovora infects carrots and other The Obsidian Pool rRNA sequences were aligned by plants; it is closely related to Yersinia pestis, the cause of the method illustrated in and divergence bubonic plague. Photobacterium profundum is a marine distances were analyzed by maximum likelihood. In each barophile (high pressure) growing in a deep-sea trench. tree, the total distance (in terms of base-substitution freOverall, the tree shown is rooted by Shewanella, a genus of quency) between any two sequences is approximated by the metal reducers used to construct fuel cells. The tree shows distance from each sequence and its branch point, or node gens to deep-ocean dwellers, diverged relatively recently root—that is, a common ancestor. Moving from the root from a common ancestor. to the tips of the branches means moving forward in time. One group, the genus Buchnera, appears to have diverged Phylogenetic trees can be drawn in different ways. The much faster than the other bacteria. Buchnera species are tree at left in is a radial tree, in which branches intracellular endosymbionts of aphids (Fig. 17.19 inset). The indicate distance outward from their nodes. The tree at right intracellular symbionts have undergone reductive evolution, shows the same divergence distances from nodes, drawn as losing many functions supplied by their host. Intracellular a rectangular tree. In a rectangular tree, all branches run endosymbionts typically mutate much faster than free-living bacteria. In addition, they undergo intense selection pressure branches, although it takes up more space than a radial tree, for adaptation to their obligate host. And yet, other bacteria especially when large numbers of organisms are compared. (Regiella) within the same host evolved the opposite way— If the length of each branch corresponds to a given length they gained genes encoding parasitic factors. Endosymbiosis of time, we expect all the branches to add up to the same is discussed further in Section 17.6. total length. In some trees this condition is approximated, but in microIntestinal proteobacteria Aphid embryo bial trees the lengths differ greatly. Escherichia and Shigella In for example, SulfolBuchnera 5% sequence change 500 Myr (approximate) obus acidocaldarius appears to have evolved much more than DesulfuroPhotorhabdus luminescens acidocaldarius and its recent ancesErwinia carotovora tors have accumulated mutations Yersinia pestis faster. In every tree, some lineages 100 µm Sodalis glossinidius accumulate mutations faster than others. The difference in rate arises Haemophilus and Pasteurella from differences in mutation rate and with accelerated Photobacterium profundum from differences in generation time mutation rate) “Fan” or “bush” of between organisms whose sequences similarly divergent are compared. Thus, our molecular was derived from concatenated sequences of highly conserved “housekeeping” proteins. The isms with disparate mutation rates. scale bar corresponds to 5% amino acid sequence divergence. Inset: Aphid embryo contains any set of organisms, even from mul- Buchnera; pink = Regiella; blue = aphid nuclei. Source: Phylogeny modified from Morgan Price et al. 2008. tiple habitats. 

Buchnera and several other lineages show a widening branch. The widening branch indicates a “fan” or “bush” of strains equally distant from a common node (branch point). The cause of “bushy” branches is debated; some researchers argue that all branches become bushy once enough strains have been sequenced. How do we calibrate a phylogenetic tree—that is, relate the number of mutations to the time since divergence? We if some kind of fossil evidence or geological record exists to confirm at least one branch point of the tree. But for microbes, such fossil calibrations remain speculative. One convincing method of calibration is to correlate the divergence of microbial species growing only inside of particular host species with the divergences of their hosts, based on the host fossil record. For example, the exceedingly rapid divergence of Buchnera species (Fig. 17.19) can be calibrated on the basis of their host insects. Such calculations, however, reveal vastly divergent rates of evolutionary change in different bacterial taxa. Could a life-form mutate even faster than Buchnera? they form multiple strains within one host (discussed in Chapter 11). 

17.6 What are the major sources of error and uncertainty in constructing phylogenetic trees? 

existence of a third kind of life, Archaea, roughly as distant from bacteria as from eukaryotes (Fig. 17.20). The three fundamental groups of life-forms—Archaea, Bacteria, and Eukarya—are termed domains. How was an entire domain of life missed in the past? Many archaea grow in habitats Others, such as methanogens and halophiles, were long known to microbial ecologists, but without tools for genetic analysis they were simply classified among bacteria. 

■ Three domains of life. Carl Woese (1928–2012) domains of life: Bacteria, Eukarya (eukaryotes), and Archaea. 

archaea argue that archaea represent a model system for related processes in complex eukaryotes such as humans. The root, however, can be found only by measuring divergence relative to an outside group of organisms. Since no “outgroup” exists for the tree of all life, how is the tree rooted? One approach is to compare a pair of homologous genes within one organism—homologs that diverged from a common ancestral gene and acquired distinct functions (paralogs). The pair of paralogs chosen for analysis must have diverged within the common ancestral cell before the divergence of the three domains of life. The early divergence is determined by comparing the pair’s sequence similarity in many different organisms and constructing a tree genes with different functions have been subjected to natural selection in addition to random variation. Most phylogenetic data so far indicate a root between Bacteria and the common ancestor of Archaea and Eukarya; that is, Bacteria diverged from Archaea and Eukarya before Archaea and Eukarya diverged from each other. While the position of the root remains controversial, the three major divisions of life based on rRNA phylogeny have been confirmed by sequence data from the numerous genomes published to date. Furthermore, structural and physiological comparison of the three domains largely confirms the rRNA tree (Table 17.2). Note first that all living cells on Earth share profound similarities. All cells consist of membrane-enclosed compartments that shelter the same fundamental apparatus of cell production: the DNA-RNAprotein machine. The fundamental components of this machine appear to have evolved before the three domains diverged from their last universal common ancestor. From a molecular standpoint, all cells on Earth appear more similar than they are different. Nonetheless, important differences emerge between each pair of domains; indeed, each domain shows distinctive traits absent or scarce in the other two. We summarize here the major features common to most members of each domain. Various classes and species within each domain are explored in Chapters 18–20. Archaea, bacteria, and eukaryotes. Of the three domains, the eukaryotes stand out as having a nucleus and other complex membranous organelles (see Table 17.2). Eukaryotic organelles include mitochondria and chloroplasts, which evolved from internalized bacteria. Bacteria and archaea possess no nucleus and have relatively simple intracellular membranes. Their size is limited by diffusion across the cell membrane, with occasional exceptions, such as the “giant bacterium” Epulopiscium fishelsoni. The larger size and complexity of eukaryotic cells mean that they generally require the most highly powered sources of energy, such as aerobic respiration and oxygenic photosynthesis, although some protists conduct fermentation. By contrast, the prokaryotes (bacteria and archaea) employ a wider range of metabolic alternatives, including lithotrophy and anaerobic respiration. Finally, eukaryotic plants and animals have attained a degree of multicellular complexity unknown in the prokaryotic domains. On the other hand, eukaryotes share key traits with archaea that distinguish both from bacteria. The core information machinery of eukaryotes more closely resembles that of archaea. The two domains share closely related components of the central DNA-RNA-protein machine: Even such hallmarks of eukaryotes as intragenic introns, why rRNA trees place archaea closer to eukaryotes than to Nevertheless, eukaryotes share fundamental structures with bacteria that differ from those in archaea. Archaea possess unique cell membrane components, such as their ether-linked lipids (see Chapter 19). Outside the archaea, ether-linked membrane lipids are found only in deepbranching bacterial species that share habitat (and exchange genes) with hyperthermophilic archaea. Only the domain Archaea includes species capable of growth in the most many other archaeal species grow well at mesophilic temperatures in soil or water. Perhaps the most striking distinction of archaea is the complete absence of archaeal pathogens of animals or plants. Even the many methanogens that live within animal digestive tracts have never been shown to cause disease. Overall, the three-domain phylogeny divides life usefully into three distinctive groups. Yet the tree also shows signs of gene flow unaccounted for by monophyletic descent. The eukaryotes contain mitochondria derived from assimilated bacteria whose genomes persist within the organelle. And genomes reveal evidence of gene transfer between bacteria and archaea sharing high-temperature habitats. What if the tree of life is not strictly monophyletic? 

In retrospect, the very first demonstration of the molecular basis of heredity—the transformation of avirulent Pneumococcus to virulence in 1928—involved horizontal gene as distinguished from vertical gene transfer, the transmission of an entire genome from parent to offspring. 

as discussed in Chapter 9. For example, drug resistance genes are transferred from harmless human-associated bacteria to pathogens. Another example is the transfer of genes encoding light-driven proton pumps (bacteriorhodopsin) from halophilic archaea into marine bacteria. Such transfer events are relatively rare, occurring perhaps once in a million generations. But over time, the number of such “rare” events can accumulate. species of a different domain. In some archaea, particularly the hyperthermophiles Pyrococcus and Aeropyrum, 10%–20% of the genes appear to come from bacteria that share their high-temperature environment. On the other hand, the thermophilic bacterium Thermotoga maritima shows a number of genes transferred from archaea. Between more closely related taxa, genes migrate even faster. For example, the Escherichia coli genome acquired about 18% of its genes from closely related species after its relatively recent divergence from the close relative Salmonella enterica. Some medically important genera, such as Neisseria (which causes gonorrhea and meningitis), are particularly “recombinogenic.” Rapid gene exchange enables pathogens to avoid the host immune system by expressing novel proteins not recognized by host antibodies. Furthermore, the genomes of eukaryotes include many genes acquired from bacteria, most of them from the endosymbiotic ancestors of their mitochondria and chloroplasts (discussed in Section 17.6). How does horizontal gene transfer affect microbial phylogeny? In 1999, Ford Doolittle, at Dalhousie University, redrew the standard tree of life with a bewildering array of cross-cutting lineages to show how actual phylogeny combines horizontal and vertical transfer (Fig. 17.22). Perhaps the “last common ancestor” was actually a last common community of diverse life-forms that contributed different parts of our genetic legacy. 

trees and whole-genome trees consistently reflect monophyletic descent (black lineages) down to the genus level. Below the genus level, monophyletic descent may be obscured by high rates of horizontal transfer (colored lines entering, gray lines departing). White spaces indicate genes lost by reductive evolution. 

with the time since the two sequences diverged from a common ancestor. 

assumes that some classes of genes nearly always transmit vertically—particularly “informational genes,” which in complex ways with large numbers of cellular components; thus, their capacity for horizontal transfer is limited. On the other hand, “operational genes” are those whose products govern metabolism, stress response, and pathogenicity. Operational genes function with relative independence from other cell components and consequently move more easily among distantly related organisms, particularly organisms that share the same habitat. An important category of such movable genes is virulence factors. Pathogens show extensive horizontal transfer of virulence genes and genes encoding resistance to host defenses and antibiotics. Groups of such genes are often transferred together on or nitrogen fixation (discussed in Section 9.6). Examples of a virulence plasmid and a genomic island are found in the cases, the group of genes transferred is so large that it makes up a substantial chunk of an organism’s genome. For example, the Aquificales group of thermophilic bacteria includes a so large that the Aquificales phylogeny remains unclear. diverging species. Black lines represent vertically transferred with more flexible function. At various levels, colored lines indicate horizontal transfer, where genes enter each lineage by processes such as conjugation or transformation. Gray lines peel out, indicating loss of a gene by mutation. Overall, the vertical lineage persists for most of the core informational genes (black lines), while horizontally acquired genes enter the genome. The persistence of genes showing vertical the phylogeny of the organism as a whole, despite the other genes that are transferred horizontally. But to fully assess phylogeny, we must sequence entire genomes. 

genes that function independently of other components are more likely to transfer horizontally. 

Horizontal gene transfer is important for adaptation to new environments and for pathogenesis. Gene transfer among pathogenic and nonpathogenic strains leads to emergence of new pathogens. 

Genomic analysis. Comparing gene sequences, both within and between genomes, enables us to track how organisms adapted in the past. 

Strongly selective environments. Environments under intensive selective pressure, such as high-temperature habitats or exposure to antibiotics, lead to rapid evolution. 

As discussed in Section 17.3, the sequence of genomes reveals descent over time based on steady accumulation of make a duplicate copy of a gene. With duplicate copies of a gene, one copy may acquire mutations that change its function without detriment to the organism because the “backup” copy still functions. Now, suppose the mutated copy gains additional mutations that further alter its function, providing a new function to the cell. For example, a gene encoding a transporter for one sugar may now encode a transporter that better “fits” a different sugar. The two paralogous genes, or paralogs, have evolved to serve different functions. Paralogs are a major source of raw material that contributes to new functions arising through evolution. We can detect paralogs in a genome, through sequence relatedness; for example, the genome of the hyperthermophilic bacterium Thermotoga cellobiose, mannose, and xylose, among others. Evolution of paralogs provides an important way for organisms to enhance fitness in a complex environment. Does a population ever lose some of its paralogs? Certain environments select for loss of many genes—a phenomenon called degenerative, or reductive, evolution. The selection for loss is “positive” because organisms save energy by avoiding replication and expression of unneeded genes. Intracellular pathogens and obligate symbionts often lose large chunks of their genome, by processes such as intracellular recombination of the chromosome. The lost genes typically encoded functions supplied by the host, such as capture of nutrients and generation of energy. Lost genes can be identified by comparison with free-living species. For example, Treponema pallidum, the cause of syphilis, has a genome of 1.1 million base pairs, which is about and amino acid biosynthesis. These genes remain in the genomes of free-living treponemes. In other species, dilute, nutrient-poor natural environments select for gene reduction. Marine cyanobacteria, a major source of global photosynthesis, have lost numerous genes that confer little advantage in the open ocean. Missing genes encode transporters for sugars and amino acids (which are scarce in the ocean) as well as proteins for flagellar motility and pili. More surprising, Prochlorococcus species have lost catalase, an enzyme that destroys the hydrogen peroxide they produce. Their hydrogen peroxide is detoxified by catalase-positive bacteria that share their marine habitat. Erik Zinser at the University of Tennessee– Knoxville showed that Prochlorococcus could be cultured on agar only in the presence of partner bacteria that supply catalase. Given that catalase is an expensive enzyme to produce, Prochlorococcus may have gained an advantage when this enzyme was deleted during its evolution in the nutrient-poor open ocean. 

isolate infecting the patient showed partial resistance to vancomycin but was sensitive to rifampin, ciprofloxacin, and linezolid. Right: Following exposure to these antibiotics, a new strain was isolated that grew more slowly (the small-colony variant) but was at least partly resistant to all the antibiotics. Source: Wei Gao et al. 2010. PLoS Pathog. 6:e1000944. 

The “fittest” trait depends on the environment in which selection occurs. The presence of an antibiotic selects individuals that are resistant, despite slower growth (small-colony size). Without the antibiotic, the faster-growing individuals prevail. 

The process of evolution can be studied in the laboratory—an approach known as experimental evolution or at Michigan State University (Fig. 17.25 and eTopic 17.4). 

patient was an elderly man with a weakened immune system, the patient’s blood showed bacteria sensitive to four antibiotics. But prolonged exposure resulted in natural selection for resistance. Ultimately, following a total of 12 weeks’ exposure to linezolid (one of the last antibiotics effective against other antibiotics plus partial resistance to linezolid. In note that the latest drug-resistant strain actually made smaller colonies with or without the drug— the “small-colony variant.” In other words, natural selection yielded a population that was the “fittest” under a particular environmental condition—the presence of linezolid in an immunocompromised host—where even a slow-growing strain could persist. In the absence of the drug, the original strain would outcompete the small-colony variant. In the case just described, what was the molecular basis small-colony variant. They sequenced the two genomes and compared them. Just three point mutations in the small-colony variant accounted for the drug resistance, as well as the retarded growth. One of these mutations derepressed a stress regulon (group of genes under one regulator), causing accumulation of the stress signal ppGpp (guanosine tetraphosphate). The ppGpp stress regulon includes expression of many protective genes that enable a cell to survive in the presence of antibiotics. But the cost to the cell of expressing this regulon is a slower growth rate; like a community under “terror alert,” the cell’s normal everyday processes are slowed by the demands of the stress response. 

freezer. Blount meditates before a tower of petri plates that represent 20 years of competition assays for relative fitness of evolved clones. 

rnk promoter drives citT expression. 

generations potentiated evolution of the Cit+ trait. The Cit+ trait first appeared in about generation 31,000. Subsequent mutations refined the phenotype, increasing the rate of citrate utilization. Ball symbols indicate genomes from the population’s history that generations, a tandem duplication event placed a copy of the rnk promoter, which directs expression when oxygen is present, upstream of the citT gene encoding a citrate/succinate antiporter that is normally repressed by oxygen. This new rnk-citT module now expresses CitT, which takes up citrate, allowing bacteria to respire on citrate from the medium. Source: Adapted from Zachary Blount et al. 2012. Nature 489:513. 

The Cit+ mutation arose initially as a weak ability to transport citrate in the presence of oxygen, and therefore to respire on citrate. The genetic basis of this mutation was found to be a tandem duplication of a gene encoding a citrate/succinate antiporter, citT the Cit+ phenotype causes a metabolic imbalance—but this imbalance gets corrected by the potentiating mutation for acetate utilization, gltA. The duplicated citT (upstream of the first copy) happens to include a promoter for an adjacent gene, rnk, which encodes a regulator of nucleic acid metabolism, expressed in the presence of oxygen. Thus, the duplication places citT expression under control of the copied rnk promoter. The rnk promoter now expresses citT in the presence of oxygen, enabling the cell to respire on citrate. The history of the initial Cit+ clone thus required two rare events: the potentiating mutation, gltA; and the tandem duplication of citT-rnk, which placed citT expression under control of a promoter active in the presence of oxygen. Refinement of the phenotype. The earliest Cit+ clones were very poor at growing on the citrate. But later clones evolved as a result of mutations that increased the rate of citrate utilization—that is, by evolutionary refi nement of the Cit+ trait. The researchers showed that this improvement was due to an increase in the copy number of the duplicated segment that produces the rnk-citT module, which increased the number of expressed copies of citT. This improved growth on citrate eventually led the Cit+ clones to dominate the population. Interestingly, though, even the “refi ned” Cit+ cells never fully took over the cultures. Some cells always remained that had adapted to limiting glucose by other means. We saw the example of Caroline Turner’s mutant (Current Research Highlight), which evolved to metabolize the succinate and other fourcarbon acids excreted by Cit+ clones. 

clones may be more common than expected. How might the mechanisms of evolution favor the emergence of dependent clones? 

is it in the process of evolving a new species? We address the species concept next (Section 17.5). Meanwhile, beyond the philosophical debates, industrial laboratories now use advanced forms of experimental evolution. Evolution can improve commercial enzymes—and even develop new products. For example, Bernhard Palsson vitro all the possible mutants of an organism, and set them against each other all at once? Such an approach is called directed evolution. An example of directed evolution is the development of hyperthermophilic forms of a xylanase enzyme used for paper production (discussed in Special Topic 17.1). 

Genomic analysis tracks how organisms adapted in the past. Gene duplications provide the opportunity to evolve paralogous genes with different functions. Degenerative (reductive) evolution happens when unneeded genes are lost from the genome. The organism saves energy by avoiding their replication and Strongly selective environments, such as antibiotic exposure, reveal rapid evolution. Experimental evolution in the laboratory enables us to test hypotheses about natural selection. Richard Lenski’s Long-Term Evolution Experiment shows potentiation to achieve useful mutations; actualization of a novel mutant phenotype; and refinement, or increasing the degree of the phenotype. Laboratory evolution is used widely in industrial development. 

What is a species? Among eukaryotes, a species is defined by the principle that members of different species do not normally interbreed. Thus, the failure to interbreed is the traditional property that distinguishes species. Bacteria and archaea, however, transfer genes horizontally between distantly related clades. So the definition of bacterial species is complex, subject to heated debate among microbiologists. Also much debated is the classifying of life-forms into different kinds (classification) and the naming of species (taxonomy). 

Classification is the sorting of life-forms into bins (categories) based on genetic relatedness and traits of the organisms. Nomenclature is the naming of categories, including species. Taxonomy is the classification and naming of organisms. 

(the cause of meningitis) from Neisseria lactamica, a harmless resident of the nasopharynx. The multigene approach has proved successful even in the case of highly “recombinogenic” organisms known to acquire and rearrange genes readily. 

genomic relatedness, a species should include individuals that share common traits and an ecological niche, or “ecotype.” Shared traits should include cell shape and nutritional requirements, and there should be a common habitat and life history (for example, causing the same disease). By these criteria, highly divergent strains of Helicobacter pylori causing gastritis make up one species, whereas Bacillus anthracis (anthrax) and Bacillus thuringiensis (caterpillar infection) are different species despite their highly similar on, many microbiologists accept the following criteria for a working defi nition of a microbial species: considered to share the same genus. Beyond the genus level, rRNA sequence lacks resolution. 

we can define all the orthologous genes (orthologs, genes of the same function) that two strains share. If they may be considered the same species. 

■ Pan-genome of Bacillus cereus. The median cereus genomes sequenced. Error bars indicate the range of gene number found upon sequencing different combinations of genomes. 

What commercial product is used to make chicken feed more digestible, to improve the texture of cotton fabric, to bake better bread, and to make paper using less bleach? The answer is xylanase, an enzyme that cleaves plant polysaccharides containing a variety of sugar monomers, such as the five-carbon sugar xylose. Xylanases are made by many different types of bacteria and fungi, and different xylanases have evolved naturally to function best under different conditions. But for commercial use, we need to fine-tune evolution to optimize the enzyme for particular uses: a xylanase for animal feed, another xylanase for baking, and yet another for treatment of paper pulp. The paper pulp application imposes particularly demanding conditions of high pH and high temperature, and To design types of xylanases and other enzymes for industrial conditions, scientists at Verenium Corporation (now possible mutations—in some cases, the entire collection of single mutations possible in a given gene. Large-scale screening then “selects” for the mutant strains that have optimal activity. While directed evolution may involve more than one round of mutation and screening, it avoids the need for hundreds or thousands of rounds of growth and selection. To generate a hyperthermophilic xylanase, Verenium scientists first undertook “discovery,” a process of collecting and testing genes encoding xylanase from many naturally occurring bacteria and fungi from all over the world. The most promising xylanase producers were collected from an alkaline hot spring of the Russian Kamchatka Peninsula, including bacteria such as Bacillus species and fungi such as Trichoderma. The scientists identified 200 different xylanases having promising levels of activity and stability. Both bacterial and fungal xylanases showed homology—members of a group called “family 11,” which shares a common ancestor and related peptide structure. From the hot-spring collection, several genes were selected that encoded the best thermophilic xylanases active at high pH. The top genes were used for “gene assembly,” in which parental genes are recombined to form a highly diverse set of daughter genes (Fig. 1). In effect, the gene assembly process jump-starts evolution by forming in one generation a collection of recombinations that in Enzyme genes from best sources: Best blend from gene reassembly: nature would require many generations to occur by chance. Make all possible amino acid substitutions In gene assembly, the parental genes were cleaved by restriction endonucleases into several fragments (using methCleave into ods described in Chapters 7 and 12). The gene fragments were then shuffled like a deck of cards by recombination in the test tube, generating a library of many Blend fragments example, six parental genes cleaved into and assemble five fragments could recombine (assumExpress enzymes: screen for best ing one fragment of each type) into 56 = 15,625 different recombinants. The library robotic screening system. Verenium sciExpress enzymes; entists selected the gene encoding the screen for best xylanase that was most active at the highCombine selected The product of gene assembly was then subjected to a secondary method of performed in collaboration with another lab—that of Claire Dumon and Harry made. The mutants are screened and subjected to a combinatorial process that generGilbert at Newcastle University, England. ates all possible mutant combinations. 

“generation” a pool of all possible single-codon mutations that, in nature, might occur, but only over many generations. 300 codons, making all the codon substitutions with 20 different amino acids at each position results in 300 × 20 = 6,000 different single-substitution mutations. The mutant genes were cloned in an expression vector and transformed into bacteria. To ensure that greater than 95% of the library was sampled, 70,000 different colonies were screened for xylanase activity and thermostability. Clones were selected that The thermostable mutant genes were then assembled and combined by a multisite combinatorial assembly process that generates all possible combinations of the single-codon substitutions. shows a distribution of the number of combined mutations in combinatorial library isolates with result is that none of the mutations found would have been predicted from crystal structure to increase thermostability; they arose only from the screen of all possible mutants and, in combination, yield dramatic enhancement. 

enhanced thermostability. Amino acid color represents the a substitution at that position. The amino acid substitutions that were combined in the best hyperthermophilic xylanase are shown as space-filled atoms. Source: Modified from Claire Dumon et al. 

The hyperthermophilic xylanase is now used for paper pulp manufacture, enabling the pulp to be processed with much lower levels of bleach, which is toxic to the environment. Thus, directed evolution in the test tube jump-started the development of a product to enhance industrial sustainability. 

gene site saturation mutagenesis with the new approaches described by Packer and Liu (2015, Nat. Rev. Genet. 16:379– 394). How could directed evolution make an enzyme with an activity not known to exist in nature? 

library. The frequencies of combination strains are plotted as a function of number of mutations per strain. Blue bars represent the frequencies of hyperthermophiles; red bars represent the distribution of all combination strains. Source: Modified from Claire Dumon et al. 

thus, most bacterial and archaeal species have access to their core genome plus an uncountable number of possible accessory genes. 

Defining a species is part of the task of taxonomy, the classifying of life-forms into different categories with shared traits. Taxonomy is critical for every microbiological pursuit, from diagnosing a patient’s illness to understanding microbial ecosystems. Classification generates a hierarchy of taxa (groups microbial taxonomy. Historically, taxa have been defined and named on the basis of a combination of genetic and phenotypic traits. The nomenclature of microbes remains surprisingly fluid: As new traits are identified and the genetic sequence of a microbe is established, species are all too frequently renamed. Current information on microbial names is available through online databases such as Traditional classification designates levels of taxonomic hierarchy, or rank, such as phylum, class, order, and family (Table 17.3). Some levels of rank are designated by certain suffixes—for example, “-ales” (order) and “-aceae” (family). The ultimate designation of a type of organism is that of species, which includes the capitalized name of the genus (group of closely related species) followed by the uncapitalized species name—for example, the well-known the Actinomycetales (informally called actinomycetes), filamentous Gram-positive bacteria that produce many kinds of antibiotics. Actinomycetes are subdivided into families and genera, such as the genus Streptomyces. Microbiologists continually reveal previously unknown taxa. In 2002 a group of uncultured marine bacteria, the phylogeny places these marine oligotrophs in the order Rickettsiales, most of whose known members are obligate intracellular parasites, such as Rickettsia, the cause of since been classified as part of the order Pelagibacterales, and a few species have been cultured, such as Pelagibacter ubique (see Table 17.3). 

Taxonomic categories generally have two forms: formal and informal. The formal term is capitalized, with a latinized suffix: Actinomycetales, Pseudomonas, Micrococcus. The informal term is lowercase, in some cases with an anglicized ending; and informal references to genera are not italicized: actinomycetes, pseudomonads, micrococci. 

Phenotypic categories for identification. Categories such as pigmentation or cell shape (rod or coccus) may have minor genetic significance but are useful for practical identification of organisms isolated from field or clinical sources. 

Ecological categories. In ecology, the niche filled by an organism may be more important than its phylogeny. For example, cyanobacteria and sequoia trees both fill the role of photosynthetic producers of biomass. Both are primary producers—a trophic category of organisms that feed other organisms in the food web. Ecological categories are discussed further in Chapter 21. 

rium) and influenza virus are both pulmonary pathogens, whereas Escherichia coli and Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron are both normal members of the gut microbiome. Disease categories are discussed further in Chapters 25 and 26. 

taxa is essential for research and communication. The accepted rules for naming species and taxa have been determined by the International Committee on Systematics of of bacteria and archaea. To establish a new species, a previously unknown form of microbe must be isolated and grown in pure culture; this cultured organism is known as an isolate. The isolate’s unique genetic and phenotypic traits are published, with a proposed species name designated “Candidatus” for candidate species. An example of a candidate species is “Candidatus Nitrosopumilus maritimus,” a marine archaeon that oxidizes ammonia, first isolated in 2005. The candidate species becomes accepted as an official species upon publication in the International Journal of Systematic and Evolutionary Microbiology, the official journal of record for novel prokaryotic taxa. Historically, the taxonomic categories and species descriptions are compiled in Bergey’s Manual of Determinative Bacteriology, a multivolume reference work of prokaryotic taxonomy. Up-to-date taxonomy of bacteria and archaea, as well as eukaryotes, is maintained in the “Taxonomy” browser of the interactive National Center for In recent years, the standard practice for accepting and naming species has been overwhelmed by the number of new isolates, as well as uncultured microbes, reported in the literature. Many uncultured microbes are known only uncultured organisms have large portions of their genomes sequenced and assembled using metagenomics (presented in Chapters 7 and 21). Metagenomics is the sequencing of multiple genomes in an environmental community. The community can be sampled from any kind of habitat, such as the human digestive tract or the Sargasso Sea. 

nonsheathed, Gram-negative bacterium that has sulfur granules, is motile, and is 1.0 µm wide? What would happen if you assigned the bacterium a width of 0.9 µm? 

sequences and multiple orthologous genes. The species definition should be consistent with the ecological niche or pathogenicity. number of genes) or closed (finite set of available genes). Taxonomy is the description and organization of lifeforms into classes (taxa). Taxonomy includes classification, nomenclature, and identification. Classification is traditionally based on a hierarchy of ranks. Groups of organisms long studied tend to have many ranks, whereas recent isolates have few. 

Below genus level, however, the definition of bacterial species can be problematic. Emerging taxa are types of organisms recently discovered or described. They may be uncultured, and their phylogeny may be uncertain. Practical identification is based on phenotypic and genetic traits. Methods of identification include the dichotomous key and the probabilistic test battery. Both methods assume a predefined set of organisms. 

In fact, however, all organisms evolve in the presence of other kinds of species, with whom they share interactions, symbiosis, the intimate association of two unrelated species. The ecology and behavioral adaptations of microbial symbiosis are discussed in Chapter 21; here we focus on the role of symbiosis in the evolution of cells. 

Filariasis. Patient suffering from a form of filariasis known as elephantiasis. 

section of the nematode Brugia malayi, showing Wolbachia bacteria (stained pink) within the worm’s dermis and uterine tubes. 

pathways to make purines, pyrimidines, and the coenzymes riboflavin and FAD—essential pathways lost by its host nematode. Overall, Wolbachia appears to be evolving into an organelle of its host, like the ancestors of mitochondria and chloroplasts. 

Mutations in these key genes lead to serious diseases; for example, damage to mitochondrial genes of respiration is associated with motor neuron disease, parkinsonism, and forms of ataxia. as other essential parts of mitochondria, have migrated from the mitochondrion to the nucleus. The nuclear acquisition probably occurred through accidental copying of mitochondrial genes into the nuclear genome. Reductive evolution then occurred, faster in the mitochondrial copy because of the faster mutation rate. Some of these nuclear-acquired mitochondrial genes show tissue-specific expression, resulting in different mitochondrial types associated with different tissues. Thus, some mitochondrial defects are actually inherited through the nuclear genome. The mitochondria have evolved as integral parts of the host cell. Chloroplast genome. In chloroplasts, the organellar genome encodes essential products for photosynthesis, including subunit of Rubisco, whereas the gene encoding the small subunit has migrated to the nucleus. 

Remarkably, the process of symbiogenesis, the generation of new symbiotic associations, continues in many protists. Protist-algae, also known as “secondary symbiont” algae, result from symbiogenesis in which an alga (containing a chloroplast) was engulfed by an ancestral protist. The protist cell contains the degenerate remains of the algal endosymbiont (Fig. 17.35). The algal mitochondrion was lost through reductive evolution, and the nucleus shrank to a nucleomorph, the vestigial remains chloroplast was maintained, “enslaved” by its new host. The result is a new protist-alga species, Guillardia theta, capable of both phototrophy and heterotrophy. Its chloroplast has a double membrane derived from the original cyanobacterial ancestor of the chloroplast and from the algal ancestor, surrounded by another double membrane derived from the cell membranes of the alga and a secondary host. Other secondary endosymbiont algae, such as kelps, diatoms, and dinoflagellates, are discussed in Chapter 20. In some species, tertiary symbiosis has been documented, in which a secondary-endosymbiont alga has been swallowed in turn by another protist. 

Symbiotic partners undergo coevolution, the evolution of two species in response to one another. Coevolution involves reductive (degenerative) evolution, in which each partner species loses some functions that the other partner provides. An endosymbiont lives inside a much larger host species. Many microbial cells harbor endosymbiotic bacteria whose metabolism yields energy for their hosts. Many invertebrates harbor endosymbiotic bacteria. The bacteria are required for host survival and, in some cases, for pathology caused by a parasitic invertebrate. Mitochondria evolved from endosymbionts. The ancestor of mitochondria was an alphaproteobacterium related to rickettsias. Chloroplasts evolved from endosymbionts. The chloroplast ancestor was a cyanobacterium. 

di Thoughts he Antarcticc microbial landscape provides a glimpse of what Eart h might have looked like 3.4 billion years ago, aass the first microbial communities evolved, theirr mats m building rock layers that persist today. om those early microbes, all subsequent life It is hard to say which is more astonSecondary the overall commonalities of all living protist cytoplasm cells, including membrane-enclosed support systems for genomes of shared ancestry, or the subsequent evolution of organisms with vastly different adaptations to exploit every possible niche of our planet. Our next three chapters these diverse adaptations: Chapter 18, endosymbiosis. The protist Guillardia theta contains the primary diversity; Chapter 19, archaeal diverbac algal chromosome surrounded by the remains of the primary algal 20, diversity among microbial cytoplasm and nucleus, which has shrunk to a nucleomorph. Source: eukaryotes, including fungi, algae, and protozoa. 

shows surprisingly diverse bacteria growing upon a tumor (cyan). By contrast, the lining of a noncancerous colon shows a thicker layer of protective mucus, colonized by thinner biofilms with a healthy distribution of commensal bacteria. 

acteria vary tremendously in their cell structure and metabolism. They include heterotrophs, phototrophs, and lithotrophs—and some species can be classified as all three. There are obligate aerobes, anaerobes, and microaerophiles. Their cell shapes include rods, cocci, spirals, and budding forms. Ecologically, bacteria include mutualists, pathogens, and organisms that cannot be cultured in our laboratories. Every day we discover new species, ranging from metal metabolizers buried beneath Antarctic mountains to filamentous mutualists clinging to our intestinal epithelium. 

Bacteria evolve a bewildering array of life-forms that colonize every habitat on Earth, from the ocean depths to our own skin and digestive tract. You might think that, by now, we would know at least all the major phyla of bacteria, just as we know the major kinds of vertebrate animals and vascular plants. Yet we are constantly discovering new clades of bacteria never seen before. At the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Cynthia Sears discovers new bacteria that colonize our colonic epithelium (see the Current Research Highlight). In Chapter 13 we learned that many colonic bacteria are normal residents that aid our digestion. But other bacteria, including members of the Lachnospiraceae, Bacteroidetes, and Fusobacteria, act as pathogens. Some take advantage of cancer pathology to invade the tissue of colon tumors. Elsewhere, microbe hunters discover bacteria in remote, pristine sites such as the frozen brine of Antarctic Lake Vida (Fig. 18.1). The deepest hypersaline layer of Lake From this deep anoxic layer, Alison Murray and colleagues from the Desert Research Institute recovered growing bacteria that are ultrasmall—some less than 200 nm in diameter. We now predict that all water and soil habitats, as well as parts of the human body, might also host ultrasmall microbes, perhaps showing yet other unique traits to be How do we begin to describe bacterial diversity, when even in familiar habitats the vast majority of species remain unknown? Chapter 18 surveys the bacteria that we do know something about. For instance, many kinds of Gramnegative Proteobacteria inhabit our digestive tract, or grow in ponds by photosynthesis, or colonize legumes as nitrogen-fixing mutualists. Well-known bacteria are generally those cultured in the laboratory, subject to experiments under controlled conditions. At the same time, comparing genome sequences clarifies the relatedness of major groups of bacteria. Chapter 18 emphasizes major taxa that are of physiological, ecological, and medical importance. We organize our discussion by phylogeny (evolutionary relatedness of taxa), as well as key traits of a taxon, such as the Grampositive cell wall of Firmicutes and the oxygenic photosynthesis of cyanobacteria. We show how diverse bacteria contribute to communities. Microbial communities and ecology are explored further in Chapter 21, and their roles in global biogeochemical cycles are discussed in Chapter 22. For each major taxonomic group, we describe a few key species to represent the spectrum of diversity. Additional genera and species are referenced in an expanded table found in Appendix 2 and eAppendix 4. 

whole-genome data reveal new kinds of bacteria faster than we can figure out how to culture or characterize them. We continually discover very different new kinds of bacteria, known as emerging clades (see Chapter 17). Some microbiologists estimate that there exist 1,500 phyla, many as yet undiscovered. Apart from their genome sequences, we know little about those newly discovered bacteria. Lineages whose genome sequences diverged sequences of uncultivated bacteria (not shown) branch from all parts of this tree. Phyla and other major divisions are also defined on the basis of historical convention and consensus of the research community. Generally, a well-studied bacterial phylum comprises species that share key traits as well as ancestry. While sharing key traits, the member species often show remarkable diversity in other ways. Some phyla, such as Cyanobacteria, share a unique form of metabolism (oxygenic photosynthesis), yet have evolved many diverse cell shapes and grow in diverse habitats. Other phyla, such as Spirochetes, share a unique cell structure while diverging in habitat and metabolism. Table 18.1 introduces seven major groups of bacteria that appear most frequently in the literature. An expanded version of this table, including many important species, appears in Appendix 2.2 and eAppendix 4.2. 

Deep-branching thermophiles. Thermophilic bacteria that diverged early from archaea and eukaryotes. Many genes transferred laterally from archaea. Chloroflexi. Filamentous phototrophs, often with chlorosomes. Chloroflexus aurantiacus. 

Cyanobacteria. Oxygenic photoautotrophs with thylakoid membranes. Share ancestry with chloroplasts. • Chroococcales. Square colonies based on two division planes. • Gloeobacterales. Lack thylakoids; conduct photosynthesis in cell • Nostocales. Filamentous chains with N2-fixing heterocysts. Some grow symbiotically with corals or plants. Nostoc sp. • Oscillatoriales. Filamentous chains with motile hormogonia (short chains). Oscillatoria sp. • Pleurocapsales. Globular colonies; reproduce through baeocytes. • Prochlorales. Tiny single cells, elliptical or spherical (0.5 μm). Prochlorococcus sp. Firmicutes and Actinobacteria (Gram-positive). Peptidoglycan multiple layers, cross-linked by teichoic acids. Firmicutes. Low-GC, Gram-positive rods and cocci. • Bacillales. Aerobic or facultative anaerobes. Bacillus subtilis. • Lactobacillales. Non–spore formers. Facultative anaerobes. Ferment, producing lactic acid. Lactobacillus lactis. • Tenericutes (Mollicutes). Lack cell wall; require animal host. Mycoplasma pneumoniae. Actinobacteria. High-GC, Gram-positive bacteria with moderate salt • Actinomycetales. Actinomycetaceae. Filamentous, producing aerial hyphae and spores. Actinomycetes such as Streptomyces coelicolor. Corynebacteriaceae. Irregularly shaped rods. Corynebacterium Micrococcaceae. Small airborne cocci. Micrococcus luteus. Mycobacteriaceae. Exceptionally complex cell walls. Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Propionibacteriaceae. Propionic acid fermentation. Propionibacterium shermanii. • Bifidobacteriaceae. Ferment without gas. Bifidobacterium sp. Proteobacteria. Gram-negative bacteria with diverse cell forms and Alphaproteobacteria (class) • Caulobacterales. Aquatic oligotrophs; alternate stalk and flagellum. Caulobacter crescentus. • Rhizobiales. Plant mutualists and pathogens. Sinorhizobium • Rhodobacterales, Rhodospirillales. Flagellated • Rickettsiales. Includes intracellular parasites; related to mitochondria. Rickettsia rickettsii causes Rocky Mountain spotted • Sphingomonadales. Heterotrophs and photoheterotrophs; some opportunistic pathogens. Sphingomonas sp. *Bulleted terms are representative orders within the phylum (unless stated otherwise). 

Betaproteobacteria (class) • Burkholderiales. Burkholderia pseudomallei causes melioidosis. • Neisseriales. Diplococci. Neisseria gonorrhoeae causes Gammaproteobacteria (class) • Acidithiobacillales. Lithotrophs. Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans oxidizes iron and sulfur. • Aeromonadales. Aquatic heterotrophs such as Aeromonas • Enterobacteriales. Facultative anaerobes; colonize the human • Legionellales. Legionella pneumophila causes legionellosis • Pseudomonadales. Rods; aerobic or respire on nitrate; catabolize aromatics. Pseudomonas aeruginosa infects lungs in cystic fibrosis patients. • Thiotrichales. Lithotrophs and heterotrophs. • Vibrionales. Marine heterotrophs. Vibrio cholerae causes cholera. Deltaproteobacteria (class) • Bdellovibrionales. Periplasmic predators. • Desulfobacterales. Reduce sulfate. • Myxococcales. Gliding bacteria that form fruiting bodies. Epsilonproteobacteria (class) • Campylobacterales. Spirillar pathogens. Campylobacter jejuni causes gastroenteritis. Helicobacter pylori causes gastritis. Deep-branching Gram-negative phyla. Acidobacteria. Acidophiles and thermophiles. “Candidatus Chloracidobacterium” species. Bacteroidetes. Obligate anaerobes. Heterotrophs that feed on diverse carbon sources. Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron. Chlorobi. Green sulfur-oxidizing phototrophs. Chlorobium tepidum. Fusobacteria. Gram-negative anaerobic bacteria found in septicemia and in skin ulcers. Fusobacterium nucleatum. Nitrospirae. Oxidize nitrite; aerobic or facultative. Nitrospira marina. Spirochetes (Spirochaeta). Narrow, coiled cells with axial filaments, encased by sheath. Polar flagella beneath sheath double back around cell. • Spirochaetales. Aquatic free-living; endosymbionts and pathogens (width <0.5 µm; length 10–20 µm). Hollandina. Termite gut endosymbionts. Leptospira. L-shaped animal pathogens; cause leptospirosis. Spirochaeta. Aquatic, free-living heterotrophs. Chlamydiae, Planctomycetes, and Verrucomicrobia. Irregular cells lacking peptidoglycan, with subcellular structures analogous to those of eukaryotes. Chlamydiae. Intracellular cell wall–less pathogens of animals or protists. Chlamydia trachomatis causes sexually transmitted disease and trachoma (eye infection). Planctomycetes. Nucleoid has double membrane analogous to eukaryotic nuclear membrane and other intracytoplasmic subcellular membrane compartments. Brocadia species reaction). Pirellula species inhabit marine sediment. Verrucomicrobia. Stalk-like appendages contain actin filaments. Aquatic oligotrophs. Prosthecobacter sp. 

and cell membrane are contained within an outer membrane called the sheath. Between the sheath and the cell membrane extend flagella doubled back from each pole. The rotation of these flagella is coordinated so as to twist and flex the helical body, generating motility and chemotaxis. Spirochetes include many free-living forms in aquatic systems, as well as digestive endosymbionts and pathogens. Three phyla of bacteria have unusual cell shapes: Chlamydiae, Planctomycetes, and Verrucomicrobia (see Section 18.7). Most members of these groups have lost their peptidoglycan cell walls, but they show complex structural adaptations and developmental forms. The Chlamydiae (best-known genus Chlamydia) are intracellular parasites that lose most of their cell envelope during intracellular growth. The replicating parasites generate multiple sporelike “elementary bodies” that escape to infect the next host. Planctomycetes, by contrast, are free-living aquatic bacteria, with stalked cells that reproduce by budding. Each planctomycete cell contains an extra double membrane surrounding its nucleoid, analogous to a eukaryotic nuclear membrane, though it evolved independently. Verrucomicrobia, also free-living, are bacteria with wart-like protruding structures containing actin. 

supposedly sterilized with a radiation dose of several megarads. Deinococcus bacteria are found suspended in air, both indoors and high in the atmosphere; they resist drought. 

Several deep-branching phyla stain Gram-negative but diverge distantly from the Proteobacteria. They show diverse metabolism and morphology (see Section 18.5). Most members of the phyla Bacteroidetes and Chlorobi are obligate anaerobes. Within Bacteroidetes, Bacteroides species ferment complex carbohydrates, serving as the major mutualists of the human gut. By contrast, the closely related Chlorobi species are anaerobic “green sulfur” phototrophs that photolyze sulfides or hydrogen. The Nitrospirae largely resemble proteobacteria in form. Most is a lithotrophic conversion essential for ecosystems (see Chapter 22). Other Gram-negative clades include Acidobacteria, an important phylum of soil bacteria; and the phylum Fusobacteria, which includes human pathogens. 

Clades of microbes that are recently defined or characterized are referred to as emerging. Emerging clades are discovered by field microbiologists who devise ever-more-creative screens, finding new bacteria with unexpected traits. For instance, ultrasmall bacteria from the Rifle, Colorado, aquifer. These bacteria passed through a 0.2-μm filter—barely big enough for ribosomes. Cryo-TEM shows tiny cells that contain about fifty ribosomes, with a cell wall enclosed by an S-layer and long pili (Fig. 18.4). The cells’ genomes are smaller than deeply branching phylogeny—that is, very distant relatedness are so distant from those of other taxa that they cannot be know little about these microbes—or others yet unknown, which future microbe hunters may discover. 

18.2 Which taxonomic groups in Table 18.1 stain Grampositive, and which stain Gram-negative? Which group contains both Gram-positive and Gram-negative species? For which groups is the Gram stain undefined, and why? 18.3 Which groups of bacterial species share common structure and physiology within the group? Which groups show extreme structural and physiological diversity? 

■ Ultrasmall bacteria. Bacteria capable of passing through a 0.2-μm filter were discovered in 2015 by Jill Banfield and her colleagues in an aquifer in Rifle, Colorado. The tiny cells possess approximately fifty ribosomes, a cell wall surrounded by an S-layer, and long pili (cryo-TEM). 

Informal forms are lowercase roman (cyanobacteria, streptococci), as are adjectival forms (cyanobacterial, streptococcal). 

Following our brief tour of the bacterial domain, we now explore some of the diverse species within well-studied phyla of Table 18.1. For reference, additional species of interest are compiled in Appendix 2 and eAppendix 4. 

Cyanobacteria conduct oxygenic photosynthesis and interact closely with heterotrophs. Species vary widely in their cell shape and ecological niche. Firmicutes and Actinobacteria have a thick cell wall and generally stain Gram-positive. Proteobacteria and deep-branching Gram-negative phyla have a thin cell wall and an LPS-containing outer membrane. They show diverse metabolism and ecological Spirochetes have flexible, spiral-shaped cells with complex intracellular architecture. Chlamydiae, Planctomycetes, and Verrucomicrobia have irregularly shaped cells with complex intracellular form and development. 

Thermotoga species share traits and habitats with thermophilic archaea. Their genomes are highly mosaic, including many archaeal genes. Deinococcus species are highly resistant to ionizing radiation. Chloroflexus species are thermophilic photoheterotrophs. Emerging organisms continually reveal previously unknown clades of bacteria. 

The main organizing principle used in Chapters 18–20 is described for each branch apply to the majority of its known species, though many exceptions have evolved, such as members of Spirochetes that lack spiral form. 

of phototrophy in clades throughout the bacterial domain, including those presented in this chapter. All light-harvesting complexes descend from one of two ancestral sources: the chlorophyll/bacteriochlorophyll with electron transport photosystems have diverged through vertical inheritance, as well as by horizontal transfer between different clades. 

Formation of specialized nitrogen-fixing cells called heterocysts. Heterocysts exclude oxygen, which associated heterotrophic bacteria consume. 

Another single-celled cyanobacterium is Microcystis, a colonial microbe found in freshwater that produces dangerous toxins (microcystins). Blooms of Microcystis form in the spring and summer when nitrogen and phosphorus runoff from agricultural fertilizer and animal waste enters resulted in microcystin levels great enough that the water supply of Toledo was contaminated. Since cyanobacterial species can have positive or negative impacts on their habitat, environmental scientists survey the cyanobacterial communities of lakes and ponds in order to assess their health. 

An akinete develops next to a heterocyst, as a large oval cell with a multilayered envelope. 

At the tip of an aerial mycelium, cells undergo vegetative division and pinch off as arthrospores. 

Intracellular chlamydia reticular bodies replicate and then develop into elementary bodies with cross-linked outer membrane proteins. Elementary bodies survive outside the host cell. 

Individual cell develops mother cell and forespore. The forespore develops into an endospore with a spore coat reinforced by keratin and calcium dipicolinate. 

Myxobacteria aggregate to form a fruiting body in which vegetative cell division forms a mass of myxospores. 

Cyanobacterial filaments and colonies, in effect, represent multicellular organisms. Different bacteria have evolved diverse means of generating multicellularity (Fig. 18.8). As we have seen, filamentous cyanobacteria such as Anabaena or Nostoc form 20 μm 10 μm 20 μm chains by serial cell division. ates into a heterocyst, which performs nitrogen fixation— a specific function for the filament as a whole. In other clades, we will see very different mechanisms. Firmicute the properties of akinetes with those of other spore types Bacillus cells (discussed in Section 18.3) assemble by attach(which are discussed along with Firmicutes and other taxa). ment to a substrate. The cells grow forming a biofilm that Akinetes lie dormant but viable until improved conditions releases endospores. Actinomycetes (see Section 18.3) form permit germination and growth of new vegetative filabranching filaments, aerial and into the soil, where they ments. In lake water, akinete germination may cause toxic produce antibiotics. The older cells undergo programmed blooms of Anabaena. cell death, while aerial filaments generate exospores. GramSome filamentous cyanobacteria, such as Lyngbya and negative myxobacteria (Section 18.4) assemble by cheTrichodesmium, form algal blooms in the ocean. Trichomotaxis and differentiate into a fruiting body to release desmium can form giant blooms visible from outer space, covering many square kilometers of ocean surface. Such a bloom can be triggered by an influx of iron carried by wind from a dust storm blowing off the Sahara desert (discussed in Chapter 22). Cyanobacterial Communities Yet other species, called colonial cyanobacteria, divide Cyanobacteria share many kinds of mutualistic associations to form small groups or larger colonies (Fig. 18.7). with animals, plants, fungi, and protists. Sponges growing Gloeocapsa and Chroococcus form doublets or quartets, on coral reefs may harbor communities of cyanobacteria that provide the sponges with nutrients from photosyntheOthers, such as Merismopedia, continue cell division sis. The products of photosynthesis supplement the nutriin two planes, extending to form long, square sheets ents obtained by the sponges from their filter feeding, and these extra nutrients greatly augment the sponge Myxosarcina and Pleurocapsa reproduce by multiple fisgrowth rate within the competitive coral reef environment. Sponge symbionts produce many pharmaceutically active aggregate matures, some cells continue to divide and release single cells called baeocytes. Each baeocyte reproIn salt marshes and sand f lats, cyanobacteria particduces and develops into a new cell aggregate. The aggreipate in multilayered microbial mats, such as the secgate group maintains anoxic conditions at the center for tion shown in cut from the sand f lats of nitrogen fixation. Great Sippewissett Salt Marsh, on Cape Cod, Massachusetts. The high concentration of sulfides in the sediment supports growth of high populations of sulfur phototrophs. Typically, cyanobacteria and eukaryThought Questions otic algae such as diatoms form the upper green layer. 18.4 What are the relative advantages and disadvanBelow, the purple layer consists of “purple sulfur” protages of propagation by hormogonia, as compared with teobacteria, whose photopigments (primarily BChl a) absorb at longer wavelengths (discussed in Section 18.5). 18.5 What are the relative advantages and disadvantages of The pale-colored layer below the purple layer consists of the different strategies for maintaining separation of nitrogen proteobacteria with BChl b, which absorbs farther into fixation and photosynthesis? the infrared. 

■ Bacterial multicellularity. Multicellularity cyanobacteria form chains by serial cell division. At intervals, a cell differentiates assemble by attachment to a substrate. They grow as a biofilm that produces antibiotics, then releases endospores. filaments that produce antibiotics, then undergo programmed cell death. Aerial filaments generate by chemotaxis of swarmer cells. They differentiate into a fruiting body and release myxospores. 

■ Cyanobacteria in microbial mats. Cutaway through a multilayered microbial mat from the sand flats of Great Sippewissett Salt Marsh (Cape Cod, Massachusetts). Cyanobacteria and diatoms form the upper green layer, above layers of purple sulfur proteobacteria. 

Single-celled cyanobacteria such as Prochlorococcus are among the smallest and most abundant phototrophic producers in the oceans. Microcystis species produce microcystins that poison lakes polluted by agricultural runoff. Filamentous cyanobacteria such as Nostoc and Oscillatoria are common in freshwater lakes. They form heterocysts to fix nitrogen, and reproduce by hormogonia or by akinetes. Colonial cyanobacteria such as Myxosarcina produce large cell aggregates with an anaerobic core for nitrogen fixation. The colonies reproduce through baeocytes. Symbiotic associations of cyanobacteria occur with animals, fungi, and plants. 

Which bacteria have the toughest, thickest cell walls? Most bacteria of the phylum Firmicutes, meaning “tough skin” bacteria, have thick peptidoglycan cell walls that retain the Gram stain (discussed in Chapter 3). The thick cell wall helps exclude antibiotics and antibacterial agents from competitors in the environment. Members of a related phylum, Actinobacteria, also stain Gram-positive. As shown in Table 18.1, we define Firmicutes as the phylum of Grampositive bacteria that contains “low-GC” species (having thick cell walls reinforced by teichoic acids, cross-threading phosphodiester chains of glycerol and ribitol (discussed in Chapter 3). 

Many firmicutes, such as Bacillus and Clostridium species, survive unfavorable environmental conditions by forming durable endospores. Non–spore formers such as Lactobacillus and Streptococcus may have evolved from a common Firmicutes ancestor that formed endospores. In many cases, the machinery to form endospores is discovered in the genomes of firmicutes previously thought to be non–spore formers, such as Carboxydothermus, soil bacteria hand, actinobacteria of the order Actinomycetales (actinomycetes), such as Streptomyces, do not form endospores, but they develop filaments that disperse arthrospores (see Table 18.3). 

terial genera to be classified, in the nineteenth century (Fig. 18.10). Colonies soon appear on a nutrient agar plate exposed to air. Bacillus species can be isolated from soil or for half an hour. Vegetative cells (that is, cells undergoing binary fission) and non–spore formers are killed at that temperature. The remaining endospores will germinate species isolated in this way include over a thousand characterized strains, all but a few of them harmless to humans. 

Crystalline inclusion cells (growing and replicating form) of Bacillus species are easily stained and best-studied Gram-positive organism, a “model system” for Firmicutes. The large number of transporters for carbon sources and many secretory complexes for industrially important enzymes and 1 μm 1 μm drug resistance proteins. It also reveals several integrated prophages (integrated tribute to bacterial evolution by transferring genes between different strains the digestive tracts of insect larvae; thus, it is safe for aniand species, as discussed in Chapter 17. mals with acidic digestive tracts. Many Bacillus species are extremophiles, growing at etative cells run short of nutrients on an agar plate, they combine alkaliphily with thermophily, as in the case of the begin a program to “sporulate”—that is, develop inert tal plan, in which the cell divides near the pole instead of For example, thermostability of proteins can be determined by comparing the protein sequences of a thermophile with develops as the forespore, directed by unique regulatory those of a related mesophile. The thermophilic sequence proteins such as SpoIIIE. The larger compartment, called shows specific patterns of amino acid residues that confer ful information for industrial engineering of enzymes. endospore. When the released endospore encounters favorable conditions of moisture and nutrients, it germinates Clostridiales. This anaerobic family of spore formers and restarts vegetative growth. The sporulation cycle can The botulism toxin (botulinum, or “Botox”) is famous for its therapeutic use to relax muscle spasms and smooth agent yet produced (Fig. 18.11). covered in 1901 by Japanese bacteriBefore ologist Shigetane Ishiwata as a cause of disease in silkworms. The organism proved easy to culture on agarbased medium, and its spores are now applied as an insecticide against the gypsy moth caterpillar. During 2 μm The crystal contains an insecticidal protein known as delta endotoxin. cells sporulate, the endospore swells, forming a characteristic “drumstick” appearance. The crystals are ultimately released This woman was unable to open her eyelids fully (left frame)—a condition that was cured by toxin is activated only at high pH in injection of Botox (right frame). 

pathogen. The pathogen can be so hard to eradicate that patients require fecal bacteriotherapy, or “fecal transplant” from a healthy person’s colon. The healthy colon residents recolonize the gut and outcompete the pathogen. Related to Clostridium are the Heliobacteriaceae, or “Sun bacteria,” the only known phototrophs in Firmicutes (see Table 18.2). Their name derives from their yellowish color, caused by the shift of their red-peak absorbance into the infrared, which allows transmission of red light plus green of energy to supplement heterotrophic metabolism of simple organic compounds. Most heliobacterial cells are elongated rods with peritrichous flagella, and they form endospores— the only known endospore-forming phototrophs. 

Distinguish Heliobacterium from Helicobacter, a helical species of the Gammaproteobacteria. 

1. Endospore germinates and cell grows. 

4. Forespores multiply within mother cell. 

Offspring grow through length of the mother cell. 

pole. The cells grow internally until released. No binary fission occurs outside the mother cell. 

ingested from feces germinate in the upper intestine but rarely undergo binary fission. Instead, the growing cell several endospores, which are released in the colon before An even larger enteric endosymbiont is Epulopiscium fishelsoni, found in the digestive tract of surgeonfish (Fig. 18.14). These bacteria are large enough to be seen reproduction is synchronized with the digestive cycle of its host, but it has gone even further in transformation of the sporulation cycle. Binary fission is eliminated; the cell must fission at both poles. Each polar fission generates an intracellular daughter cell that grows to nearly the full length of the mother cell. From two to seven intracellular offspring ultimately emerge in “live birth” from the mother cell, which then disintegrates. An even more bizarre “live birth” species related to clostridia was discovered in the mammalian intestine. These bacteria, provisionally named “Candidatus Savagella,” grow as filaments attached to the intestinal epithelial cells (Special Topic 18.1). 

Many Firmicute species do not form spores. These non– spore formers include species of Bacillales and Clostridiales, as well as other Gram-positive orders such as Lactobacillales. In these taxa, the endospore-forming system was probably lost by reductive evolution. Non-spore-forming firmicutes include human pathogens such as Listeria and Streptococcus species, as well as lactic acid bacteria that are important for food production. 

Listeria species are facultative anaerobic bacilli, named for the British surgeon Joseph Lister (1827–1912), who was the first to promote antisepsis during surgery. They contaminate cheese and sauerkraut (discussed in Chapter 16). Unlike other food-associated organisms, Listeria led to the emergence of Listeria as the cause of listeriosis, a and escape the vesicles. The bacteria then multiply as they travel through the host cytoplasm, generating “tails” of actin (Fig. 18.15 ). The actin tails eventually project the cells of Listeria out of the original host cell and enable it to penetrate a neighboring host cell. Lactic acid bacteria. The lactic acid bacteria (order Lacto- bacillales) are aerotolerant (capable of growth in the presence of oxygen), though they do not use oxygen to respire. Most lactic acid bacteria are obligate fermenters; that is, in Chapter 13). As the acid builds up, the pH decreases until it halts bacterial growth; thus, the carbon source retains much of its food value for human consumption. This is the basis of yogurt and cheese production. Lactococcus and Lactobacillus species are extremely important for the dairy industry (discussed in Chapter 16). Other common genera of lactic acid bacteria include Leuconostoc, which often spoils meat, and Pediococcus, found in sauerkraut and fermented bean products, as well as meat products such as sausage. 

Lactobacillus acidophilus, are believed to play a positive role in human health by inhibiting the growth of pathogens. 

Staphylococcus and Streptococcus. The staphylococci are facultative aerobic cocci that grow in clusters and their fermentation generates short-chain fatty aacids that inhibit growth of skin pathogens. species, however, are themselves serious o pathogens. Staphylococcus aureus causes 10 μm impetigo and toxic shock syndrome, as well as pneumonia, mastitis, osteomyB. elitis, and other diseases (discussed in Chapter 26). It is a major cause of nos1. Phag 7. Replication ocomial (hospital-acquired) infections, in cytoplasm especially contamination of surgical wounds. The most dangerous strains, 6. Penetration of neighboring cell Streptococcus species generally form chains instead of clusters, because 2. Phagosome cells divide in a single plane 5. Formation of in the presence of oxygen) but metabolize by fermentalong actin tail tion. Many live on oral or dental surfaces, where they 3. Replication cause caries (tooth decay). Their fermentation of sugars in cytoplasm produces such high concentrations of lactic acid that the pH at the tooth surface can fall to pH 4. Streptococcus species cause many serious diseases, including pneumonia 4. Encapsulation by host actin Macrophage or parenchymal cell The streptococci are less salt tolerant than Staphylococcus species, which tolerate as much as 5%–15% NaCl. Another genus whose size and fermentative metabolism resembles mark the tails of polymerized actin (green) behind the Listeria cell mon member of the intestinal flora, and related strains are bacteria encapsulate themselves in actin. Actin tails propel the bacteria through the host cytoplasm and out through the cell mementeric pathogens. Microbiology and Immunology On Line. 

Anaerobic dechlorinators. Some fi rmicutes from the soil show promising abilities to degrade chlorinated pollutants, such as dry-cleaning solvents that are biodegraded very slowly in the environment. The chlorinated molecules are reduced as alternative electron acceptors. Dehalobacter restrictus, a flagellated rod, was isolated as an anaerobe capable of respiring by donating electrons to chlorine atoms in tetrachloroethene (Fig. 18.17). Thus, the discovery of chlorinated pollutants. 

clostridia, the bacterium actually stains Gram-negative, perhaps because its peptidoglycan layer is relatively thin. Nevertheless, the species shows no Gram-negative outer membrane. It does possess a thick S-layer of hexagonally tiled proteins, typical of Gram-positive bacteria. 

The in vitro system enabled Schnupf to observe the bacteria’s unique proSymmetrical cess of differentiation and production of intracellular offspring (Fig. 2). Electron microscopy showed that each filament begins Engulfment of Intracellularwith a single “newborn” cell daughter cell whose holdfast attaches to the surface of the host epithelial cell. The cell then grows and divides, forming a multicellular filament (primary segment cells). When the filament length 5 m exceeds 50 μm, the distalsegment cells start to differentiate into mother and differentiate until offspring bacteria develop within each cell. Offspring are released, to attach ter cell becomes engulfed by within cells of the filament (Gram stain). a mother cell. The engulfed daughter cell then divides and differentiates into two intracellular offspring. Finally, the mother cell breaks open, releasing the two offspring. How do you think Savagella filaments communicate with the Each offspring cell possesses a holdfast to attach a new site host immune system? Can you design an experiment to test on the gut epithelium. your hypothesis? How do the attached bacterial filaments influence our gut epithelium? Schnupf has shown that the filament-attached Schnupf, Pamela, Valérie Gaboriau-Routhiau, Marine Gros, epithelial cells have elevated transcription of genes that Robin Friedman, Maryse Moya-Nilges, et al. 2015. Growth govern innate immune responses (discussed in Chapter 23). and host interaction of mouse segmented filamentous bacteThus, this bacterium’s unusual life cycle plays a key role in the ria in vitro. Nature 520:99–103. function of its mammalian host. 

Streptomyces cells produce the compound geosmin, which causes the characteristic odor of soil and can affect the green, or gray, depending on their distinctive products, many of which are antibiotics. Thought Question 18.6 Why would Streptomyces produce antibiotics targeting other bacteria? 

Streptomyces species are obligate aerobes, requiring access to air to complete their multicellular life cycle (see that grow into the substrate. Some of the filaments then grow upward into the air, where they develop into aerial mycelia. The aerial mycelia in some species grow in by the younger cells. The nutrients also attract other scavengers, which may be killed by antibiotics produced by the aging streptomycete cells. The dead scavengers, too, release nutrients that feed the growing tip of the As mycelia mature, they fragment into smaller cells called exospores (also called arthrospores). Exospores are vegetative cells, not dormant like Bacillus endospores (see Table 18.3). The exospores separate and are dispersed by the wind, enabling them to colonize a new location. Streptomycete mycelia can be obtained from natural habitats by burying a glass slide in soil and then waiting several days for spores to germinate, covering the slide with mycelia. They are challenging to isolate in pure culture, however, because their coiled filaments trap cells of other pairs—one of the largest prokaryotic genomes. Streptomycete chromosomes are linear with special “telomeres,” single-stranded end sequences that double back to form of a streptomycete encodes catabolism of a rich array of diverse organic components of decaying plant and animal matter, including even lignin. Other genes encode extensive operons for production of diverse secondary products (see Chapter 15), including antibiotics. More than half of the antibiotics currently used in medicine derive from Streptomyces species. 

with plants. Root of alder tree (Alnus glutinosa) bears the orange-yellow-colored nodules (arrowhead) containing Frankia. 

Note: Distinguish Mycobacterium, rods whose cell walls contain mycolic acids, from Mycoplasma, firmicutes lacking cell walls, related to Bacillus and Clostridium. 

Micrococci are aerobic heterotrophs, commonly isolated from air and dust, although their habitat of choice is human skin. Micrococci grow in square or cuboid formations, dividing in two or three planes (Fig. 18.24); cuboid clusters are to humans and grows well at room temperature, so it makes an excellent laboratory organism for observation by students. 

actinomycetes show unusual cell shapes. Members of the genus Corynebacterium include soil bacteria, as well as ease diphtheria. Corynebacterium species grow as irregularly shaped rods, which may divide by a “half-snapping” ■ Firmicutes, the low-GC Gram-positive bacteria, include mechanism in which one side of the cell remains attached tridium. The cycle of endospore formation was probably the genera Nocardia and Rhodococcus. present in the common ancestor of this phylum. Soil bacteria of the genus Arthrobacter exhibit an unusual cell cycle in which coccoid stationary-phase cells sprout into rods, which eventuB. ally run out of nutrients and revert to the coccoid form. The growing anaerobic respiration by reduction of hexavalent chromium (Cr6+), a toxic 10 μm 1 μm metal pollutant, to a less toxic oxidation state. Arthrobacter now shows tion of hexavalent chromium. 

Nonsporulating firmicutes include pathogenic rods such as Listeria, as well as food-producing bacteria such as Lactobacillus and Lactococcus. 

Staphylococcus and Streptococcus are Gram-positive cocci that include normal human flora, as well as serious pathogens causing toxic shock syndrome, pneumonia, and scarlet fever. Mycoplasmas belong phylogenetically to Firmicutes but lack the cell wall and S-layer. They have flexible cytoskeletons and show ameboid motility. Mycoplasma species cause diseases such as meningitis and pneumonia. Actinobacteria (order Actinomycetales) include mycelial spore-forming soil bacteria, such as the actinomycete Streptomyces. Other actinobacteria have irregularly shaped cells, such as Corynebacterium species that cause diphtheria. Mycobacteria are actinobacterial rods whose cell envelope contains a diverse assemblage of complex mycolic acids. Mycobacterial species cause tuberculosis and leprosy. They stain acid-fast. 

In many Gram-negative species, metabolic diversity arises through minor “add-ons” of biochemical modules such as light absorption by bacteriochlorophyll, use of sulfide or organic electron donors, and use of oxygen or alternative (anaerobic) electron acceptors. 

Chapter 14). However, it turns out that many purple bacteria conduct photosynthesis only in the absence of oxygen, reverting to aerobic heterotrophy when oxygen is present. Some, however, are obligate anaerobes. Still others, found in marine environments, surprisingly photolyze sulfide or organic compounds only in the presence of oxygen. Making sense of this extraordinary diversity is the job of marine and aquatic microbiologists, particularly those calculating global cycles of carbon and oxygen (discussed in Chapters 21 and 22). 

evolved multiple times in different clades by modification of the electron transport chain. Many lithotrophic reactions generate acid, which conveniently breaks down rock containing additional reduced minerals. Bacterial and archaeal lithotrophy has tremendous significance for global cycling of elements in the biosphere (discussed in Chapter 22). Some lithotrophs are autotrophs, fi xing carbon dioxide into biomolecules by the Calvin cycle (in carboxysomes) or heterotrophy when organic foods are available. An interesting kind of lithotrophy performed by many Proteobacteria We now survey species of the major Greek-lettered classes of Proteobacteria. 

The class Alphaproteobacteria includes photoheterotrophs and heterotrophs, as well as bacteria metabolizing singlecarbon compounds—along with intracellular mutualists and pathogens. 

Photoheterotrophs. Most alphaproteobacterial photoheterotrophs are unicellular. Their cell shapes range from flagellated spirilla to rounded rods (Rhodobacter sphaeroides) packed with photomembranes (membranes containing the photosynthetic complex) arranged in folds or tubes invaginated from the cytoplasmic membrane. These intracellular photomembranes expand the surface area for photon capture, but during growth with oxygen, the photomembranes extending from the outer membrane. dark red because they synthesize membrane containing BChl a, which absorbs green and infrared and reflects primarily red. a, and the cells grow white as their metabolism switches to straight heterotrophy. Heterotrophy is supplemented by oxidizing small molecules such as carbon monoxide. Alphaproteobacterial photoheterotrophs that require oxygen (but do not photolyze water) were found unexpectedly in genomic surveys of marine bacteria. Originally thought to be straight heterotrophs, these organisms revealed genes encoding bacteriochlorophyll. Their aerobic heterotrophy was shown to be driven by light absorption. The reason for the oxygen requirement is unclear, since their photosystems do not involve oxygen. Examples of O2-requiring phototrophs have since been found in most of the proteobacterial clades, and species have been isolated from all major habitats, including freshwater, marine, and soil ecosystems. Some show unusual cell morphology, such The aerobic photoheterotroph Erythromicrobium ramosum can reduce toxic metal compounds such as tellurite ion (TeO32–). The cells generate tellurium crystals that take up 30% of their cell weight—a trait that we might use to remove tellurite from liquid waste. Other toxic metals reduced by aerobic photoheterotrophs include selenium and arsenic. Thus, these obscure bacteria now have a promising future in remediation of metal-contaminated industrial wastes. 

cells produce leghemoglobin to maintain anaerobic conditions for hair as an infection thread that penetrates the legume cells, enabling the bacteria to colonize in the form of bacteroids. 

■ Plant gall induced by Agrobacterium tumefaciens. Crown gall on chrysanthemum plant. 

Table 18.4). Several are important pathogens that infect humans and other animals. 

cytoplasm. Some rickettsias propel themselves through the host cell by polymerizing cytoplasmic actin behind them— a process similar to that of Listeria (described earlier, along with Firmicutes). The actin tails eventually project outward as filopodia, extensions of host cytoplasm and membrane that protect the bacteria from host defenses while enabling them to invade adjacent cells. Genetic analysis shows that the rickettsia clade includes mitochondria. All eukaryotic mitochondria appear to be descendants of an ancient rickettsial parasite whose respiratory apparatus ultimately became essential to power eukaryotic cells. 

Filter retains the encapsulated bacteria while the treated liquid flows through. 

Nitrosovibrio, some with peritrichous or polar flagella. One ammonia-oxidizing genus of the Gamma group has been found: Nitrosococcus. Major nitrite oxidizers include the nonproteobacterial phylum Nitrospirae. Although genetically outside the Proteobacteria, the unusual spiral-shaped cells of Nitrospirae have a Gram-negative cell envelope. Pathogens. The Betaproteobacteria include aerobic hetero- trophic cocci such as Neisseria. The cocci of Neisseria species form distinctive pairs known as diplococci. Most Neisseria species are harmless commensals of the nasal or oral mucosa, requiring a narrow range of oxygen concentration; it has fastidious growth requirements, necessitating cultivation on quarter of the human population, but occasionally it causes meningitis, which can be fatal. Other neisserias, such as undergraduates as an unknown for identification. Other members of the Beta class are important animal originally isolated from onions as a cause of bulb rot; it is now known to be a major opportunistic invader of the lungs of cystic fibrosis patients. 

Thioploca species oxidize sulfur in marine sediment, using oxygen or nitrate; this sample is from the northeastern Arabian Sea off Pakistan. 

Bacteria of the genus Acidithiobacillus oxidize iron or form the brown stains found inside plumbing. Most species are short rods or vibrios (comma-shaped). Acidithiobacillus and other sulfur-oxidizing genera can undergo a number (see Table 18.4). Sulfate production makes an environment acidic enough to erode stone monuments and the interior surface of concrete sewer pipes. Sulfur oxidation is often coupled to oxidation of iron, Fe2+ → Fe3+. The bacterium water, which contributes to leaching of iron, copper, and Sulfur and iron phototrophs. The Gamma group photo- utilize sulfide and produce sulfur, which is deposited as intracellular granules visible within the cytoplasm. Their phototrophy is entirely anaerobic. Some of the Gamma group are true autotrophs and do not use organic substrates. Some of these actually conduct phototrophy using nitrogen-based phototroph discovered. Enterobacteriaceae: intestinal fermenters and respirers. 

all bacterial species—is the model organism Escherichia coli. feeding on our mucous secretions and producing vitamins, pathogens include Salmonella enterica and Shigella flexneri. The Enterobacteriaceae are Gram-negative rods, although as nutrients diminish, their size dwindles almost to a coccoid form. They grow singly, in chains, or in biofilms. Many species are motile, with numerous flagella. Most strains grow well with or without oxygen, by either respiration (aerobic or anaerobic) or fermentation. They ferment rapidly on carbohydrates, generating fermentation intestine supports the growth of organisms utilizing these gases, including methanogens (discussed in Chapter 19). Many strains form biofilms. Biofilm formation explains the persistence of drug-resistant infections, such as those associated with urinary catheters in long-term hospital patients. 

forms single-flagellated rods full of sulfur over time (1–5) as a Chromatium isolate oxidizes Fe2+ to Fe3+. 

enteric rod Proteus mirabilis: isolated swimmer or cooperative swarmer. 

dinary range of natural compounds, including aromatic length can reach 20 μm. ural recycling and soil turnover. mirabilis migrate through The Pseudomonadaceae are a large and amorphous group. blood agar. As the “pseudo-” prefix suggests, their taxonomic unit is 2 μm has necessitated their reassignment to other groups. The Gamma class pseudomonads, such as Pseudomonas aerugiB. Cell division and are vigorous swimmers with single or multiple a standard agar plate (much to the chagrin of stuSwimmer cell dents attempting to isolate colonies). Nevertheless, under appropriate environmental conditions, pseudomonad cells give up their motility and develop bioDifferentiation films (Fig. 18.36) (discussed in Chapter 4). Biofilms of ing of cystic fibrosis patients. Some pseudomonad pathogens have the unusual ability Lag period (Fig. 18.35). In response to an environmental signal, the while it also appears as an opportunistic pathogen of immuflagellated rods grow into long-chain swarmer cells. The nocompromised cancer patients. Other pseudomonad speswarmers gather together, forming “rafts” that swim cies, however, are harmless residents of soil or sewage. together and grow into a complex biofilm. Legionella pneumophila is a well-publicized pathogen Besides symbionts of animals, Enterobacteriaceae include related to the pseudomonads. Incapable of growth on sugars, plant pathogens, such as Erwinia carotovora and related speL. pneumophila requires oxygen to respire on amino acids. cies. Erwinia species cause wilts, galls, and necrosis of a wide The organism exhibits an unusual dual lifestyle, alternating variety of plants, including bananas, tomatoes, and orchids. between intracellular growth within human macrophages and Related facultative rods in soil and water conduct anaerintracellular growth within freshwater amebas (Fig. 18.37). obic respiration by donating electrons from organic subGrowth within amebas facilitates transmission through strates to a variety of metals, such as iron and magnesium. Shewanella oneidensis and other metal fuel cells (discussed in Chapter 14). 

Plant pathogens. Gammaproteobacteria include impor- tant plant pathogens, such as Xanthomonas species. Xanthomonas is a flagellate rod that colonizes a wide range of agricultural plants, such as tomatoes, potatoes, onions, broccoli, and citrus fruits (Fig. 18.38). The disease may mottle the leaves and fruit, and it may spread throughout the plant. 

Bacterial spot disease of orange fruit, caused by Xanthomonas species. 

prevalence of large-scale air-conditioning units that contain unfiltered water). 

The aggregation generates a fruiting body with bulges packed with small, spherical myxospores. 

also form in slime molds, a class of eukaryotic microbe (discussed in Chapter 20). The myxobacteria, however, have evolved their process independently. Within the myxobacterial fruiting body, durable spherical cells called myxospores develop (Fig. 18.40). Ultimately, the fruiting body releases the myxospores to be carried on the wind or by insects to a more favorable location. 

the inner membrane to degrade host macromolecules and make their components available to the bdellovibrio. The entire host cell loses its shape and becomes a protective incubator for the predator. This stage is called the bdelloplast. Within the periplasm, the invading bdellovibrio elongates as a spiral filament while replicating several copies of filament septates into multiple short cells. The cells develop flagella, and the bdelloplast bursts, releasing the newly Bdellovibrios can be isolated from sewage, soil, or marine water—any environmental source of Gram-negative plate containing host bacteria—the same procedure used to isolate bacteriophages (discussed in Chapter 6). 

18.10 Compare and contrast the formation of cyanobacterial akinetes, firmicute endospores, actinomycete arthrospores, and myxococcal myxospores. 

Gram-positive genus that includes the causative agents of tuberculosis and leprosy. 

Helicobacter. Helicobacter pylori is well known today as the causative agent of gastritis and stomach ulcers (Fig. 18.42). Yet, until recently, most microbiologists believed that bacteria could not live in the acidic stomach. The discovery of 1. Bdellovibrio finds host by chemotaxis. 

Bdellovibrio cells. 

5. Chain fragments into flagellated flage ted cells. 

the 2005 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine. Marshall famously swallowed a Helicobacter culture to prove these bacteria cause gastritis. gastric contents (pH 2–4). The bacteria bury themselves in the epithelial layer and neutralize their acidic surroundings by making urease enzyme, which converts urea to ammonia and carbon dioxide. Helicobacter species form wide spiral cells (spirilla) with an unusual grouping of flagella at requiring a low level of oxygen. The bacteria can be isolated through biopsy of the gastric mucosa. Several groups of related Epsilonproteobacteria are sulfur oxidizers and sulfur reducers, found in marine and aquatic habitats. Thiovulum species oxidize sulfides aerobically, using oxygen available in marine water. In deep-ocean sediment, near hydrothermal vents, hydrogenotrophs Nautilia These bacteria enrich the marine habitat by cycling carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur. Surprisingly, genes from Epsilonproteobacteria are found in the sequenced genomes of deepbranching taxa, the Aquifex species (see Section 18.1). Like other hyperthermophiles, the Epsilons “get around,” with their genes migrating into distantly related organisms. 

Proteobacteria stain Gram-negative, with a thin cell show wide diversity of form and metabolism, including phototrophy, lithotrophy, and heterotrophy on diverse organic substrates. 

Alphaproteobacteria include photoheterotrophs (such as Rhodospirillum) and heterotrophs, as well as methylotrophs. They include intracellular mutualists such as rhizobia, and pathogens such as the rickettsias. Rickettsias share ancestry with mitochondria. Betaproteobacteria include photoheterotrophs (Rhodocyclus), as well as nitrifiers (Nitrosomonas) and ironsulfur oxidizers (Thiobacillus). Pathogenic diplococci include Neisseria gonorrhoeae, the cause of gonorrhea. Gammaproteobacteria include sulfur and iron bacteria (Acidithiobacillus, Chromatium). The most famous species are the Enterobacteriaceae found in the human colon. Intracellular pathogens include Salmonella and Legionella. The pseudomonads, aerobic rods, can respire on a wide range of complex organic substrates. Deltaproteobacteria include sulfur and iron reducers (Geobacter), fruiting-body bacteria (Myxococcus), and bacterial predators (Bdellovibrio). Epsilonproteobacteria are spirillar pathogens such as Helicobacter pylori, the cause of gastritis. 

Do other phyla besides Proteobacteria possess an outer membrane and stain Gram-negative? Some Gram-negative bacteria branch more deeply from the Proteobacteria than the five Greek-lettered classes do from each other, and they are thus classified as separate phyla. Most members of these phyla (though not all) are obligate anaerobes. They have diverse lifestyles and habitats, from aquatic phototrophs to human pathogens. Major phyla include Acidobacteria, Bacteroidetes, Chlorobi, Fusobacteria, and Nitrospirae. 

Section 18.1). These distantly related organisms may have shared photosynthesis genes via horizontal gene transfer. 

the human colon (Fig. 18.44). Their envelope polysaccharides help the bacteria evade the immune system. Bacteroides species grow anaerobically under extremely low oxygen concentrations such as those found in the human intestine (1 ppm), yet they can actually use the oxygen they find; thus they have been called “nanoaerobes.” Their main source of energy is fermentation of a wide range of sugar derivatives from plant material, compounds that are indigestible by humans and potentially toxic (discussed in Chapter 13). Bacteroides bacteria convert these substances into simple sugars and fermentation acids, some in Chapter 21). Thus, Bacteroides species serve important functions for their host: They break down potential toxins in plant foods, and their fermentation products make up as much as 15% of the caloric value we obtain from food. Yet another benefit of Bacteroides is their ability to remove side chains from bile acids, enabling the return of bile acids to the hepatic circulation. In effect, our gut bacteria, including Bacteroides, constitute a functional organ of the human body. Bacteroides species cause trouble, however, when they reach parts of the body not designed to host them. During abdominal surgery, bacteria can escape the colon and invade the surrounding tissues. The displaced bacteria can form an abscess, a localized mass of bacteria and pus contained in a cavity of dead tissue. The interior of the abscess is anaerobic and often impenetrable to antibiotics. 

Their cell structure resembles that of the Proteobacteria, although their phylogenetic branch is deep enough for assignment to a separate phylum. Most species, such as Nitrospira species (see Tables 18.1 and 18.4), are true lithotrophs or autotrophs, fixing carbon in the form of carbon dioxide or carbonate using carboxysomes. Nitrospira species are generally found in freshwater or salt water. Their removal of excess nitrite makes a key contribution to aquatic ecosystems. Another important genus is Leptospirillum, which includes acidophilic iron oxidizers. Leptospirillum species are also strict autotrophs, fixing carbon by using Fe2+ Their metabolism generates acid, contributing to acid mine drainage in iron mines at Iron Mountain, California, where they grow in massive pink biofilms. 

Chlorobium species require extensive membrane systems full of photopigments for light absorption. The chlorophyll reaction centers of Chlorobium are contained within chlorosomes associated with the cytoplasmic membrane (460 nm) and near-infrared (750 nm), thus reflecting the middle range, brownish green. 

Bacteroidetes are anaerobes that ferment complex plant materials in the human colon. They may enter body tissues through wounds and cause abscesses. Chlorobi are green sulfur phototrophs, obligate anaerobes incapable of heterotrophy. Fusobacteria are pathogens that cause septicemia and skin ulcers. Nitrospirae are Gram-negative spiral bacteria that oxidize nitrite to nitrate (Nitrospira). 

too narrow (0.2 μm) to visualize by bright-field microscopy; instead, dark-field, fluorescence, or electron microscopy The spirochete genus Borrelia includes two pathogens Borrelia species is their multipartite genome. Each species possesses a linear main chromosome of less than a million burgdorferi, for example, has a linear chromosome of 910,725 base pairs, with at least 17 linear and circular plasmids that total an additional 533,000 base pairs. The reason for this unusual fragmentation of Borrelia genomes is unknown. Spirochetes include important pathogens of animals, such as Leptospira, the cause of leptospirosis, a form of nephritis (kidney inflammation) with complications in the liver and other organs. Leptospira cells are known for the turns out at an angle. Members of the genus Treponema also cause digital dermatitis in cattle and sheep. As in other bacterial phyla, however, the pathogenic species are far outnumbered by harmless organisms. 

its width cannot be resolved by bright-field microscopy, and the organisms can pass through a filter of pore size 2 µm. 

The spirochete cell is a tight coil, enclosed by a sheath and periplasmic space containing periplasmic flagella. 

flagella (axial fibrils) rotate on proton-driven motors, as do regular flagella; but because they twine back around the cell body, their rotation forces the entire cell to twist around, corkscrewing through the medium. This corkscrew motion of the cell body turns out to have a physical advantage in highly viscous environments, such as human mucous secretions or agar culture medium. Few nonspirochetes can swim through agar at standard culture concentrations (1.5% agar); thus, growth within agar provides a way to isolate anaerobic spirochetes from environmental sources. When an environmental sample is inoculated into agar, other bacteria grow and concentrate at the injection point, whereas spirochetes migrate outward in a “veil” through the agar. 

Spirochete motility is driven by a flexing motion caused by rotation of the periplasmic flagella, propagated the length of the coil. Spirochetes grow in diverse habitats. Some are freeliving fermenters in water or soil. Others are pathogens, such as Treponema pallidum, the cause of syphilis. Still others are endosymbionts of an animal digestive tract, such as the termite gut. 

3. Elementary body differentiates into reticulate body. 

5. Reticulate bodies develop into elementary bodies. 4. Reticulate body replicates and persists in cell for long periods. 

Several related phyla of bacteria have either no cell walls or diminished cell walls. These organisms evolved independently of the mycoplasmas, and their alternative cell forms show diverse environmental adaptations. 

Chlamydophila evolved complex developmental life cycles of parasitizing host cells. Chlamydia trachomatis causes the most prevalent sexually transmitted infection among young people in the United States. The same pathogen also causes trachoma, an eye disease dating back to records in ancient Egypt. The related species Chlamydophila pneumoniae causes pneumonia and has been implicated in cardiovascular disease. 

body.” Upon endocytosis, the elementary body avoids lysosomal uncondensed, has a reticular (netlike) appearance. The reticulate body replicates within the host cytoplasm and then develops into new elementary bodies that are released when the cell lyses. 

metabolism and divides rapidly, but outside the cell it is incapable of infection and vulnerable to osmotic shock. To complete the infection cycle, therefore, reticulate bodies must develop into new elementary bodies before exiting the host. When the host cell lyses, the elementary bodies are released to infect new cells. Chlamydiae infect a wide range of host cell types, from respiratory epithelium to macrophages. 

Another cell wall–less group, the Planctomycetes, evolved largely as free-living organisms. Planctomycetes are oligotrophs, heterotrophs requiring nutrients at extremely low concentrations. They grow in aquatic, marine, and saline environments. Their mechanism of osmoregulation remains poorly understood. internal membrane compartments of unknown function the eukaryotic nucleus—a remarkable example of independent analogous evolution between bacteria and the eukaryotes. The actual function of the nucleoid-surrounding membrane varies with different species; for example, in anammox planctomycetes, a single membrane enclosing the nucleoid contains the complexes conducting the anammox reaction (anaerobic ammonium oxidation; discussed in Chapter 14). Like eukaryotic protists (discussed in Chapter 20), the planctomycetes have f lexible cell bodies that can eukaryotic yeasts. 

Altiarchaeum hamiconexum, was discovered in marsh water hooks that connect neighboring cells in a biofilm matrix. The matrix of grappling hooks also coats filaments of sulfideoxidizing bacteria that may cooperate with Altiarchaeum. 

rchaea are found in all soil and water habitats, in symbiosis with animals and plants, and in extreme environments that exclude bacteria and eukaryotes. Archaea include hyperthermophiles inhabiting Earth’s hottest habitats, as well as Arctic and Antarctic psychrophiles. Methanogens inhabit the digestive tracts of humans and other animals, as well as anaerobic soil and water, with consequences for global climate. Many archaea collaborate with bacteria in multispecies biofilms. No archaeon is yet known to cause disease, but archaea do interact with our innate immune system. 

What is most surprising about the new kind of archaeon you discovered? The ultrastructural analyses of Altiarchaeum were breathtaking, especially the discovery of the “hami.” The hami are filamentous cell-surface appendages that carry a tiny grappling hook at their end. Such features have never been found for any cellular appendage of eukaryotic or prokaryotic cells. 

Archaea are everywhere, and that we just need to use the award from the European Space Agency for a comprehensive microbiome analysis of the International Space Station in order to find interesting Archaea and Bacteria there and to identify the potential adaptations to this very interesting habitat. Such analysis will help us understand the mechanisms of an encapsulated ecosystem, the impact of microbes on long-term spaceflight, and the adaptation capacity of a microbial community. 

In 1977, Carl Woese revealed the existence of a third kind of life—the Archaea, a domain of life-forms very different from the plants, animals, and bacteria that had long been known. Today, the Archaea continue to yield surprises. An 2004 by Rudolph Huber and his students at the University of Regensburg, Germany. The marsh-dwelling microbe is an archaeon related to methanogens, and it appears to fix showed how this organism forms netlike biofilms by use of grappling-hook appendages, called hami (singular, hamus) (Fig. 19.1). Each grappling hook contains paired barbs along an extended protein filament many times the length of the cell. The filament ends with a triple fishhook that enables filaments to clasp each other. No other kind of cell is known to make this type of appendage. below pH 1. Extremophiles are of interest to biotechnology because their enzymes may catalyze reactions under industrially useful conditions, such as high salt or acidity. But we also find archaea throughout mesophilic soil and water, and within the digestive tracts of humans and other animals. Moissl-Eichinger even discovered archaea on human skin, comprising more than 4% of the skin’s prokaryotic microbiome. She argues that archaea exist everywhere, in every livable habitat; we just need the right methods to find them. How do archaea in “moderate” habitats interact with bacteria and eukaryotes? Many archaea join bacteria within biofilms in soil and on marine particles. For example, Altiarchaeum envelops sulfide-oxidizing bacteria in its grappling appendages to form thick biofilms like pearls on a string. Other archaea cooperate with eukaryotes, for example, by colonizing the surface of plant roots. Even in these shared habitats, archaea show unique traits, such as energy-yielding methanogenesis and cyclic diether membranes. Perhaps the most compelling unique feature of archaea, from the human point of view, is that no archaea are known to cause disease. Recent reports find gut methanogens associated with the inflammatory response, but no causal relationship has yet been demonstrated. In Chapter 19 we explore the diversity of archaea. We emphasize the unique structures and metabolic pathways of archaeal cells. While surveying their major taxonomic categories, we introduce research techniques used to study organisms in extreme environments and those with unique forms of metabolism, such as methanogenesis. 

Ether links are much more stable than ester links; in other words, breaking them requires more energy. 

Isoprenoid chains. The side chains of archaeal lipids are branched at every fourth carbon. The methyl branches are called isoprenoid or diphytanyl chains; thus, the overall lipid is diphytanylglycerol diether. Isoprenoid branched chains increase membrane stability by hooking each other in place. 

The ends of the lipid side chains are joined to each other. 

The end of a lipid chain is linked to the end of a chain on the opposite side of the membrane. 

Cross-link is formed by an additional covalent bond between the lipid chains. 

S-layer proteins plugged into a tetraether have a cell wall of pseudopeptidoglycan between their membrane and S-layer. 

is still produced by further breakdown of pyruvate.) On the other hand, halophilic archaea such as Halobacterium phosphorylate the dehydrated product of gluconate (2-oxo-3-deoxygluconate), which enters the “standard” of pyruvate and one molecule of 3-phosphoglycerate, energy-yielding reaction. The energy-yielding process of methanogenesis occurs only in archaea. Methane production by methanogenic archaea (methanogens) makes a growing contribution to global warming, as discussed in Chapter 22. Methanogenesis includes a unique pathway of carbon fixation, called the carbon monoxide reductase pathway because the key into acetyl-CoA by condensation with a methyl group generated by methanogenesis. Acetyl-CoA then enters the Section 19.4). The only known form of phototrophy in archaea is that of retinal-based ion pumps. Membrane protein complexes known as bacteriorhodopsin and halorhodopsin contain Bacteriorhodopsins are found in haloarchaea (formerly called halobacteria) such as Halobacterium halobium; the species was named before it was known to be an archaeon (discussed in Section 19.5). It turns out that haloarchaea have transferred genes encoding light-absorbing proton pumps into many marine bacteria. By contrast, the chlorophyll-based phototrophy found in bacteria and plants is completely unknown in archaea. 

curved around a histone tetramer from the methanogen show homology to eukaryotic histones. Histones have since been found in many species of archaea. 

What are the major kinds of Archaea? The domain includes three phyla, also called divisions, that have been extensively characterized (Fig. 19.6). These phyla are Crenarchaeota, Thaumarchaeota, and Euryarchaeota. In addition, a growing number of phyla emerge through exploring the sequences of environmental samples, such as the Ancient benthic subsurface communities. Major taxa are outlined in Table 19.2. An expanded version of this table appears in Appendix 2. 

Archaeal phylogeny. Major clades, divisions, and metagenomic groups of Archaea. Divergence is based approximately genes from bacteria. Starred taxa contain >20% bacterial genes. 

Crenarchaeota. Tetraether membranes surrounded by S-layer. Wide range of growth temperatures. hydrothermal vents, coastal regions. Thermoprotei. Many thermophiles in hot springs and marine vents. Also includes marine mesophiles and psychrophiles. 4● Caldisphaerales. Thermoacidophilic heterotrophs grow in hot springs. Caldisphaera spp. 4● Desulfurococcales. Anaerobic sulfur reduction with organic electron donors. Irregularly shaped cells with glycoprotein S-layer; no cell wall (Aeropyrum pernix, Desulfurococcus fermentans). Ignicoccus islandicus. Pyrodictium abyssi, Pyrodictium occultum, 4● Psychrophilic marine crenarchaeotes (uncharacterized). Marine water, deep sea, and Antarctica. 4● Thermoproteales. Pyrobaculum, Thermoproteus, Vulcanisaeta. members of Marine Group 1.1a. 4● Psychrophilic marine thaumarchaeotes (uncharacterized). Marine water, deep sea, and Antarctica. Anaerobic heterotrophs, sulfate reducers, nitrite-reducing methanotrophs. Euryarchaeota. Metabolism includes methanogenesis, halophilic photoheterotrophy, and sulfur and hydrogen oxidation; acidophiles and alkaliphiles. Methanogens and halophiles have rigid cell walls. Altiarchaeota. Includes Altiarchaeum. Form grappling-hook biofilms in cold sulfidic water. methanogenesis. Archaeoglobus fulgidus. pump and Cl– pump. Haloarcula, Halobacterium, Haloferax grow in salterns and salt lakes. Haloquadra (Haloquadratum) are squareshaped. Halorubrum lacusprofundi is an Antarctic psychrophile. Natronococcus spp. are alkaliphiles in soda lakes. Pseudopeptidoglycan or sulfated chondroitin cell walls. Grow in anaerobic soil, water, or animal digestive tracts. Deep-sea psychrophiles generate methane hydrates. smithii and Methanosphaera stadtmanae inhabit human digestive tract. electron bifurcation. Methanocaldococcus jannaschii, vent thermophile. Nanoarchaeota. Vent hyperthermophiles; obligate symbionts attached to Ignicoccus. Nanoarchaeum equitans. Thermoplasmata. Extreme acidophiles; oxidize sulfur from pyrite (FeS2), generating sulfuric acid. Mesophiles or moderate Deeply branching groups of uncultured Archaea. Korarchaeota. Hyperthermophiles in Yellowstone hot springs and in deep-sea thermal vents. Lokiarchaeota. Found in marine sediment near thermal vent; shares 3% eukaryotic genes. May represent ancient ancestor of Eukarya. *Bulleted terms are representative orders (unless stated otherwise). 

For several reasons, the phylogeny of Archaea is a challenge to define. Most archaea are uncultured and are or through metagenomics (the genome sequences of a microbial community). Many of their genomes are highly “recombinogenic.” For example, two different samples of yet their overall genomes differ by 22%, implying extensive horizontal gene exchange. And many archaeal genomes, particularly those of mesophiles, include large portions starred taxa contain more than 20% bacterial genes.) Microbial ecologist Purificación López-García, Université Paris-Sud, proposes that hyperthermophilic archaeal species evolved into mesophiles by acquiring genes from bacteria. According to her model, the bacterial genes provided key metabolic pathways and cell structures optimized for growth at moderate or cold temperatures. Finally, deeply branching clades such as the Ancient primers based on the most highly conserved regions of the gene. Much “dark matter” remains unknown, as yet undetected by our current molecular tools. 

The phylogeny of Archaea undergoes frequent revision, as new taxa are discovered and novel genomes are sequenced. For example, the taxa now designated Thaumarchaeota were originally classified with the Crenarchaeota, until multilocus genome comparison revealed the deeper division between the two clades. 

proportion of soil, marine, and benthic (marine sediment) microbial communities and are found in the microbiomes of plants and animals. Understanding these organisms is important for assessing their contribution to the global carbon cycle. in Antarctic lakes. Overall, the Crenarchaeota encompass the widest range of growth temperature of any division of life. 

Thaumarchaeota include mesophilic heterotrophs and sulfur oxidizers in soil and water. Some are key symbionts of invertebrate animals such as deep-sea sponges. 

Castle, the Lokiarchaeota genomes share surprising traits with eukaryotes. Eukaryotic-like genes found in Lokiarchaeota include those associated with an actin cytoskeleton and phagocytosis. These features suggest that Lokiarchaeota may descend from a common ancestor of a cell that contributed to the ancestral eukaryote. Euryarchaeota. The phylum Euryarchaeota also includes members throughout soil and water, and associated with plants and animals. They show a greater range of metabolism than the Crenarchaeota. The most highly divergent group of Euryarchaeota is the methanogens. Methanogens serve a key energetic role in ecosystems by offering an small-molecule reductants. Despite their common energetic pathway, methanogens branch deeply among other euryarchaeotic groups, and they show a wide range of cell shape and environmental adaptations. One branch of euryarchaeotes is the Haloarchaea, extreme halophiles that are the only form of life to grow in concentrated brine (NaCl). Most haloarchaea, such as Halobacterium species metabolism with light-driven ion pumps. Euryarchaeotes include extreme acidophiles, as well as extreme alkaliphiles. With respect to pH, the euryarchaeotes show the widest range of any clade, from Ferroplasma (order Thermococcales), growing at pH 0, to Natronococcus, growing at pH 10. 

In Table 19.2, certain archaeal names contain a “bacteria” component—for example, the genus Halobacterium. Such organisms were known and named as bacteria before 1977, when the category “archaea” was first defined. 

root of the tree. The Miscellaneous Crenarchaeota Group group Bathyarchaeota, capable of methanogenesis. The Bathyarchaeota are the only known methanogens outside of the Euryarchaeota. An even deeper branch is the Ancient gene sequences. Instead, their detection requires reverse transcription of rRNA from uncultured cells. The reverse organisms differs by 20% from the most conserved regions of other known archaeal rRNA. 

19.1 Suppose two deeply diverging clades each show a wide range of growth temperature. What does this suggest about the evolution of thermophily or psychrophily? 

How were the first crenarchaeotes discovered and described? The name Crenarchaeota means “scalloped archaea,” derived from the amorphous scalloped cell shapes of the first hyperthermophiles discovered. The first members described were hyperthermophiles such as Thermosphaera species (see Table 19.2). Since their discovery, however, numerous mesophiles and psychrophiles have been identified in soil and marine habitats. 

after a morphological feature? What problems might arise later, as more members of the lineage are characterized? 

Thermophiles colonize a hot spring. Morning Glory Pool, a hot spring in Yellowstone National Park, supports thermophilic archaea and bacteria. 

Reduced minerals. The heated water dissolves high concentrations of sulfides and other reduced minerals. When the water emerges and cools, the minerals precipitate. These reduced minerals serve as rich energy sources for autotrophs. 

Steep temperature gradients. The temperature of the water falls dramatically within a short distance from the source, forming a steep gradient. Different species of thermophiles are adapted to different temperatures and grow in separate patches at the different temperatures, causing a variegated pattern. 

under several kilometers of ocean. Pressure increases by approximately 100 atm per kilometer of ocean depth. Organisms that grow only at high pressure are called barophiles (discussed in Chapter 5). 

Species of the order Desulfurococcales show distinctive cell structures and forms of metabolism (Table 19.3). All possess elaborate S-layers but lack a cell wall; their diphytanylglycerol membranes contain a combination of diethers and tetraethers. Many take advantage of the high temperatures that increase the thermodynamic favorability of sulfur redox reactions. An example is Desulfurococcus fermentans organic molecules such as sugars. 

Vent water emerges and cools, precipitating FeS and other minerals. 

“chimneys” of sulfide minerals at the Juan de Fuca Ridge on the different classes of archaea. 

Aquarium, a pressurized device for cultivation of vent organisms. 

connecting the two daughter cells while simultaneously pushing the two cells apart. In this fashion, the cell division process expands the cell network. 

Two genera of vent thermophiles have similar names but only distant genetic relatedness: Pyrodictium abyssi, a crenarchaeote; and Pyrococcus abyssi, a euryarchaeote. 

single-species biofilm. Other forms of biofilms are found at hydrothermal vents. Thermosphaera aggregans forms colonies so tightly bound that they cannot be dissociated by protease treatment or sonication (Fig. 19.13). Multispecies biofilms of hyperthermophiles line the chimneys of black smoker vents. 

a hyperthermophile living in a thermal spring or in a black smoker vent? What would be the advantages of growth in a biofilm? 

Sulfolobus at Yellowstone. 

tube at length to obtain samples from a steaming spring, Rabbit Creek, at Yellowstone National Park. at pH 2–3. 

■ Crenarchaeotes growing on the surface of a tomato root. Crenarchaeotes were detected by fluorescence in situ eAppendix 3). Red fluorescence arises from a fluorophore-DNA probe that hybridizes to an rRNA sequence specific to Crenarchaeota. 

evolution if viruses of mesophilic archaea are found to have genomes only? 

Because archaea were first isolated from extreme habitats, crenarchaeotes in moderate habitats throughout the biosphere. The mesophiles may have evolved from hyperthermophiles by gene acquisition from mesophilic bacteria (see Section 19.1). Today, many crenarchaeotes—perhaps the majority, in nature—grow in water or soil, or in association with plants; for example, shows crenarchaeotes growing on the surface of a tomato root. Time-series Station found high numbers of crenarchaeotes at depths of 1,000 meters, where temperatures are cold. 

Some of the organisms identified as crenarchaeotes were later reassigned as thaumarchaeotes (discussed in the next section). 

19.6 What hypothesis might you propose to explain the reason for the time and depth distribution of marine Crenarchaeota seen in ? How might you test your hypothesis? 

Crenarchaeote species are found in a wide range of extreme and moderate habitats. 

Habitats for hyperthermophiles include hot springs and submarine hydrothermal vents. Vent organisms are barophiles as well as thermophiles. Anaerobic hyperthermophilic acidophiles include Caldisphaerales and Desulfurococcales includes diverse thermophiles. Most are anaerobes that use sulfur to oxidize hydrogen or organic molecules. Pyrodictium species are disk-shaped cells interconnected by cytoplasmic bridges called cannulae. 

Genetic surveys also reveal crenarchaeotes that are psychrophiles—species adapted to low temperatures. Alison Murray and colleagues from the Desert Research Institute found crenarchaeotes growing in sea ice off Antarctica below zero because of the high salt concentration. Other crenarchaeotes are adapted to high pressure as well as cold. strata show crenarchaeotes that include anaerobic heterotrophs, sulfate reducers, and anaerobic methanotrophs (methane oxidizers). Methanotrophs are particularly crucial in recycling the methane produced by seafloor methanogens (euryarchaeotes, discussed in Section 19.4). Another source of psychrophilic archaea is Ace Lake, (discussed in Section 19.4). 

a six-membered cyclic ring (Fig. 19.20). Crenarchaeol was originally named for “Crenarchaeota” but now appears to be found mainly in those organisms reclassified as Thaumarchaeota. Thaumarchaeota include intriguing symbionts of marine sponges, as well as ammonia oxidizers that perform a key role in cycling nitrogen. 

In marine environments, excreted ammonia can build up to high levels, until it is oxidized by archaea and bacteria. In some habitats, the Thaumarchaeota perform most of the recycling of ammonia, such as the ammonia excreted by fish in your aquarium. The thaumarchaeotes thus help balance the ecology of intertidal pools and beaches. The reaction plays a key role in the global nitrogen cycle, as the (discussed in Chapters 21 and 22). It also provides a major source of nitrite for marine phytoplankton. 

How the microbe benefits its sponge host is unknown, but the sponge and its endosymbionts can be cocultured in 10 μm pharmacological properties. Further metagenomic studies of soil and water continue to reveal additional novel kinds of Thaumarchaeota, including thermophiles. Overall, the clade may turn out to be as diverse as the Crenarchaeota. 

Ammonia-oxidizing archaea comprise a significant part of the human skin microbiome. Thaumarchaeotes include symbionts of marine sponges. Emerging thaumarchaeotes include mesophiles, psychrophiles, and thermophiles in many environments. 

The phylogeny of shows how clades of methanogens branch deeply, as diverse as all the euryarchaeotes together. Two possible explanations of this phylogeny would be (1) the ancestral euryarchaeote was a methanogen, but many descendant lineages lost the metabolism; or (2) divergent euryarchaeotes acquired the genes for methanogenesis later, independently by gene transfer. As yet, we lack sufficient genomic data to determine which model is correct. Furthermore, methanogenesis now appears in one deep-branching clade outside the Euryarchaeota, now called the Bathyarchaeota (formerly the Miscellaneous Crenarchaeota Group). 

1. Organics are utilized by bacteria and converted into biomass. 

2. Biomass flocculates and settles to the bottom. 

which chains of alternating amino sugars are linked by peptide cross-bridges analogous to those of peptidoglycan. By contrast, Methanosarcina species have a cell wall composed of sulfated polysaccharides. The genera Methanomicrobium and Methanococcus have protein-derived cell walls. Filamentous methanogens form chains of large cells similar to those of filamentous cyanobacteria. Filamentous methanogens, such as Methanosaeta, perform a key function in the treatment of sewage waste (Fig. 19.25). In waste treatment, the raw sewage first undergoes aerobic respiration by bacteria, converting the organic materials to anaerobic decomposition become trapped in filaments of into granules that settle out from the liquid. 

Under anaerobiosis, the bacterial waste products are converted to forms granules packed with bacteria and methanogens (discussed forming “flocs” that settle in the wastewater tank. Methanogens environment is the anaerobic soil of wetlands (Fig. 19.26). The wetlands that generate the most methane are typically disturbed or artificial wetlands, particularly rice paddies, which contain high levels of added fertilizer that bacteria convert to the substrates used by methanogens. From the standpoint of the organism, methane is an incidental byproduct, but this product has great significance for our biosphere as a greenhouse gas (discussed in Chapter 22). 

■ Polar methane release. Katey Anthony at the University of Alaska Fairbanks demonstrates how bubbles of methane from methanogens beneath the ice burst into the atmosphere, where the methane ignites into flame. 

Lake is saturated with methane from methanogens present at high numbers. Cavicchioli showed that the Ace Lake methanogens have membrane lipids with many double bonds; the unsaturated form allows more fluidity at low temperature (see Chapter 3). Rising temperatures accelerate methanogenesis, and the methane bubbles up so fast that it melts holes in the ice sheets covering Arctic lakes. In 2012, Andrew McDougall and colleagues at the University of Victoria, British Columbia, modeled the permafrost carbon release and its feedback effect on global warming. They project that permafrost could release more than a quarter of its carbon stores by the to the global temperature by the year 2300. 

methanogens grow at or beneath the seafloor. These seabed methanogens generate large volumes of methane that seep up slowly from the sediment. Under the great pressure of the deep ocean, the methane becomes trapped as methane gas hydrates, which are crystalline materials in which methane molecules are surrounded by a cage of water molecules. The methane hydrates accumulate in vast quantities. Methane hydrates are of interest as a potential source of natural gas. But if a large part of this methane were to be released, it could greatly accelerate global warming (discussed in Chapter 22). Fortunately, much of the methane produced by seafloor methane in syntrophy with sulfur-reducing bacteria such as Desulfurococcus (discussed in Chapter 18). The bacteria reduce sulfate (abundant in seawater) to sulfide. Coupled together, the reactions of methane oxidation and sulfate metabolism for both kinds of organisms. 

(discussed in Chapter 21). Termites have to aerate their mounds continually in order to remove methane; when rainfall temporarily clogs the mound, the mound can be ignited by lightning and explode. Cattle support methanogenesis within their rumen and reticulum (a common veterinary trick is to insert a tube into the rumen and ignite the escaping methane gas). Bovine methanogenesis diverts carbon from meat production, and it makes a significant contribution to global methane. Research on rumen microbiology focuses on attempts to suppress growth of methanogens. For example, Steven Ragsdale and his graduate student Bree DeMontigny at the University of Nebraska–Lincoln tested potential chemical inhibitors of methanogenesis on samples of rumen fluid serve as artificial rumens. The artificial rumens allow researchers to assess how well the proposed methane-blocking compounds might perform in an actual bovine rumen. 

■ Correlation of intestinal methanogen levels between twins. The amount of methanogens in r2 = 0.04 p = 0.32 fecal samples was measured by qPCR twins show similar methanogen levels. 

genomes were assigned to the order Clostridiales. This is the first such specific methanogen-bacterial correlation to be shown across multiple human host metagenomes. The basis of the connection is not known, but Hansen speculates that specific methanogens couple with specific clostridia-like bacteria to provide the hydrogen gas needed for methanogenesis. In effect, methanogens may bring preferred “dinner guests” to the intestinal buffet. 

Methanogens also contribute to human digestion. Species such as Methanobrevibacter smithii and Methanosphaera stadtmanae may constitute about bacter smithii increases the efficiency of digestion by consuming excess from bacterial mixed-acid fermentation (discussed in Chapter 13). High dehydrogenases and thus decrease duction. Methanosphaera stadtmanae consumes methanol, a potentially toxic by-product of the bacterial degReticulum the community of fermentative bacteria in the rumen and reticulum of ruminating animals. enhance the growth of human enteric bacteria (see Special Topic 19.1). at the University of Nebraska, is shown here pipetting rumen fluid samples into vials that serve If methanogens influence the fer- as “artificial rumens.” The vials were then incubated and assayed for the amount of methane mentation efficiency of gut flora, do formed. Ragsdale is now at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. 

they affect the caloric content we obtain from food? Experiments with gnotobiotic mice test the interactions between methanogens and Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, an anaerobic bacterium that ferments complex polysaccharides from plant foods. The mice were colonized in the presence or absence humans found a correlation between methane breath release and obesity. Thus, methanogenesis may somehow interact with human gut bacterial digestion to increase the efficiency of fat storage. How the composition of intestinal microbiota may influence obesity is discussed in Section 23.2. 

Cofactors for methanogenesis. Cofactors specific for methanogenesis transfer the hydrogens and the increasingly reduced carbon to each enzyme in the pathway. 

requires both nickel and iron. The enzyme catalyzing the requires either molybdenum or tungsten, depending on the species; some species have two alternative enzymes, depending on which metal is available. Another metal, cobalt, is required for a B12-related cofactor that participates in methane production from methanol and methylamines. 

19.7 What do the multiple metal requirements suggest about how and where the early methanogens evolved? 

Methanogens gain energy through redox reactions acetate. They require association with bacterial species that generate the needed substrates. Methanogens have rigid cell walls of diverse composition in different species, including pseudopeptidoglycan, protein, and sulfated polysaccharides. Species of methanogens show a wide range of different shapes, including rods (single or filamentous), cocci (single or clumped), and spirals. Methanogens inhabit anaerobic environments such as wetland soil, marine benthic sediment, and animal digestive organs. Biochemical pathways of methanogenesis involve transfer of the increasingly reduced carbon to cofactors that are unique to methanogens. 

effortlessly floats with her head up in the highly concentrated brine of the Dead Sea, in Israel. 

Sources: Aharon Oren, The order Halobacteriales, The Prokaryotes, Springer-Verlag; the Halorubrum lacusprofundi growth temperature range comes from Ricardo Cavicchioli. 2006. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 4:331. 

Acidic proteins. Most haloarchaeal proteins are highly acidic, with an exceptional density of negative charges at their surface. The high negative charge maintains a layer This unusual hydration layer keeps the acidic proteins soluble in the high salt within the cytoplasm. 

Potassium ion concentrations are moderately high in most microbial cells (commonly 200 mM), but the exceptionally high KCl concentration within haloarchaea requires major physiological adaptations: contains gas vesicles formed of a recombinant protein vaccine. Crystals are held here by Shiladitya DasSarma. 

and convenient delivery method for developing countries where typhoid is widespread. With respect to cell shape, haloarchaea display considerable diversity. Some species form symmetrical rods, as in cells, flattened like pancakes; and still others form regular unknown. In oligotrophic (low-nutrient) environments, it is likely that the greater surface-to-volume ratio gives flattened cells a competitive edge in obtaining nutrients. 

Brine pools beneath the ocean. Undersea brine pools collect near geothermal vents, as in the Gulf of Mexico, Mediterranean Sea, and Red Sea. These hypersaline regions contain salts brought up by vent water. They support hyperthermophilic halophiles, most of which have not yet been cultured. 

Alkaline soda lakes, such as Lake Magadi in Kenya, where carbonate salts drive the pH above pH 9. These lakes support alkaliphilic haloarchaea such as Halobacterium. 

Underground salt deposits, which contain micropockets of salt-saturated water where halophiles may survive for thousands of years. 

Because chloride is negatively charged, this chloride transport contributes to the proton motive force. Light-driven chloride pumps are unique to haloarchaea. helices containing retinal. When the sensory rhodopsins absorb light, they signal the cell to swim using its flagella activated to reverse the flagellar motor and make the cell swim away from blue and ultraviolet light, which causes through the chemotaxis machinery to the flagellar motor, or phototaxis, is an important model for archaeal molecular regulation. 

The Halobacterium genome reveals homologs for many genes that encode transporters of organic food molecules such as sugars and amino acids. In addition, the genome contains a number of cation and anion transporter genes. Some transporters move in needed molecules such as phosphate, whereas others pump out harmful substances such as arsenate. Efflux of inorganic toxins is particularly critical for growth in evaporating brine, where the concentrations of trace metals are increasing. 

Euryarchaeota includes a number of hyperthermophiles that superficially resemble the crenarchaeotes, although their genetic divergence from these organisms is deep. Some of the euryarchaeotes are acidophiles that grow under the most extreme acidic conditions on Earth. 

gains energy by sulfate respiration on small organic molecules such as lactate. This process drives a unique acetyl-CoA degradation pathway involving reversal of methanogenesis Klenk et al. 1997. Nature 390:364. 

Pyrococcus is that both proton motive force generation and methanogens and the halophiles. Thought Question 19.8 Compare and contrast the metabolic options available for Pyrococcus and for the crenarchaeote Sulfolobus. 

While many archaea reduce sulfur, only one group is partner. The order Archaeoglobales includes Archaeoglobus degradation pathway that reverses part of methanogenesis methyl groups are oxidized by reduction of sulfate. Archaeoglobus is the only archaeon known to reduce sulfate without a bacterial partner. This archaeon may play an important role in limiting ocean release of methane from methanogens. required is gained through fermentation of carbohydrates and through anaerobic respiration with sulfate. The sulfate is successively reduced to sulfite and sulfide. When organic substrates are available, sulfate reduction yields more energy than methanogenesis. 

The order Thermoplasmatales includes thermophiles and acidophiles with no cell wall and no S-layer, but only a plasma membrane. How they maintain their cells against extreme conditions is poorly understood. An example is the moderate thermophile isolated from self-heating coal refuse pH 2. The cells have flagella and are motile, but it is unclear how the flagella maintain a torque against the membrane without a rigid envelope for support. The metabolism of 1.5 million bp—one of the smallest known for a free-living organism. It shows substantial evidence of horizontal transfer from the crenarchaeote Sulfolobus, a hyperthermophile that shares the same range of habitats. Horizontal transfer between distant relatives turns out to be common among the hyperthermophiles, causing some controversies in their Another acidophilic genus of the order Thermoplasmatales is Ferroplasma (Fig. 19.40). Ferroplasma species are found in mines containing iron pyrite ore (FeS2). Using dissolved Fe3+ as an oxidizing agent in the presence of This degree of acidity is enough to dissolve a metal shovel within a day. The amorphous cells of Ferroplasma acidarmanus grow in biofilms that form long streamers into water draining of iron-bearing ores can be useful for leaching of minerals, but it also causes acid mine drainage into aquatic systems (discussed in Chapter 22). 

California. The stream is about a meter across, its water about pH 0. This level of acidity will dissolve a metal shovel in a day. 

19.9 Compare and contrast sulfur metabolism in Pyrococcus and Ferroplasma. 

PCR-amplified rDNA probes. Some of these clades, such as the Lokiarchaeota, emerge within existing phyla, such as Euryarchaeota. Others, however, diverge more deeply than the divergence between Crenarchaeota and Euryarchaeota. 

Thermococcales includes hyperthermophiles and acidophiles. Most species use sulfur to oxidize complex organic substrates. Pyrococcus and Thermococcus are the source of vent Thermococcal enzymes notably use tungsten at their active site. Archaeoglobus species reduce sulfate. The methyl methanogenic cofactors. Thermoplasmatales includes extreme acidophiles. Ferroplasma oxidizes iron pyrite ore (FeS2) in a process that generates concentrated sulfuric acid, causing acid mine drainage. Nanoarchaeum equitans is a tiny obligate symbiont of Ignicoccus hospitalis. 

he domain Eukarya encompasses a breathtaking range of size and shape, from giant whales and sequoias to microbial fungi, algae, and protists. Fungi include multicellular forms such as mushrooms, as well as unicellular yeasts and filamentous Penicillium. Algae conduct photosynthesis using chloroplasts; they include broad sheets of kelp, as well as unicellular phytoplankton. Protozoa include amebas and stalked vorticellae. Most protists are free-living predators that use cilia to catch their prey, but some are parasites that cause diseases such as malaria and sleeping sickness. 

Antarctic choanoflagellates form proto-multicellular lifeforms. Choanoflagellates are protists with a single flagellum surrounded by a collar of interconnected microvilli (tiny cell extensions). Choanoflagellates may alternate between unicellular free-living and multicellular colonial life stages. The ability to form complex colonies of interconnected cells suggests that these protists might be showing characteristics of and cellular traits suggest that choanoflagellates are the most appropriate protozoan reference for studies of animal origins. Source: Wei Li and Rachael Morgan-Kiss, Miami University of Ohio, 2015. 

In the McMurdo Dry Valleys, perennially ice-covered lakes are the only source of year-round liquid water for life. Most of the lake food webs are microbially dominated and virtually lack metazoa. Microbial eukaryotes play important roles as primary producers and consumers. Photosynthetic protists represent the major producers of organic matter in McMurdo lake ecosystems, while heterotrophic flagellates and ciliates are the predators of bacteria and smaller protists. In Lake Bonney, heterotrophic flagellates (such as choanoflagellates) are major bacterivores and a key component in the food web. How do you think choanoflagellates resemble the earliest form of animal life? 

Over 600 million years ago, the multicellular ancestor of modern animals evolved from a unicellular flagellate. The transition to multicellularity that triggered the evolution of metazoa from protozoa is a critical question regarding animal origins. Recent phylogenetic studies indicate that metazoa are monophyletic and their common ancestor was shared by single-celled choanoflagellates. 

In Chapter 20 we present the phylogeny of major groups of microbial eukaryotes, along with the branching of animals and plants from the microbial family tree. We explore the form and function of algae, such as the calcium carbonate–plated coccolithophores that bloom include a dozen deep-branching clades, from free-living amebas to diarrhea-causing parasites such as Giardia essential partners in ecosystems and as infectious agents that cause some devastating diseases. 

With all their diversity, eukaryotic cells share a common structure defined by the presence of the nucleus and other membrane-enclosed organelles (for review, see eAppendix 2). The extensive compartmentalization of the eukaryotic cell, including the nucleus and endomembrane system, enables eukaryotic cells to grow a thousandfold larger than prokaryotic cells. Yet these organelles are found within even the tiniest of eukaryotes, such as Ostreococcus tauri, a green alga less than 2 μm across (Fig. 20.2). This alga consists of a flat, disk-shaped cell containing one or two of each major type of organelle: a mitochondrion, a chloroplast, and a stack of Golgi, all packed within the cell’s small volume. The genome of genome is barely twice as long as that of the bacterium Escherichia coli. Discovered only recently, such tiny bacteria-sized eukaryotes are believed to be the most numerous and ubiquitous forms of eukaryotic life. Note that, despite their extraordinary range of form, the metabolism of eukaryotes is less diverse than that of either bacteria or archaea. Most eukaryotes conduct either oxygenic photosynthesis or heterotrophy—or both. All have descended from an ancestral cell that engulfed a bacterial endosymbiont, giving rise to mitochondria, the source of aerobic respiration. And all phototrophs descended from a cell that engulfed the bacterial ancestor of chloroplasts. 

Protist refers to single-celled and colonial eukaryotes other than fungi. Protists include many diverse clades of algae and protozoa. 

They include environmental consumers, as well as medically important parasites such as Giardia. 

The algae include two major kinds. Those of the first kind are derived from a single endosymbiotic event and are closely related to green plants. These algae are called primary algae (Viridiplantae in Fig. 20.4). By contrast, various groups of heterotrophic protists later incorporated algae in a second event of symbiogenesis. These are secondary algae (green asterisks in Fig. 20.4). 

Medical textbooks also cover invertebrate animal parasites such as worms and mites as eukaryotic agents of disease, although they are not considered microbes. 

Classifying eukaryotes presents a challenge, for several reasons. Complex eukaryotic cells frequently lose structures through reductive (degenerative) evolution. Thus, for example, a clade originally defined by possession of flagella often includes members that lack flagella. In addition, superficially similar forms of organisms have evolved independently in distantly related taxa; this is called convergent evolution. For example, the “water molds” that grow on aquarium fish superficially resemble fungi, but they actually evolved in a clade that includes brown algae and diatoms. Another challenge for classification is the size and complexity of eukaryotic genomes, which has delayed the completion of genome sequences. Eukaryotic genomes are typically severalfold larger than those of bacteria and sequence and are more challenging to annotate than those of prokaryotes. Furthermore, the evolution of eukaryotes includes multiple events of endosymbiosis, in which an engulfed cell evolved into an essential organelle. An endosymbiotic incorporation of a proteobacterium by the ancestor of all eukaryotes gave rise to mitochondria. Later, incorporation of a cyanobacterium by the ancestor of plants and algae gave rise to chloroplasts. Much later, several lineages of protists took up chloroplast-bearing algae, which now show varying stages of evolution as organelles. 

Opisthokonta (fungi and metazoan animals). Single flagellum on reproductive cells. Includes multicellular animals. Metazoa (animals). Multicellular organisms with motile cells and body parts. Includes colonial animals, both invertebrates and vertebrates. Homo sapiens. Choanoflagellata. Single flagellum and collar of microvilli. Resemble sponge choanocytes. Possible link to common ancestor of multicellular animals. Eumycota (fungi). Cells form hyphae with cell walls of chitin. Ascomycota. Fruiting bodies form asci containing haploid ascospores. Includes opportunistic pathogens and breadmaking yeasts. Penicillium, Aspergillus, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Stachybotrys. Lichens are a mutualism between an ascomycete and green algae (Trebouxia) or cyanobacteria Basidiomycota. Basidiospores form primary and secondary mycelia; some generate mushrooms. May be edible (Lycoperdon) or toxic (Amanita). Plant pathogens (Ustilago maydis causes corn smut). Human pathogens (Cryptococcus Chytridiomycota. Motile zoospores with a single flagellum. Saprophytes or anaerobic rumen fungi. Allomyces. Frog pathogens (Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis), bovine rumen digestive endosymbionts (Neocallomastix). Glomeromycota. Mutualists of plant roots, forming arbuscular mycorrhizae, filamentous networks that share nutrients with and among diverse plants. Microsporidia. Single-celled parasites that inject a spore through a tube into a host cell, causing microsporidiosis. Encephalitozoon fuse to form the zygote (zygospore). Saprophytes or insect parasites. Some form mycorrhizae. Viridiplantae (primary endosymbiotic algae and plants). Includes green algae and multicellular land plants. Chloroplasts arose from a primary endosymbiont. Charophyta. Multicellular algae with rhizoids that adhere to sediment. Spirogyra. Chlorophyta (green algae). Chlorophyll a confers green color. Inhabit upper layer of water. • Unicellular with paired flagella. Chlamydomonas, Volvox • Multicellular. Ulva grow in sheets; Cymopolia forms calcified stalks with filaments. Glaucophyta. Unicellular algae whose chloroplasts have • Picoeukaryotes. Ostreococcus and Micromonas are unicellular • Siphonous algae. Caulerpa species consist of a single cell with multiple nuclei, growing to indefinite size. *Bulleted terms are representative groups within the phylum. 

Rhodophyta (red algae). Phycoerythrin obscures chlorophyll, colors the algae red. Absorption of blue-green light enables colonization of deeper waters. Porphyra forms sheets edible by humans; Mesophyllum is a coralline alga, hardened by calcium carbonate crust; resembles coral. Amoebozoa (amebas and slime molds). Lobe-shaped (lobose) pseudopods driven by sol-gel transition of actin filaments. Amebas. Unicellular. No microtubules to define shape. Life cycle is primarily asexual. Predators in soil or water. Giant free-living amebas (Amoeba proteus); parasites (Entamoeba histolytica). Mycetozoa. Slime molds. Cellular slime molds (Dictyostelium). Upon starvation, amebas aggregate to form a fruiting body, which produces spores. Plasmodial slime molds (Physarum polycephalum) undergo meiosis, producing spores that germinate to ameboid gametes. Rhizaria (amebas with filament-shaped pseudopods). Filament-shaped (filose) pseudopods. Some species have a test (shell) of silica or other inorganic materials. Possess flagella or pseudopods (Cercozoa); form spiral tests (Foraminifera); form thin pseudopods called filopodia (Radiolaria). Alveolata (having cortical alveoli). Cortex contains flattened vesicles called alveoli, reinforced below by lateral microtubules. Ciliophora. Common aquatic predators. Undergo sexual exchange by conjugation, in which micronuclei are exchanged, then regenerate macronuclei. Covered with cilia (Paramecium); mouth ringed with cilia (Vorticella); suctorians (Acineta). Dinoflagellata. Secondary or tertiary endosymbiont algae, from engulfment of primary or secondary algae. Cortical alveoli contain stiff plates. Pair of flagella, one wrapped around the cell. Freeliving aquatic (Peridinium); zooxanthellae, endosymbionts of coral Apicomplexa (formerly Sporozoa). Parasites with complex life cycles. Lack flagella or cilia; possess apical complex for invasion of host cells. Vestigial chloroplasts. Plasmodium falciparum causes malaria; Toxoplasma gondii causes feline-transmitted toxoplasmosis; Cryptosporidium parvum is a waterborne opportunistic parasite. Heterokonta. Paired flagella of dissimilar form, one much shorter than the other. Diatoms (Bacillariophyceae); kelps (Phaeophyceae); golden algae (Chrysophyceae); coccolithophores (Prymnesiophyceae); water molds (Oomycetes). Discoba (having disk-shaped cristae). Disk-shaped cristae of Free-living flagellates (Euglenida); trypanosomes (Trypanosoma Metamonada (vestigial mitochondria). Parasitic or symbiotic flagellates. Mitochondria and Golgi degenerated through symbionts of termite gut (Pyrsonympha). 

Appendix 2. 

As a whole, the clade including single-flagellum members is termed “opisthokont,” based on the Greek words meaning “backward-pointing pole,” because the flagellum points backward like an oar. Among opisthokonts, the microbes that diverged most recently from animals (600 million years ago) appear to be the choanoflagellates. Genetic studies of choanoflagellates reveal several genes found only in animals. The prefix “choano-” (meaning “funnel”) refers to the collar of filaments surrounding the flagellum. The collared cells of choanoflagellates closely resemble the choanocyte cells of colonial sponges, an ancient form of animal (Fig. 20.6). Furthermore, choanoflagellates form colonies that crudely resemble the colonial structure of sponges. Thus, choanoflagellates may represent a “missing link” between animals and the microbial eukaryotes. 

Eukaryotic flagella are whiplike organelles composed of microtubules and surrounded by a membrane; their action is bacterial and archaeal flagella, which are rotary helical filaments composed entirely of protein subunits; their rotation is powered at the base by proton motive force. 

Fungi (Eumycota) consist of cells with chitinous cell walls that grow in chains called hyphae (singular, hypha). Fungi range from single-celled organisms, such as yeasts, to complex multicellular forms such as mushrooms. The deepest-branching clade of fungi, Chytridiomycota, produces the uniflagellar zoospores that define opisthokonts. Other fungi, however, generate nonmotile reproductive cells, a result of reductive evolution. Several taxa that historically were grouped with fungi (for example, slime molds) are now classified genetically as protists. Slime molds generate populations of cells that migrate into a unified structure called a fruiting body to make reproductive cells. Slime molds are now grouped with amebas (Amoebozoa, discussed in Section 20.4). Water molds, which are plant and animal pathogens of the class Oomycetes, are now recognized as heterokont protists (see eTopic 20.1). 

algae (Rhodophyta) contain chloroplasts (green) that evolved from (green), vestigial primary-host cytoplasm (yellow), and vestigial Lake Fryxell. 

cyanobacterium (Fig. 20.7). In Earth’s biosphere, algae plus bacterial phototrophs feed all marine and freshwater ecosystems, producing the majority of oxygen and biomass available for Earth’s consumers. How did ancestral algae get their chloroplasts? The “green plants” (Viridiplantae) include primary algae descended from a common ancestor containing a chloroplast. The chloroplast evolved by endosymbiosis between an ancient protist and a cyanobacterium (discussed in Chapter 17). In primary algae, the chloroplast is enclosed by two ancestral phototroph’s cell membrane) and the outer membrane (from the host cell membrane as it enclosed its prey). Both green algae (chlorophytes) and red algae (rhodophytes) are primary algae. Their chloroplasts diverged from their common ancestor to utilize pigments absorbing different ranges of the light spectrum. Surprisingly, several other taxa traditionally considered to be algae evolved through a secondary endosymbiosis with a second protist host. The symbiotic history of these secondary algae is most evident in the cryptophytes nucleomorph, derived from the engulfed alga. In secondary algae, the chloroplast is surrounded by two extra membranes, one from the primary algal cell membrane and one from the secondary host. Other secondary algae include the chrysophytes, such as kelps and diatoms. The dinoflagellates, of the protist clade Alveolata, are secondary or tertiary algae, descended from a flagellate that consumed one or more types of algae. Dinoflagellates also engage in “kleptoplasty,” or “chloroplast stealing,” in which the chloroplast of a digested prey is retained long enough to derive some photosynthetic energy, but ultimately consumed. The variety of endosymbiosis among protists provides clues as to how the original chloroplast evolved within the ancestral algae. 

“Algae” may refer to primary algae, or “true algae,” as well as secondary algae that derive from protist clades. Fungi (the “true fungi,” or Eumycota) are opisthokonts. Several fungus-like organisms have been reclassified within protist clades. 

filamentous pseudopods, often radially arranged like a star, as in heliozoan amebas. Some Rhizaria, such as the foraminiferans, form inorganic shells called tests. Fossil foraminiferan tests are common in rock formations derived from ancient seas. Foraminiferan shells formed the White Cliffs of Dover in Britain and the stone used to build the Egyptian pyramids. 

single unpaired flagellum (if any). Flagellated heterokonts possess two flagella of unequal length and different structure. They include many voracious zooplankton. Other heterokonts include the oomycetes, or water molds (formerly classified with fungi), as well as diatoms and kelps (secondary endosymbiotic algae with chloroplasts). Diatoms are single cells with unique bipartite shells that fit together like a petri dish. The shells of diatoms form an infinite variety of different patterns for different species. Kelps, also known as brown algae, extend multicellular sheets floating at the water’s surface. The Discoba include free-living protists such as euglenas, as well as parasites showing extensive evolutionary reduction. Most Discoba have mitochondria with distinctive disk-shaped cristae (membrane pockets). Parasitic Discoba include the trypanosomes that cause sleeping sickness and metamonads the mitochondria have lost their genomes and degenerated into mitosomes (discussed in Section 20.6). 

potentially doubling the known number of major eukaryotic taxa. Furthermore, our metagenomic analysis reveals eukaryotes in environments previously believed to be restricted to bacteria and archaea, such as anaerobic submarine sediments, and the hyperacidic Tinto River in Spain. In every new habitat tested, new deep-branching clades of eukaryotes emerge, with new implications for ecology and global cycling (discussed in Chapters 21 and 22). The wealth of new genomic data is reshaping our understanding of the domain Eukarya. 

filaments called mycorrhizae extend the root systems of most plants, forming a nutritional “internet” that interconnects the plant community (discussed in Chapter 21). Mycorrhizae may have inspired the fictional underground tree network depicted in the film Avatar (2009). Within the ruminant digestive tract, fungi ferment plant materials. On the other hand, pathogenic fungi infect plants and animals, and they contribute to the death of immunocompromised human patients. Still other fungi produce antibiotics such as penicillin, as well as food products such as wine and cheeses (discussed in Chapter 16). 

Protist groups include Amoebozoa, the unshelled amebas with lobe-shaped pseudopods; Rhizaria, the filopodial amebas; Alveolata, ciliates and flagellates with complex cortical structure; Heterokonta, the kelps, diatoms, and flagellates with nonequivalent paired flagella; and Discoba and Metamonada, primarily parasites. 

Cell walls contain chitin. Chitin is an acetylated amino-polysaccharide of immense tensile strength, from multiple hydrogen bonds between fibers. Chitinous cell walls enable fungi to penetrate plant or animal cells, including tough materials such as wood. Inhibitors of chitin synthesis, such as the polyoxins and nikkomycins, are used as antibiotics against fungal infections. 

Many protists are phototrophs as well as heterotrophs, based on secondary or tertiary endosymbiosis derived from engulfed algae. Metagenomic analysis reveals new clades of microbial eukaryotes. New kinds of microbial eukaryotes emerge from all habitats. 

2. Ca2+ released; induces vesicle fusion. 

3. Turgor pressure drives hyphal extension. 

aging part of the hypha is called the senescence zone (not shown in the figure). As hyphae grow, branches extend from their sides. The hyphae branch and extend radially, forming the mycelium. The mycelium forms the characteristic round, fuzzy colony of a fungus or “mold.” On a substrate such as wood or agar, mycelia grow in two forms: aerial mycelium, which extends out into the air; and surface mycelium, which grows into and along the surface of the substrate. 

Saccharomyces cerevisiae, serves as a model for many human cell processes. 

number of buds, the mother cell senesces and dies. Thus, yeasts provide a unicellular model system for the process of Other yeasts, such as Candida albicans, are important members of human vaginal f lora but can cause opportunistic infections. Some are important opportunistic yeast-form ascomycete, whereas Cryptococcus neoformans is a yeast-form basidiomycete (discussed shortly). Pathogens such as Candida albicans can grow either as single cells (yeast form) or as mycelia; because they exist in two different forms, these are known as “dimorphic” fungi. The yeast form grows normally in the mucosa, but environments, but it grows as a yeast within the infected Yeast as a model organism for research. The yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae is a model organism for research genetic recombination and transformation. The yeast genome of 6,000 genes includes many human homologs, such as the ras proto-oncogene (a gene involved in cancer). Often entire networks of proteins interacting in yeast “single-celled human.” Susan Lindquist at the Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research uses yeast as a model for brain neuronal diseases such as Alzheimer’s (Special Topic 20.1). 

of generations allows an organism to respond genetically to environmental change by reassorting its genes through meiosis, and by recombining them through fertilization. Gene reassortment and recombination provide new genotypes, some of which may increase survival in the changed In baker’s yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae), haploid spores divide and proliferate by mitosis. Under environmental signals such as starvation, mating factors induce the haploid cells to differentiate into gamete forms called “shmoos” fuse, and their nuclei combine to form a zygote. In the diploid generation, the zygote divides mitotically, generating a population of diploids that appear superficially similar to haploid cells. Under stress, particularly desiccation, the diploids undergo meiosis to reassort their genes for combinations that may better survive the changed environment. Meiosis generates an ascus (plural, asci) that contains four haploid spores. Many fungi and protists undergo modified versions of alternation of generations, utilizing a wide variety of haploid and diploid structures to accomplish essentially the same genetic tasks. In many fungi, the haploid form predominates; for example, ascomycetes such as Aspergillus and Neurospora form mainly haploid mycelia. In some fungi, no sexual reproduction has been observed, probably because the inducing conditions are unknown. Species that lack a known sexual cycle are called mitosporic fungi, also known as “imperfect” fungi. Mitosporic species are found in many different clades. An example is the famous Penicillium mold, an ascomycete, from which we discovered the antibiotic penicillin. 

20.2 Why would some fungi conduct asexual reproduction under most conditions? What are the advantages and limitations of sexual reproduction? 

The major groups of fungi are also known by names with the alternative suffix “-etes”: Chytridiomycetes, Zygomycetes, Ascomycetes, Basidiomycetes. 

Yeast cultures were serially diluted (vertical direction) and expressing a normal yeast protein or no protein (vector control) (middle and right, respectively). 

mitochondria have evolved into hydrogenosomes, organelles that ferment carbohydrates in a pathway generating anaerobic fungi and protists. 

Central and South America, in an epidemic associated with within the frog skin, producing capsules full of diploid zoospores called zoosporangia. Each zoosporangium protrudes through the skin surface, ready to expel zoospores in search of a new host. 

produces motile zoospores that form cysts in a poor environment. Alternatively, the diploid mycelium undergoes meiosis to form a haploid mycelium (gametophyte) that produces motile gametes. 

zoospores, which form cysts and regenerate the diploid mycelium; and those that undergo meiosis to produce haploid zoospores. The haploid zoospores generate a haploid mycelium (gametophyte) capable of producing haploid Zygomycota: nonmotile sporangia. The zygomycetes and other nonchytridiomycete fungi generate nonmotile spores. Nonmotile spores require transport by air or water, or ballistic expulsion (expulsion under pressure) from a are soil molds that decompose plant material or other fungi molds fi ll important niches in all terrestrial ecosystems. Like chytrids, the life cycle of a zygomycete alternates The mechanics differ, however, owing to the lack of motile directly undergo sexual reproduction; it grows into a haploid mycelium. The haploid mycelium then forms special hyphae whose tips differentiate into gamete cells. The gametes cannot separate from the filament; instead, two gamete-bearing hyphae must grow toward each other in order to fuse and form a zygospore. The zygospore undergoes meiosis and generates the sporangium, a haploid structure that releases sporangiospores. 

cete fungi are famous in the history of science, as well as in the culinary arts (Fig. 20.14). The bread mold Neurospora was used by George Beadle and Edward Tatum in the 1940s to formulate the one gene–one protein theory. 

Special hyphae form gametes. 

(+) and (–) gametes grow toward each other and fuse. 

life cycle of zygomycetes involves primarily haploid mycelia. Special hyphae form gametes at their tips. Gametes of different mating types fuse to form the diploid zygospore. The zygospore undergoes meiosis, regenerating haploid cells that form sporangia. The sporangia release sporangiospores, which germinate to form new mycelia. 

Hyphae containing paired nuclei grow into mycelia. 

Asci develop within fruiting body. 

Meiosis forms linear ordered tetrads of ascospores in asci. 

Some species pack asci in fruiting bodies. 

affects livestock and, in some cases, agricultural workers; the toxin causes liver damage, immunosuppression, and cancer. Conidiophore-forming ascomycetes such as Aspergillus and Stachybotrys are the major form of mold associated with dampness in human dwellings; for example, they caused homes full of drywall made ideal conditions for the growth of mold, which commonly consists of airborne ascomycete mycelia. Mold grew not only on materials submerged, but also on the surface above, exposed to water-saturated air, up to 3 feet above the flood line (the highest level submerged). Unfortunately, most homeowner insurance policies covered damage only “up to the flood line.” Many ascomycetes are pathogens of animals or plants. For example, Microsporum and Trichophyton species cause ringworm skin infection, whereas Magnaporthe oryzae causes rice blast, the most serious disease of cultivated rice. Other species, however, are beneficial symbionts of plants, including crop plants such as beans, cucumbers, and cotton. Trichoderma species grow on the roots, or in some cases within the vascular tissue, of the plant. The fungi share nutrients with the plant, and they induce plant defenses against pathogens. Trichoderma even has a commercial use in cloth processing; the fungus is used to make “stonewashed jeans,” as its cellulase enzymes partly digest the cotton. 

Basidia line the gills on the underside of mushrooms. They burst to release basidiospores. 

Gametes of opposite mating types fuse their cytoplasm only, forming secondary mycelium. The parental nuclei remain separate throughout many generations of mitosis during development of the fruiting body (mushroom). As the mushroom matures, the basidia undergo nuclear roots. Mycorrhizae enhance and extend the absorptive power of the tree roots, while obtaining plant sugars for the fungus. 

mycorrhizae (singular, mycorrhiza) that gain sugars from obligate mutualists of plants. These fungi, such as Glomus species, form extensive networks of fi lamentous connections with plant roots similar to the mycorrhizae formed by basidiomycetes; but unlike the basidiomycete mycorrhizae, the mycorrhizae formed by glomeromycota are arbuscular mycorrhizae, in which the fungal fi laments actually penetrate plant cells in a most intimate symbiosis (Fig. 20.18). Mycorrhizae expand the roots’ absorptive capacity, while obtaining plant sugars for the fungus. More than 90% of all land plants, including trees, depend on these fungal interconnections, which share nutrients among many unrelated plants, as well as the fungi (discussed in Chapter 21). In arbuscular mycorrhizae, a fungal hypha first grows in between plant cells without breaching the plant cell wall cytoplasm; the plant cell membrane invaginates to accommodate the branch, while maintaining a “periarbuscular space” between the plant cell membrane and the fungal plasma membrane. This highly regulated invaginating branch is called an “arbuscule”—hence the term “arbuscular mycorrhiza.” Arbuscular formation is regulated by plant hormones called strigolactones. The arbuscule expands the surface area to exchange sugars from the plant for ammonium and phosphate from the fungus. 

The dominant role of fungi in our biosphere is positive— as decomposers, recyclers, and symbiotic partners within Fungal cell wall lichens and mycorrhizae (discussed further in Chapter 21). Plant cell membrane But some fungi are important pathogens, such as Histoplasma capsulatum, an ascomycete fungus that infects healthy people who inhale contaminated dust, causing a deadly pneumonia. And as human demographics shift and climate Fungal plasma change increases, a growing number of human, animal, and plant pathogens Periarbuscular space emerge (Table 20.2). For immunoPeriarbuscular membrane compromised patients, especially the elderly confined to hospitals, a growing threat is Aspergillus species, which can colonize the lungs and other tissues. In 2012, contaminated steroid other previously rare opportunists. the plant cells, and then into a plant cell to form an arbuscule. The arbuscule expands surface Other fungal pathogens cause massive mortality of animals and plants. Parniske. 2008. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 6:763. 

Several parasitic organisms originally classified as protozoa because of their superficial appearance have now been shown to be fungi or fungus-related, based on their genome sequence and biochemistry. The reclassification has important consequences for research, taxonomy, and therapy. An example is the ascomycete Pneumocystis jirovecii. The organism was first described in 1909, when it was thought to be a life stage of a trypanosome causing Chagas’ disease (discussed in Section 20.6). When the organism was recognized as a distinct species of protists infecting animals, it was named Pneumocystis carinii. In the 1970s, a strain of in immunocompromised humans. In the 1980s, the rise of organism’s genome revealed it to be an ascomycete fungus. As a result, the organism’s name was called into question by fungus researchers; its developmental forms and biochemistry were reevaluated, and medical research was redirected to culture and treat the organism based on fungal physiology. Microsporidia form spores as small as a few micrometers in size, which can infect animal cells. The microsporidian spore extrudes a specialized invasion complex called the polar tube that penetrates the host cell, typically a macrophage. In humans, microsporidians are opportunistic pathogens, such as the intestinal parasite Encephalitozoon of elderly and immunocompromised populations. 

Other taxa originally assigned as fungi, based on superficial appearance, are now classified as protists, based on genetic similarity. The oomycetes, or “water molds,” were originally classified as fungi because of their fungus-like filaments, which infect plants and animals. Oomycete Phytophthora infestans devastated Irish potato crops in the 1840s, causing the Great Irish Famine, in which a million people died. Today, a related species, Phytophthora ramosum, causes “sudden oak death,” a disease killing tens of thousands of oaks and other trees in the western United States. Oomycetes are discussed further in eTopic 20.1. 

Basidiomycete fungi form mushrooms. Cells with paired nuclei (secondary mycelium) form large fruiting bodies called mushrooms. The paired nuclei fuse to form the diploid basidium, which generates haploid basidiospores. The basidiospores develop underground hyphae or mycorrhizae that interconnect plant roots. Glomeromycota form arbuscular mycorrhizae. These fungi form intimate mutualistic networks of connections with plant roots, exchanging minerals for plant sugars. Emerging fungal pathogens threaten humans, plants, and animals. 

Other photosynthetic eukaryotes, or secondary endosymbiotic algae, arose from protists that engulfed a primary or secondary alga. Secondary algae often show “mixotrophic” nutrition, involving both phototrophy and heterotrophy. For example, dinoflagellate “algae” are voracious predators of smaller protists. The heterokont algae (diatoms, coccolithophores, and kelps) are covered in this section. Dinoflagellates are covered under alveolates (Section 20.5). 

Algae are CO2-fixing producers in all ecosystems, most crucially freshwater and marine habitats. In freshwater and marine ecology, the algae, together with photosynthetic bacteria, are known as phytoplankton (see Chapter 21). All algae possess chloroplasts. The primary algae are products of a single ancestral endosymbiosis that also gave rise to land plants. The biochemistry and cell structures of true algae and land plants are similar; thus, the alga Chlorella was the model organism of choice for pioneers of photosynthesis research Martin Kamen, Melvin Calvin, and others (discussed in Chapter 15). 

lar. An important model system for genetics and phototaxis is Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, a unicellular chlorophyte common in freshwater systems as well as Antarctic pools. The alga swims forward by bending its flagella back toward the cell, like a breaststroke. Chlamydomonas cells are mostly For sexual reproduction, opposite mating types fuse to form a zygote, which loses flagella and grows a spiny protective coat. The zygote undergoes meiosis to regenerate haploid cells. 

The cell ultrastructure of Chlamydomonas is typical of algal cells (Fig. 20.20). The nucleus is cupped by a single chloroplast, which is surrounded by membrane indicates primary algae; the inner membrane derives from the ancestral bacterium, and the outer membrane derives from the engulfing host. Within the chloroplast is a pyrenoid, an organelle that The pyrenoid is surrounded by one or more starch bodies, which are used for energy storage. The starch is broken down to sugars as needed, followed by glycolysis and respiraC. Evolution of multicellularity tion in the mitochondria. Osmolarity is maintained by the contractile vacuole. The Chlamydomonas cell is encased in a cell wall composed precolonies dominantly of glycoprotein. Other green algae have cellulose cell walls similar to those of plants. Chlamydomonas Gonium Male and female lular in nature, an exciting experitypes (+/–) ment showed that this alga can quickly evolve into a multicellular form. In 2013, William Ratcliff at sano at the University of Minnesota female and male gametes (Volvox). 

filaments. The “male” gametes are those whose cytoplasm inserts through the conjugation bridge to join that of the “female” gamete. As the gametes fuse, a row of empty cell hatches and germinates a new chain of cells. Some marine algae grow in undulating sheets. An example familiar to beach bathers is the “sea lettuce” Ulva square meters, although they are only two cells thick (see grows into an immense diploid sheet of cells. This sporophyte (diploid multicellular body) appears similar in form to the gametophyte. The sporophyte eventually undergoes meiosis, releasing haploid zoospores with two pairs of flagella. The zoospores undergo mitosis and regenerate the gametophyte. Algae serve as symbiotic partners for many important living systems. For example, certain algae grow in intimate association with fungi to form unified structures called lichens, important colonizers of dry and cold habitats (discussed in lichens is cryptogamic crust, common on desert soil. Still other algae grow within the cells of paramecia and hydras, providing photosynthetic nutrition in exchange for protection. 

Metabolism of secondary algae includes heterotrophy. By contrast, the primary algae are near-obligate autotrophs, catabolizing only the simplest substrates, such as acetate. 

Gametes of different mating types fuse. 

Each division gives an offspring of smaller size until fertile cell size is reached. 

Each vegetative cell division (lower right) requires formation of an in-fitting frustule half. Successive divisions result in progressive decrease in size (lower left). At a critical size limit, the diatom must undergo meiosis to form eggs and sperm. As gametes fuse, they form an auxospore (upper right), which regenerates a frustule of the original size. 

■ Sargassum forests. Sargassum natans forms the basis of the Sargasso Sea. The brown alga forms stalks with leaflike blades and round gas bladders to keep the alga afloat. Sargassum forests support animals such as the sea turtle. 

Chlorophyta (green algae) grow near the top of the water column. Green algae include unicellular, filamentous, and sheet forms. They offer models for research on the evolution of multicellularity. 

The ameba (alternative spelling “amoeba”) is familiar to most of us as an apparently amorphous form of microscopic life, capable of engulfing and consuming prey in a dramatic fashion. While the ameba’s shape is exceptionally variable, the pseudopods, or “false feet” (Fig. 20.29), that it extends are complex structures that undertake highly controlled movements. Most amebas are free-living predators in soil or water, engulfing prey by phagocytosis. They range in size up to 5 mm, large enough to phagocytose bacteria, algae, ciliates, smaller dangerous parasites of humans or animals. Furthermore, free-living amebas can harbor bacterial pathogens such as Legionella pneumophila, which contaminates water supplies and air ducts. The bacteria cause legionellosis, an often fatal form of pneumonia. The host ameba enables the pathogen’s persistence and transmission to human Free-living amebas such as Acanthamoeba species are common predators in the soil microbial community. They cause problems when they contaminate contact lens cleaning solutions, causing keratitis (infection of the cornea). Wearers of contact lenses have an increased risk of Acanthamoeba keratitis. 

Rhodophyta (red algae) have the accessory photopigment phycoerythrin, which absorbs green and longer-wavelength blue light, enabling growth at greater depths. Red algae include species of diverse forms, many of which are edible for humans. 

Kelps are heterokonts that grow in long, sheetlike fronds. Kelps play an important role in the ecology of the coastal ocean, as well as the ecology of marine beaches. 

Secondary algae are derived from protists that had engulfed primary algae. They are mixotrophs, combining phototrophy and heterotrophy. Diatoms are heterokonts with silicate shells called frustules. Diatoms replicate by an unusual division cycle generating successively smaller frustules. 

pushing the membrane forward and extending the pseudopod. As the gel is pushed backward, it resolubilizes to continue the cycle. Amebas can have one nucleus or multiple nuclei. They are usually haploid and reproduce asexually by nuclear mitosis, without dissolution of the nuclear membrane, followed by fission of the cytoplasm. Some species do have developmental alternatives, such as cyst formation, gamete fusion and meiosis, and even growth of flagella in a favorable habitat. 

Many different species form ameba-like cells. Some species persist as an ameba throughout all or most of the life cycle. Others can convert to flagellated forms, particularly when the habitat fills with water—a low-viscosity condition favoring flagellar motility. Still other protist species, such as Thought Question dinoflagellates, never become fully ameboid, but they can extend a pseudopod to engulf prey. 20.7 What kind of habitat would favor a flagellated ameba? Different kinds of amebas have different kinds of pseudopods. “Classic” amebas (Amoebozoa) have lobeshaped pseudopods (Fig. 20.29). Lobe-shaped pseudoAmeba genetics is poorly understood, but at least one ameba genome has been sequenced—that of the intestinal the sheetlike pseudopod, or lamellar pseudopod, used parasite Entamoeba histolytica. The sequence contains 20 by dinoflagellates. Lamellar pseudopods are extended erated by human white blood cells such as leukocytes. considerable variation in organization, suggesting that Finally, needlelike pseudopods, or filopodia, are thin ameba genomes undergo extensive rearrangement. extensions reinforced by parallel actin filaments. These are typical of Rhizaria amebas, although some Rhizaria instead make long, thin pseudopods supported by microSlime Molds tubules. The most famous protists with microtubuleSome amebas conduct a life cycle in which thousands of supported pseudopods also have mineralized supporting individuals (all members of one species) aggregate into a laria (radial-form “skeleton”). The extension of lobe-shaped and lamellar pseudoslime mold forms from ameboid cells that aggregate into pods has been studied closely for its relevance to human a multicellular “slug.” Slime molds, as the name implies, white blood cells (for more on white blood cells as host were originally classified with fungi because their fruiting defenses, see Chapter 23). The mechanism of pseudobodies superficially resemble fungal reproductive forms. pod motility remains poorly understood, but it is known 1. Cytoplasmic streaming to involve a sol-gel transition brings actin dimers Ameba cross section between cortical cytoplasm forward (sol). (just beneath the cell surface) and the cytoplasm of the deeper interior (Fig. 20.30). The tip of a pseudopod con2. Dendritic tains a gel of polymerized of actin (gel). Cell membrane actin beneath its cell memand cortex brane. From the center of the ameba, liquid cytoplasm (sol) containing actin sub4. Small membrane units streams forward along projections help cell 3. Actin polymer adhere to surface. microtubular “tracks,” powrolls over like a tank tread. The actin subunits stream they polymerize, forming a (sol state) followed by actin polymerization (gel state). As actin polymerizes, the cell rotates down gel. The gel region grows, toward the substrate like a tank tread. 

Distinguish the term “plasmodium” (a large multinucleate cell) from the genus Plasmodium (an apicomplexan parasite, such as Plasmodium falciparum, which causes malaria). 

Their pseudopods all extend from one opening in the most recent chamber. Radiolarians and shelled forams grow in marine and freshwater habitats. Their shells make up a large part of reef formations, sedimentary rock, and beach sand. Forams, in particular, are used in geological surveys as indicators of petroleum deposits. 

Amebas move using pseudopods. In different species, pseudopods are lobe-shaped, lamellar, or filamentous Cytoplasmic streaming through cycles of actin polymerization and depolymerization drives the extension and retraction of pseudopods. Slime molds show an asexual reproductive cycle in which a fruiting body produces spores. In cellular slime molds, amebas aggregate to form a slug. In plasmodial slime molds, a single ameba develops into a multinucleate cell. Radiolarians have silicate shells penetrated by filamentous pseudopods. Foraminiferans have calcium carbonate shells with helical arrangement of chambers. The most recent chamber opens to extend filamentous pseudopods. 

Dinoflagellates, and algae, and perhaps the most successful group of parasitic microbial eukaryotes. Alveolates are named for the flattened vacuoles called alveoli (singular, alveolus) within their outer contain plates of stiff material, such as protein, polysaccharide, or minerals. Besides alveoli, most alveolate protists possess other kinds of cortical organelles, such as extrusomes for delivery of enzymes or toxins, bands of microtubules for reinforcement, and whiplike cilia or flagella. The alveolate cell form is highly structured, in contrast to the amorphous shape of amebas. Major groups of alveolates include ciliates, dinoflagellates, and apicomplexans. 

Cell propulsion. Coordinated waves of beating cilia, usually covering the cell surface, propel the cell forward. 

Food acquisition. By generating water currents into the mouth of the cell, a ring of cilia around the mouth brings food into the cell. 

outer cell membrane lie flattened sacs called alveoli. The cilia, composed of [9(2)+2] microtubules, are rooted in a complex network of microtubules. Parasomal sacs take up nutrients and form endocytic for ingestion (differential interference contrast, colorized). 

two paramecia of opposite mating type form a cytoplasmic bridge. The 2n micronucleus of each cell undergoes meiosis. Each macronucleus, as well as three out of four meiotic products, disintegrates. The haploid micronuclei undergo mitosis, forming two daughter micronuclei. Daughter nuclei from each cell are exchanged across the cytoplasmic bridge and then fuse with their respective counterparts, restoring 2n micronuclei. The micronuclei fission several times, and one transforms into a new macronucleus. 

Three of four meiotic products disintegrate, leaving one micronucleus (n). 

Haploid micronuclei replicate and divide (mitosis). 

20.8 Compare and contrast the process of conjugation in ciliates and bacteria (see Chapter 9). 

20.9 For ciliates, what are the advantages and limitations of conjugation, as compared with gamete production? 

Stentor and Vorticella have a ring of cilia surrounding a large large currents of water and whatever prey it carries. Stalked ciliates are commonly found in pond sediment and in wastewater during biological treatment by microbial digestion, where they are attached to flocs of fi lamentous bacteria. Another group of stalked ciliates, the suctorians daughter cell is released by the stalked cell. The daughter cell swims by ciliary motion until it finds a good habitat in which to settle, whereupon its cilia are replaced by knobbed tentacles similar to the filopodia of shelled amebas. Suctorians prey on swimming ciliates such as paramecia. 

Haploid micronuclei fuse, becoming diploid (2n). 

Micronucleus fissions; one transforms into macronucleus. 

Transverse flagellum wraps around cell. 

with one of its two flagella wrapped calcified polysaccharides are formed within cortical alveoli. The chloroplast is surrounded by a triple membrane. 

predation, extending a special type of pseudopod to engulf prey. Many dinoflagellates have evolved to lose their chlorooplasts altogether, becoming obligate predators or parasites. Some dinoflagellates inhabit other organisms as endo-symbionts, providing sugars from photosynthesis in exchange for a protected habitat. Their hosts includee shelled amebas, sponges, sea anemones, and, most imporrtant, reef-building corals. Coral endosymbionts, known as zooxanthellae (singular, zooxanthella), are vital to reef growth. The zooxanthellae are temperature sensitive, and their health is endangered by global warming. Rising temperatures in the ocean lead to coral bleaching (the expulsion of zooxanthellae), after which the coral dies. 

blood cell (schizont) can be seen bursting, unleashing parasites on surrounding cells. 

new antimalarial drugs and vaccines. The elaborate life involves several common features: followed by cell separation). The cell products of schizogony are called merozoites. The merozoites from the liver then invade red blood cells, where they feed on hemoglobin. An early infected blood cell appears as a “ring ■ Schizogony, mitotic reproduction of a haploid stage” (Fig. 20.39). The parasite multiplies, filling the form (in the mammalian host) to achieve a large host cell, now called a “schizont.” The schizont bursts, population within a host tissue. Usually, the nuclei liberating progeny merozoites that invade another round multiply first, followed by separation of individual of red cells. The bursting of red blood cells also releases nucleated cells. cell fragments that trigger the cyclic fevers characteristic ■ Gamogony, the differentiation of haploid cells into male of malaria. and female gametes capable of fertilization. Some of the merozoites in the bloodstream develop pre-gamete cells, or gametocytes. The gametocytes ■ Mitosis and meiosis of the diploid zygote (within the by bloodsucking mosquitoes and then mulinsect) turns it into a haploid, spore-like form transmistiply and mature (gamogony) in the mosquito’s midgut. sible to the next host. The gametocytes develop into female eggs and thin male In the case of malaria (Fig. 20.39 ), whip-shaped cells with flagella (this is the only stage in the apicomsporozoites injected by the mosquito invade the liver, plexan life cycle that has flagella). The male cells fertilize where they undergo schizogony (nuclear multiplication the egg cells, and the resulting zygotes undergo meiosis and differentiate into sporozoites, which enter the mosquito’s salivary gland for transmission to the next human Red blood cells consists of 24 Mb 3. Merozoites repeatedly invade contained in 14 chromosomes. red blood cells. Sequence annotation and expression studies predict 5,300 liver cells protein-encoding open readstage mitosis to form ing frames (ORFs), comnumerous parable to the number in a yeast genome. The parasite has lost many genes encoding enzymes mitosis and and transporters while of gametes 2. Sporozoites expanding its repertoire 4. Gametocytes form travel to the liver. and are transmitted of proteins involved in Human host to mosquito. antigenic diversity. In Mosquito vector addition, the parasite contains two smaller 1. Mosquito salivary gland transmits sporozoites to that of its mitochondria human bloodstream. and that of the chloron 2n Male gametes plast-derived apicoplast. How can we treat 6. Zygote undergoes 5. Fertilization malaria and eradicate the meiosis to form disease? The malarial genome reveals promising targets for drug design. For example, the fatty acid biosynthesis within the apicoplast is targeted by triclosan and other antibiotics. Other promising targets Mosquito midgut for antimalarial drugs are the unique proteases transmission between mosquito and human. food vacuole. 

Surprisingly, many protists harmlessly inhabit the human gut as commensals. Such commensals include members of diverse clades, such as Entamoeba coli (an ameba), Blastocystis (a heterokont), and Retortamonas intestinalis (a metamonad). Such protists might provide positive benefits to their host. Nevertheless, closely related organisms, such as Entamoeba histolytica, may cause deadly disease. The previous section introduced apicomplexan parasites of major importance, especially those that cause malaria. Other major clades of parasites (and related harmless protozoa) are the trypanosomes and metamonads. The human intestine harbors many kinds of protozoa, including both harmless symbionts and deadly parasites. 

generating new antigenic forms until the host repertoire of antibodies is exhausted. In order to infect its human host, the trypanosome needs to interconvert among several different forms of its life cycle. The molecular basis of conversion offers targets for drug therapy. An example of research on the trypanosome life cycle is described in eTopic 20.3. Chagas’ disease, a debilitating infection of the heart and other internal organs. Chagas’ disease is prevalent in South and Central America, and global warming is expected to expand its range north. 

Giardia is just one of many unpleasant intestinal visitors acquired by humans and animals. The ameba Entamoeba histolytica grows in the human colon, causing amebiasis and possible damage to the intestinal wall; in some cases, the parasite can invade the blood The organism is challenging to diagnose, as it appears very similar to a harmless ameba, Entamoeba dispar, which grows normally in the water supplies in the United States; it caused the nation’s largest waterborne disease outbreak to date, sickening more than 400,000 people in Milwaukee, in 1993. Cryptosporidium is especially dangerous to immunocompromised An important ciliate parasite is Balantidium individuals whose stomach acid is low, thus failing to kill the pathogen. Infection may be without symptoms, or it can lead to diarrhea and damage the colon. be protozoa, but genetically and physiologically they are fungi (see Section 20.2). Encephalitozoon intestinalis is an obligate fungal parasite of the intestine, causing problems especially for immunocompromised patients. More discussion of intestinal pathogens is found in Chapters 23 and 26. 

detaches from the intestine and is expelled from the host. It remains dormant until ingestion by a new host, where stomach acid triggers differentiation into a trophozoite. 

Other intestinal parasites include the ameba Entamoeba histolytica, the apicomplexan Cryptosporidium parvum, the ciliate Balantidium coli, and the microsporidian (fungal parasite) Encephalitozoon intestinalis. 

The microbial eukaryotes, including fungi, algae, and many most exist primarily to parasitize humans. However, recent many protozoan clades in nature as we have studied to date. Most of these unknown clades have no direct connection with humans, yet they may fill crucial niches in the ecosystems on which human existence depends. Chapters 21 and 22 emphasize the interconnections among many kinds of microbes that form the foundations of Earth’s biosphere. 

icrobes dominate all habitats on Earth, from the Antarctic Southern Ocean to the human intestine. Microbial communities form functional components of all plants and animals, including of their metagenomes, and by fluorescence microscopy of their biofilms. For their plant and animal hosts, microbes provide nutrition, enhance development, and even control behavior. Chapter 21 explores how microbes interact with each other and with their many diverse habitats on Earth. 

2.5 kilometers at the Antarctic Southern Ocean hydrothermal vents of the East Scotia Ridge. Bacteria (white tufts) grow on the crab’s legs and pincers. The bacteria oxidize sulfides from through the vent water but keeps enough distance to avoid scalding by the superheated fluid. As its bacteria grow, the crab grazes on them. Source: Sven Thatje et al. 2015. PLoS One 10:e0127621. 

Why do chemosynthetic bacteria associate with the yeti crab? How does each partner benefit? The yeti crab Kiwa tyleri feeds entirely on chemosynthetic bacteria. The association has not yet been proved to benefit the bacteria, although the crab keeps the bacteria within a region of survivable temperature. 

Yeti crabs need the warm water surrounding the hydrothermal vents to survive. The surrounding deep sea is freezing warm water constrains the crabs to a very limited habitat of a few cubic meters of seawater at each chimney system. 

Microbes recycle organic material in aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems, providing resources for plants and animals; and deep below Earth’s surface, microbes shape the rock of Earth’s crust. The first problem of microbial ecology is: How do we find and identify a habitat’s microorganisms? The great eighteenth-century taxonomist Carl von Linné (known also as Carolus Linnaeus) called microbes “chaos” because he thought we would never be able to distinguish one from another (see Chapter 1). In the nineteenth century, Robert Koch developed techniques of pure culture, and Sergei Winogradsky developed enrichment culture methods that isolate microbial species and reveal their metabolic traits (discussed in Chapters 1 and 4). Yet the vast majority of microbes remain uncultured, and perhaps undiscovered. In 2015, a single publication by Jill Banfield’s group revealed 35 new phyla, expanding the domain of all known bacteria by 15% (see Chapter 18). To find the microbes in a particular habitat, we need specialized tools. Section 21.1 begins with the tools of metagenomic analysis—and beyond, the new emerging tools of microbial ecology. In subsequent sections, we evaluate the functions of those microbes in their habitats and microbiomes, including symbioses with partner animals and plants, as well as the larger communities found in the oceans and Earth’s crust. 

This chapter presents the interactions of microbes and partner organisms within communities. Chapter 22 presents the role of microbes in global fluxes of nutrients and climate change. 

environmental samples was Norman Pace, then at Indiana standard for identifying environmental taxa (discussed in gene, which tells us little about the rest of the organism. In 1998, Jo Handelsman and colleagues, then at the University of Wisconsin–Madison, used shotgun sequencing to analyze large portions of genomes from a soil microbial community—a mixture of species that was previously thought impossible to interpret. Handelsman coined obtained directly from a mixture of genomes. 

What are they doing? What function do the microbes contribute? Do they fix carbon, break down toxic waste, or produce antibiotics? 

They found that individual gut microbiomes show distinctive species profiles that are stable over time. This finding suggests that understanding individual microbiomes could help fine-tune drug therapies for different patients. 

Assembled 15 bacterial genomes with 27,700 carbohydrate-digesting enzymes. 

Genome libraries; Illumina sequencing by synthesis. 

Science 331:463. 

Manimozhiyan Arumugam et al. 2011. Nature 473:174. 

Antarctic mats show more osmotic stress genes, while Arctic mats show more copper response (pollution related). 

Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 

Desert soil genomes show more osmotic stress genes but fewer antibiotic resistance genes than nondesert genomes. 

10 Mb per sample, Illumina functional annotation. 

High coverage reveals within-species 1.5 terabases (1012 base variation; human individuals possess pairs); Illumina sequenced. distinct microbial strains, stable over time. May lead to personalized chemotherapies. 

Siegfried Schloissnig et al. 2013. Nature 493:45. 

Ocean microbial catalog compiled; core genes vary with depth and temperature. 

Shinichi Sunagawa et al. 2015. Science 348:1261359. 

Rare organisms (<0.1%) in new candidate phyla detected from diverse communities. 

Illumina: multi-kb reads compared to short reads. Long-read sequencing improves genome assembly. 

Genome Res. 25:534. 

Archaeal phylum Bathyarchaeota contains previously unknown methanogens. 

MetaBAT multisample assembly reveals referenceindependent genomes. 

Science 350:435. 

Iron Mountain, California, one of the largest Superfund cleanup sites. from a fistulated (cannulated) cow. The closable opening (see the plug sitting digest plant fibers within the rumen of a cow. 

with a host animal, such as the rumen (fermentation organ) a host animal or plant are called the microbiome. Every multicellular organism possesses a microbiome. 

when sampling a large, dilute target community, such as an ocean. Which community interests you—the protists and small invertebrates? the bacteria and archaea? the viruses? If you sample the entire community, one fraction may yield most of to fi lter or fractionate the target community (Fig. 21.3, step 2). Filtering can be physical—for example, by pore size or by cell sorting through flow cytometry. But bacteria, protists, and even can use “computational fi ltration” to eliminate sequences. For example, when we are focusing on bacteria, we can fi lter out the sequences known to come from protists. However, computational fi ltering may also exclude bacterial sequences of interest because they are new and match nothing reported before in the databases. Every procedure has trade-offs. 

habitat, the cells of the target community must be with minimal breakage of the strands (Fig. 21.3, step 3). We can lyse the cells by “bead beating” or by sonication (methods discussed in Chapter 3). with phenol and ethanol, or by binding to special fi lters. But—unlike the analysis of a single-species genome—for a metagenome we must account for different species that possess different kinds of enzyme inhibitors, as well as envelope, sheath, and S-layers of diverse composition. 

extraction for all target communities. If all research extraction method, then results may be compared across all projects. 

methods to sample one target community, then they have the best chance to maximize coverage of all the microbial genomes in the sample. 

6. Building scaffolds and assembling genomes community to sample, from a habitat such as soil, water, or host plant or animal. Remove the sampled microbes from their environment (step 1) and filter the desired class of organisms (step 2). Lyse using a high-throughput sequencer (step 5). Use computational software to build scaffolds and assemble genomes (step 6). Source: John Wooley et al. 2010. PLoS Computational Biol. 6:e1000667. 

(Fig. 21.3, step 4) followed by high-throughput sequencing (step 5). The choice of sequencing method depends on several factors. 

samples relative to other cell components? Samples such as a human tissue biopsy, or groundwater, will contain which can introduce sequence errors and sample loss. 

Sample diversity. Species in the community may differ in their fractional representation by several orders of magnitude. How important are the community’s rarest members? This question is hard to answer without first taking a trial run at the genome to establish a rarefaction curve (discussed shortly). 

Functional interest. Is our aim a complete description of the target community, such as the microbiota inhabiting the human stomach? Or do we focus on a narrower goal, such as identifying soil actinomycete genes quicker analysis of the DNA—unless those organisms are among the community’s rarer members. 

Other Alphaproteobacteria rRNA amplicon sequencing is that we may quickly identify many taxa present in a community, including relatively rare members that do not yield full genomes when large-scale sequencing reveals the general categories of microbes found in a community, their relative abundance in a community, and the overall diversity of the sample. An example of diversity analysis was an assessment of seawater following the Deepwater Horizon oil well blowout, which released 4 million barrels of oil into the Gulf of Mexico in 2010 (Fig. 21.4; eTopic 21.1). During several months genes from water contaminated by the plume of oil rising from the leak and from uncontaminated Gulf seawater. The collection of amplified sequences shows the relative abundance of various marine taxa at different times after the spill water, taken in May, showed a broad range of diverse taxa, including Proteobacteria, Cyanobacteria, and Bacteroidetes. By contrast, samples of oil-contaminated water, taken in May and again in June, showed a marked shift to particular taxa: a novel clade of Oceanospirillales (bright blue bars), and the genus Colwellia (blue-gray bars), a benthic gammaproteobacterium that catabolizes propane and benzene. By September, when the most digestible parts of the oil had dissipated, the range of diversity had been partly restored. 

Clones sequenced ■ Rarefaction curves of indoor air, outdoor soil, and river water were sampled from Singapore. 

Rarefaction curves show the number of species, or OTUs, found as a function of the number of clones sequenced for the metagenome. 

different OTUs (species) found, as a Alignment of short reads function of increasing sample size. If resampling continues to reveal new OTUs, then the community diverTTCAGGTTACCACGCGTAGC sity has not yet been fully sampled. On the other hand, if the number of OTUs reaches a plateau, then the community diversity may be well represented. shows rarefaction curves for metagenomes from samples of urban office interiors (indoor air-1, indoor air-2) compared to those from nearby samples Reference genome sequence of soil and river water (soil-1, soil-2, water). Indoor air microbiology is of interest because indoor microbes may colonize human occupants— and because human occupants may “mark” the room with their own telltale microbes. In reads the curves for outdoor soil and water show a continual increase in OTUs with resampling, implying high diversity beyond the samples obtained. However, the indoor air samples approach a plateau after about 2,500 clones. Thus, the Gap of known length indoor-air microbial diversity is well represented by the air samples. generate a contig. Contigs matched to a reference genome generate a scaffold. Scaffolds may sequences show taxa only down to still contain gaps of unknown sequence. the level of genus. Furthermore, the so-called “universal” primers for read, and the accuracy of the sequence (discussed in Chapbacteria and archaea miss many uncharacterized taxa, such surface water (discussed in Chapter 18). An improvement provides the longest sequence reads (600–900 bp) and the over single-gene analysis is to select a collection of marker most accurate base calls. But Sanger sequencing is impractical genes that are widespread in numerous taxa, and then comfor the high volumes required for metagenomes. The method bine the data to achieve a consensus diversity survey. Such tion, comparable to the sequence volumes required for full short sequence reads (150–300 bp) but offers a 1,000-fold greater volume of data for comparable cost. The shorter reads are more challenging to assemble, typically requiring largescale computation on a supercomputer (discussed next). Thought Question occupants of a room, based on the room’s airborne microbiome? For background, read James Meadow, 2015, PeerJ 3:e1258. 

developed by a team at Keio University. One common technique is to align the contigs and scaffolds with known reference genomes. Gap between Reference genomes can be effective at “pulling out” genomes of organisms present in low abundance. An example of a metagenome study is offered by the cow rumen microbiome, a highly diverse community sequenced by Matthias Hess and colleagues at the Joint Genome Institute (see Table 21.1). Hess’s study yielded 15 partial genomes (OTUs) ranging from 60% to 93% estimated completeness; 12 are listed in The completeness of each genome was estimated from the number of “core genes” identified. Core genes are defined as those genes found in nearly all members of a given taxonomic order, such as the order Clostridiales for the group of genomes (genome bin) APb (highlighted row in Fig. 21.7). The fraction of the core genes found, divided by those expected for the order, gives an estimate of completeness of the genome sequence. The OTUs that Hess found, however, account for only a tiny fraction of the species present, out of 268 gigabases (billions of base pairs) sequenced. Each partial genome assembled from the rumen community represents a bin— that is, a set of sequence reads from closely related members of one taxonomic unit, showing a given level of similarity. Since no two individual organisms possess exactly the same sequence, the investigator must decide how much difference to allow in defining a taxon. Binning, the sorting of sequences into taxonomic bins, requires further computational analysis. Factors for computation may include, for example, similarity of base composition and similarity to reference database sequences. shows an example of a binned partial genome, APb, as a ring composed of scaffolds matched to a Clostridiales reference genome. Between the scaffolds, there remain unsequenced gaps. In the wheel, the jagged trace represents the degree of coverage—that is, the number of sequence reads that cover a given region. Multiple copies of overlapped sequence represent a reliable assembly; typically, 30-fold coverage is considered good. But the remainder of the rumen sequences are unattached scaffolds and single-copy reads out of thousands of unknown genomes. These unattached sequences encode tens of thousands of novel enzymes for carbohydrate digestion, and are of great interest to the biofuel industry. 

Partial genomes assembled from a cow rumen microbiome. Map of genome bin APb (order Clostridi■ ales) showing assembled scaffolds. Inner rings indicate fold coverage (number of sequence reads) backward and forward; red lines indicate 25-fold coverage. Center: Genome bins were matched to orders by comparison with reference sequences. Source: Modified from Matthias Hess et al. 2011. Science 331:463. 

for the purpose of understanding carbon dioxide fixation and release, to improve our model for global climate change. Do you focus your resources on assembling as many complete genomes as possible, or do you focus on identifying all the community’s enzymes of carbon metabolism? 

Gene structure. The six reading frames are searched for start and stop codons that bracket sequences of appropriate length to encode proteins (open reading frames, or ORFs). To be transcribed and translated to a functional sequence, as well as a ribosomal start site (discussed in Chapters 8 and 10). 

Comparison with previously processed metagenomes. Metagenome comparison is particularly useful in the clinical setting, where diagnostic tests aim to compare the microbiomes of diseased patients with a reference collection of “normal” human microbiomes. 

■ Functional gene categories: relative abundance compared between desert and nondesert soils. Highlighted categories denote significant differences in abundance of genes in functional categories. Sixteen desert soil samples from hot deserts and Antarctic cold deserts were compared with seven nondesert soils from forests and grasslands. (Error bars represent standard error of the require a greater range of metabolic options for growth of cell biomass. 

1. Cells are fixed to a slide. 

4. Unbound probe molecules are washed away. 

Beyond metagenomes, how do we know which genes are actually expressed by the target community? Emerging and protein pools of a community. Metatranscriptomics marine water community will be presented in Section 21.2. Metaproteomics is the study of proteins synthesized by environmental samples and cultures. 

Microbial ecology is an interdisciplinary enterprise that uses methods presented throughout this book, such as fluorescence microscopy (Chapter 2), enriched medium (Chapter 4), metagenome sequencing (Chapter 7), isotope labeling (Chapter 13), and molecular phylogeny (Chapter 17). Additional methods, such as gel electrophoresis, are described in eAppendix 3. 

from a microbial community. The community may be any natural or human-made environment, or the microbiome (host-associated microbes) of a plant or animal. Samples are obtained from a target community of a defined environment. Sampling requires separating the microbes from their physical environment, filtering the to different views of a metagenome. rRNA amplification. Rarefaction curves estimate the completeness of sampling the diversity. sequencing methods, such as Illumina sequencing by synthesis, generate large amounts of data, which require computational analysis. The sequence reads are assembled into scaffolds and binned into partial genomes. Assembly requires a computational pipeline that incorporates mathematical tools and biological assumptions. Different pipelines make different assumptions and may predict different taxonomic bins. Functional annotation offers clues as to the ecological functions contributed by the microbes. Emerging technologies go beyond metagenomics. metatranscriptomics and metaproteomics. 

All organisms depend, directly or indirectly, on the presence of other organisms. How do microbes contribute to these interactions? Microbes cycle essential nutrients through a food web. They also serve more complex functions that we are just beginning to discover, such as defending host organisms from pathogens, and even modulating may involve mutualism, a highly developed partnership in which two or more species coevolve to support each other (discussed in Sections 21.3 and 21.4). 

Within a community, each population of organisms fills a specific niche. The niche is a set of conditions, including its habitat, resources, and relations with other species of the ecosystem, that enable an organism to grow and reproduce. For example, the niche of Anabaena, a cyanobacterium, is that of a filamentous or mat-forming marine organism that photosynthesis releases molecular oxygen that is used by swarms of respiring bacteria. The habitat of Anabaena is fresh or brackish water; its biomass provides food for invertebrates and fish. Despite autotrophy, Anabaena needs the other organisms too. The cyanobacteria grow best in the presence of heterotrophic Proteobacteria, whose respiration removes oxygen gas from Anabaena’s heterocysts, which need anaerobiosis to fix nitrogen. Thus, organisms do more than fill a niche; they construct niches for other kinds of organisms. Organisms perform niche construction by shaping the biochemical dimensions of their habitat. 

van Niel (1897–1985). Van Niel was the first to show that bacteria in the soil and water can conduct photosynthesis without producing oxygen, using electron donors such as one of many kinds of metabolism unique to microbes, and unknown in plants or animals. Other unique forms of microbial metabolism (discussed in Chapters 13–15) include nitrogen fixation by bacteria and archaea, and the degradation of lignin by bacteria and fungi. Moreover, microbial metabolism provides ecosystems with their sole source of key elements such as sulfur, phosphorus, and iron. 

■ Bacteria consume oil. Petroleum-polluted marine waters contain bacteria whose enzymes (orange balls) catabolize components of crude oil, revealed by bacterial metagenomes and metatranscriptomes. Source: Modified from Rafiela Bargela et al. 2015. Sci. Rep. 5:11651. 

Every molecule existing in nature can be used as a source of carbon or energy by a microorganism somewhere. Any molecule found in the environment can participate in some kind of energy-yielding reaction. If an energy-yielding reaction exists, some microbe will evolve to use it. 

Many of the substrate molecules, such as naphthalene, were once considered nondegradable “xenobiotic” molecules. But all these substrates can ultimately be degraded to the rate of breakdown may be slow. The energy gained by microbial metabolism, as well as the elements that microbes assimilate into biomass, eventually circulate throughout the ecosystem. Even the microbe’s own genes encoding useful pathways may circulate by horizontal gene transfer (see Section 9.6). 

Dissimilation: The Food Web carbon and nitrogen in association with the plants and animals of an ecosystem. The cycles of other key elements, and their effects on the global biosphere, are explored in Chapter 22. 

The interactions between microbes and their ecosystems include two common roles of metabolic input and output, often called assimilation and dissimilation, respectively. Most of these metabolic processes were discussed in Chapters 13, 14, and 15, but ecology offers a different perspective. Assimilation refers to processes by which organisms into cells. When the environment lacks organic compounds containing an element such as nitrogen or phosphorus, microbes may assimilate the element from mineral sources. source of energy is sunlight, which drives production by Common kinds of assimilation include carbon dioxide fixaphotoautotrophy. tion and nitrogen fixation. Organisms that produce bio■ Assimilating minerals into biomass. The biomass of producers is then passed on to subsequent trophic levels. ions) are called primary producers. Producers are a key determinant of productivity for other members of the Dissimilation is the process of breaking down organic nutrients to Primary producers of producers Microbial dissimilation releases minProtists and erals for uptake by plants and other microbes, and it provides the basis of archaea, and wastewater treatment (discussed in Chapter 22). But microbial dissimi40% lation can decrease habitat quality by Predators 1% removing organic nitrogen. When soil bacteria break down amines Fire, fungi, nitrifying bacteria such as NitroPredators 0.1% and bacteria somonas oxidize the ammonium to nitrite and nitrate. These highly sol■ soil into the groundwater. This chapter covers microbial down both producer and consumer microbes. In a forest, the major producers are trees, while assimilation and dissimilation of the main decomposers are fungi and bacteria. 

are multicellular plants. Plants generate detritus, discarded biomass such as leaves and stems, that requires decomposition by fungi and bacteria. While viruses are important, multicellular consumers such as worms and insects play a greater role in decomposition. The differences between the food webs of ocean and dry land explain why most of the food we harvest from the ocean consists of predators at the higher trophic levels (fish), whereas most food harvested on land consists of producers and first-level consumers (plants and herbivores). Fish depend on a large number of trophic levels that dissipate the carbon assimilated by a vast array of microbial producers. Thus, the numbers of fish remain limited, despite the seemingly huge volume of ocean. 

University of Adelaide, proposes that most of Earth’s gold ore was originally generated by bacterial reduction. Anaerobic environments require much slower rates of assimilation and dissimilation than occur in the presence of oxygen. The total biomass of anaerobic microbial communities, however, far exceeds that of our oxygenated biosphere. 

Microbial populations fill unique niches in ecosystems. Microbes are found in every environment. Every chemical reaction that may yield free energy can be utilized by some kind of microbe. Microbes fix or assimilate essential elements into biomass, which recycles within ecosystems. Important elements, such as nitrogen, are fixed solely by bacteria and archaea. Consumers and viruses break down the bodies of Dissimilation is the process of breaking down nutrients through oxidation. 

increasing acidity releases minerals to be oxidized, while excluding acid-sensitive competitors. Other kinds of habitats, such as soda lakes, show extreme alkalinity resulting from high sodium carbonate. As our understanding of ecosystems deepens, we discover other remarkable ways that organisms benefit each other. For example, plant-associated bacteria and fungi enhance the uptake of nutrients and protect the host from pathogens. Animal-associated microbes protect the host from pathogens, enhance digestion, and modulate the immune system. These processes are detailed in the next section, and in the sections on animal and plant microbial communities (Sections 21.4 and 21.6). 

Decomposers such as fungi and bacteria release nutrients from dead organisms. Microbial activity depends on levels of oxygen, carbon, nitrogen, and other essential elements, as well as environmental factors such as temperature, salinity, and pH. The largest volume of our biosphere contains anaerobic bacteria and archaea. Beneath Earth’s surface, most metabolism is anaerobic. 

One of the most fascinating features of evolution is how organisms adapt to the presence of others. Some relationships of microbes occur at a distance; for example, the oxygen gas released by marine cyanobacteria is breathed by organisms around the globe. Other relationships require intimate association between two or more partners. An intimate association between organisms of different species is called symbiosis (plural, symbioses). Symbiotic associations include a full range of both positive and negative relationships (Table 21.4). Whether positive or negative, both partners evolve in response to each other. Symbiosis may involve two or more partner species, even thousands of partners, as in animal digestive communities (see Section 21.4). 

Two organisms grow in an intimate species-specific relationship in which both partner species benefit and may fail to grow independently. 

Both species benefit through growth, but the partners are easily separated and either partner can grow independently of the other. 

One species benefits, while the partner species neither benefits nor is harmed. 

One species benefits by harming another. The relationship is nonspecific. 

In the soil, Streptomyces bacteria secrete antibiotics that lyse other species, releasing their cell contents for Streptomyces to consume. 

One species (the parasite) benefits at the expense of the other (the host). The relationship is usually obligatory for the parasite. 

Legionella pneumophila, the cause of legionellosis, parasitizes amebas in natural aquatic habitats. 

1. Cyano mat lifts off, floats on oxygen. 

3. Wind carries ecosystem to new habitat. 

Summer: Katabatic winds ablate ice, blow mat away. 

Winter: Water freezes beneath. 

■ Cyanobacterial mats carry an ecosystem. The cyanobacterial mats lift off upon bubbles of oxygen, carrying protists, heterotrophic bacteria, and meiofauna. In winter, water freezes the mat into the ice. Over several years, the mat works its way through the ice until katabatic winds scrape it out and carry the freeze-dried ecosystem to a new habitat. 

some lucky scraps are borne away to a moat in some other lake, ready to colonize a new home. Morgan-Kiss and colleagues investigate these flyaway ecosystems to discover new life-forms. They sampled Lake Fryxell cyano mats emerging from the ice, and isolated community Wang at the Joint Genome Institute using the MetaBAT computational pipeline. Analysis showed cyanobacteria (Microcoleus and Nostoc), oil-eating betaproteobacteria (such as Rubrivivax), and actinobacteria (such as Pseudonocardia). Actinobacteria could produce new antibiotics—perhaps antibiotics that never encountered human pathogens. Thus, this remote ecosystem could provide unexpected benefits for medicine. 

How do Antarctic lake microbes and meiofauna adapt to the seasonal extremes of oxygen and light, followed by freezing anaerobiosis and dark? Geology 43:887–890. and glacier meltwater. Award #1936, Genome Portal of the Department of Energy Joint Genome Institute. 

In the most highly evolved forms of symbiosis, partner species require each other for survival—a phenomenon termed interdependence of luminescent bacteria Aliivibrio fischeri and their host squid, Euprymna scolopes (described in Section 10.5). Mutualism can involve two or more microbial partners. It can also involve one or more microbial partners with a plant or animal host. In some cases, both partners absolutely require each other; in other cases, one or the other is incapable of growing alone. The mutually beneficial relationship is maintained by numerous genetic responses that regulate each partner, avoiding damage to the other. Mutualisms such as nitrogen-fixing rhizobia within legumes can have enormous practical applications (discussed in Section 21.6). 

tebrate animals acquire endosymbiotic algae, most commonly dinofl agellates. These endosymbionts are called zooxanthellae (singular, zooxanthella). The algae receive protection from predators, while the animal receives photosynthetic products. Examples include anemones, clams, and corals (Fig. 21.15 and eTopic 21.2). Coral zooxanthellae are extremely important to the biosphere because healthy coral is required for reef formation and much of the biological productivity of coastal shelf ecosystems. The slight rise in temperature that has occurred from global warming has already caused severe problems with coral bleaching, in which the algal symbionts die or are expelled. The coral turns white and soon dies, unless its symbionts return. 

with lichens (pale green) and pulmonaria) shows fungal, algal, and bacterial symbionts. 

to survive, because one of their species may happen to be resistant to a rise in temperature. 

Symbiosis between organisms involves a range of interdependence, from obligate mutualism (cooperation) to obligate parasitism (see Table 21.4). In a gut community, some of the microbial members may enhance each other’s growth, but they can also grow independently. Their optional cooperation is called synergism, in which both species benefit but can grow independently and show less specific cellular communication. For example, human colonic bacteria produce fermentation products that colonic methanogens metabolize to methane. The methanogens gain energy, and the fermenting bacteria benefit energetically through the steady-state removal of their end products. The bacteria found within marine sponges may offer an example of synergism. These bacteria fix carbon or secrete defense chemicals that protect the host sponge (see eTopic 21.3). In other cases, one species derives benefit from another without return; for example, some wetland bacteria derive benefit from Beggiatoa because Beggiatoa bacteria oxidize “commensal” microbes often provide a hidden benefit to their host. For example, gut bacteria such as Bacteroides species were considered commensals until it was discovered that their metabolism aids human digestion. An interaction that harms one partner nonspecifically, without an intimate symbiosis, is called amensalism. An example of amensalism is actinomycete production of antimicrobial peptides that kill surrounding bacteria. The dead bacterial components are then catabolized by the Finally, parasitism is an intimate relationship in which one member (the parasite) benefits while harming a specific host. Many microbes have evolved specialized relationships as parasites, including intracellular parasitic bacteria such as the rickettsias, which cause diseases such as Rocky Mountain spotted fever. The distinction between mutualist and parasite is often subtle. Lichens consist of a mutualistic association between fungus and algae, but environmental change can convert the fungus to a parasite. On the other hand, parasitic microbes may coevolve with a host to the point that each depends on the other for optimal health. For example, the high incidence of human allergies is proposed to correlate with lack of exposure to parasites that stimulate development of the immune system. 

water with and without filtration by sari cloth, which prevents passage of contaminated copepods and thus prevents transmission of cholera. 

example, the human cholera pathogen Vibrio cholerae is a mutualist of copepods (Fig. 21.16). This relationship was discovered by Anwar Huq, from Bangladesh, who worked Science Foundation (interviewed in eTopic 1.1). Huq and copepods. The copepods actually depend on these bacteria to eat through the chitin of their egg cases, releasing their young. Thus, bacterial mutualists of copepods are virulent pathogens of humans, whose cholera diarrhea returns the organism to the water full of copepods. To decrease the filtering out the copepods through sari cloth. The elucidation of this complex microbial partnership reaped benefits for people threatened by cholera. Multiple partner species can form a complex web of positive and negative dependence. An example is the leafcutter-ant symbiosis with fungi, which includes a fungal mutualist, a fungal parasite, and a bacterial mutualist that counteracts the parasite (presented in eTopic 17.5). 

Symbiosis is an intimate association between organisms of different species. Mutualism is a form of symbiosis in which each partner species benefits from the other. The relationship is usually obligatory for growth of one or both partners. Lichens are a mutualistic community of algae or cyanobacteria with fungi. Lichens are essential producers for dry soil habitats. Corals and sea anemones harbor zooxanthellae, algae that provide products of photosynthesis in exchange for a protected habitat. Parasitism is a form of symbiosis in which one species grows at the expense of another, usually much larger, host organism. Interactions of multiple species can include both mutualism and parasitism. 

Digestive chambers, such as those of the termite hindgut, the bovine rumen, and the human colon, support thousands of species of bacteria, protists, and archaea. 

All animals have microbial communities on their surfaces or within certain internal organs. Many microbes have beneficial effects, such as enhancing digestion or generating protective substances in the skin. The beneficial properties are so essential that an animal is now considered a holobiont, an entity composed of multiple types of organisms, including microbes. By contrast, a relatively small proportion of animal-associated microbes cause disease. Human microbial interactions with the immune system are discussed in Chapter 23. Pathogenesis and disease in humans are discussed in Chapters 25 and 26. 

wood polysaccharides such as cellulose. The termite feeds on wood and is completely dependent on its symbiotic bacteria. Wood particles ingested by the termite consist of cellulose and hemicellulose sugar chains entwined with complex aromatic polymers called lignin. Within the termite digestive organ (called the hindgut), its bacteria form highly complex associations with protists such as Mixotricha paradoxa (Fig. 21.17), which can be as long as half a millimeter. 

Mixotricha and other metamonad protists (see Chapter 20) partly break down the lignin component of wood fibers. It is not clear whether Mixotricha gains energy from lignin, but the breakdown of fibers makes cellulose available for bacterial catabolism. up termite-ingested wood particles by phagocytosis, and then the protist’s intracellular bacteria digest the wood polysaccharides. Mixotricha also has organelles that appear to be vestigial remnants of another endosymbiont, diminished by reductive evolution. On the protist’s surface, four kinds of bacteria are attached. Two of the attached species are spirochetes, one significantly larger than the other. The spirochetes extend from the protist’s cell membrane; they are flagellated, and their flagellar motility propels the protist cell. 

Two other species of “anchor bacteria” are Gram-negative rods attached to knobs of the protist surface. All members of the partnership have evolved an obligate relationship, although the basis for some relationships remains unclear. The relationship among microbial symbionts within the termite gut community generates a complex series of metabolic fluxes (Fig. 21.18). This kind of metabolic cooperation is called syntrophy, which means, “feeding together.” For syntrophy, the fluxes within the community must would for a single free-living organism (discussed in Chapter 13). Most commonly, one species produces a product that is consumed by the second species, which, if left to In the simplified model shown in the wood polysaccharides are hydrolyzed by bacteria and 2. Regurgitation and chewing of cud. 

1. Digestion in the rumen and reticulum. Flagellated protists break down lignocellulose, releasing sugar chains. Wood polysaccharides Bacteria break down cellulose and ferment sugars. 

3. Reswallowed cud moves to omasum. 

4. Digestion is completed in the abomasum. 

Some hydrogen is lost from the gut, some is converted to methane, and some is converted to acetic acid. Acetic acid is absorbed through the outer lining and feeds the termite. 

fermented to short-chain fatty acids, such as acetic acid, which can be converted to methane by methanogenic as 30%. The termite microbial mutualism is being studied as a model system for production of hydrogen biofuel. 

All vertebrate animals possess digestive microbiomes. The best-known microbiomes are those of ruminants, such as cattle, sheep, and caribou. Throughout most of human civilization, ruminants have provided protein-rich food, textile its food in the fermentation chamber known as the rumen (Fig. 21.19). The microbial community of the rumen enables herbivores to acquire nutrition from Amino acids complex plant fibers. From a genomic standRuminococcus point, such an arrangement makes evolutionPeptostreptococcus ary sense. If the animal had to digest all the diverse polysaccharide chains encountered in fatty acids nature, its own genome would have to encode a wide array of different enzyme systems. Instead, the ruminant relies on diverse microbial species to conduct various kinds of digesMethanogens tion. As we saw for termites, microbes that partly digest a substrate provide short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) that the host animal can absorb and digest to completion by aerobic vide food molecules that the animal host can use? How is the animal able to obtain nourishment from waste products that the microbes could not use? 

Short-chain fatty acids enter host circulation. 

Phage tranfers starch-use genes among anaerobes. 

Intestinal lumen contains diverse bacteria. 

Pathogens stimulate immune system. Immune cells release toxic oxidants. 

Anaerobes secrete hydrolases in vesicles; share with community. Hydrolases break down glycans to sugars, which feed facultatives. 

ferment sugars to SCFAs. 

Bacterial peptides enter epithelium. 

from epithelium; makes lumen anaerobic. 

Gut microbiomes even help establish circadian rhythms in mammals, and may influence our experience of “jet lag.” vary over the daily cycle, and that restoring normal gut populations can overcome a genetic defect in the molecular clock that governs animal activity. In humans, jet lag induces abnormal fluctuations in the gut microbiome. Perhaps someday we will develop probiotic therapies for jet lag. The mechanisms by which gut microbes influence our gut epithelium and immune system are discussed in Chapter 23. Thought Question 21.7 How could you design an experiment to test the hypothesis that an animal makes use of amino acids synthesized by its gut bacteria? 

The microbes possess numerous digestive enzymes absent in the host genome. Termite gut mutualists include protists that break down lignin, as well as bacteria that catabolize cellulose. Syntrophy is a metabolic association between (at least) The rumen of ruminant animals is a complex microbial digestive chamber. Rumen microbes, including bacteria, protists, and fungi, digest complex plant materials. The microbial digestion generates short-chain fatty acids that are absorbed by the intestinal epithelium. The human gut microbiome contributes to our anaerobes break down large glycans to sugars utilized by facultatives, and to short-chain fatty acids that enter the intestinal epithelium. Commensal members of the gut microbiome normally outcompete pathogens. Pathogenic bacteria can invade the inner mucus layer and harm the gut Human gut microbes communicate with their host. Commensal bacteria send chemical signals to our immune tissues and to our brain. 

which receives light for phototrophs. In the open ocean, the euphotic zone extends down a couple hundred meters, whereas at the coastal shelf (<200 meters to the ocean floor), a higher concentration of silt and organisms decreases the photic zone to as little as 1 meter. 

What microbial communities inhabit the oceans? Oceans cover more than two-thirds of Earth’s surface, reaching depths of several kilometers and forming an immense habitat. Both oceans and freshwater support huge quantities of bacteria and algae, which drive vast ecosystems. Marine microbes contribute half the planet’s productivity (production of biomass). Marine and freshwater microbes form the base of the food chain for seafood, with enormous impact on humans. 

Neuston (about 10 µm). The neuston is the air-water interface. Although extremely thin, the neuston layer contains the highest concentration of microbes. Many algae and protists have evolved so as to “hang” from the layer of surface tension that forms at the air-water interface. 

Benthos. The benthos includes the region where the water column meets the ocean floor, as well as sediment below the surface. Organisms that live in the benthos, such as those of thermal vent communities, are called benthic organisms. 

into several categories. The coastal shelf region is defined as the water extending from the shoreline out to a depth of 200 meters. The pelagic zone (open ocean) includes several depth regions: the neuston, the microscopic interface between water and air; the euphotic zone of light penetration, where phototrophs can grow, down to 100–200 meters; the aphotic zone, which supports only heterotrophs and lithotrophs; and the benthos, at the ocean floor. 

when excess sewage or petroleum is present, such as that spilled by the Deepwater Horizon oil rig in 2010. Microbial consumption of these wastes at first deprives fish of oxygen, but the process is the only way the ocean recovers (see Figs. 21.4 and 21.10). 

microbial growth requires hidden synergy or mutualism with other organisms in the natural environment. For example, the tiny cyanobacterium Prochlorococcus is the ocean’s most abundant oxygenic phototroph, accounting for half the ocean’s photosynthesis. The abundance map in obtained from marine samples worldwide, shows that in most regions, Prochlorococcus outnumbers its relative Synechococcus by tenfold; the dominance of the tiny phototroph is due in part to its unusual chlorophylls, which absorb more of the blue light from the solar spectrum. Nevertheless, Prochlorococcus species are very difficult to grow in pure culture. Erik Zinser and colleagues at the University of Tennessee–Knoxville showed that culturing Prochlorococcus in the laboratory requires the presence of a “helper bacterium” that catalyzes hydrogen peroxide, a by-product of oxygenic photosynthesis. The helpers produce catalase, which Prochlorococcus has lost through degenerative evolution, enabling more efficient growth when heterotrophs are present. Thus, in the ocean— as in gut microbiomes—microbes require surprising synergisms and symbioses, in the midst of competition. Synergism, rather than single-species growth, may be the more common condition for microbes in nature. 

organisms with functional importance, researchers set out to explore expressed genes—a “metatranscriptome.” Sallie Chisholm and Edward DeLong, then at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, sequenced the mRNAs expressed adenines was added) using an enzyme that favors mRNA and excludes ribosomal RNAs because of their high degree The sequences of the cDNA (representing expressed gives a measure of expression levels of all genes, which are plotted in declining rank order (Fig. 21.26). The most highly expressed genes included those encoding functional ocean. But the most highly expressed genes were some of the rarest in the metagenomes (colored red in Fig. 21.26). Thus, expression analysis does indeed reveal organisms undetected in the metagenome, presumably too rare for detection by our current sequencing methods. It also suggests that vast ranges of organisms may remain unreached by either genome or transcriptome sequencing. 

each other. We will now introduce approaches to measuring microbial populations and their interactions within marine communities. These approaches have enormous practical applications, from the management of fisheries to the assessment of greenhouse gas fluxes (a topic pursued in Chapter 22). 

In marine science, the term plankton refers to organisms that float passively in water. Microbiologists use the term loosely, as microbial “plankton” include motile bacteria and protists. Marine phytoplankton (microbial phototrophs) Microbial plankton, or microplankton, include numerous members of the three domains discussed in Chapters 18, 19, and 20: bacteria (cyanobacteria and proteobacteria), eukaryotes (diatoms and dinoflagellates), and archaea (crenarchaeotes and euryarchaeotes). Nanoplankton (about 2–20 µm) arbitrarily include smaller algae and flagellated protists, as well as filamentous cyanobacteria. Picoplankton (about 0.2–2 µm) consist of bacteria and the smaller eukaryotes, including the smallest living cells known. Besides these size classes of cells, the term “femtoplankton” may refer to marine viruses, the smallest detectable particles capable of reproduction. Note, however, that the use of these prefixes (“nano-,” “pico-,” “femto-”) is approximate and does not refer to size units such as nanometers. Despite the definition of “plankton,” not all marine microbes float indepenMetagenomic dently. Many form biofilms on colonial algae such as kelps, or on suspended inor3 ganic particles known as marine snow. As many as half of all marine bacteHigh Light harvesting (PufB) Extremely high ria are associated with particulate subIon transport (proteorhodopsin) strates from broken-down organisms. As Protein biosynthesis (ribosomal protein) observed by Farooq Azam at the Scripps Carbon fixation (Rubisco) Transport (ammonium transporter) Institution of Oceanography, “Seawater Photosynthetic electron transport is an organic matter continuum, a gel of Electron transport tangled polymers with embedded strings, sheets, and bundles of fibrils and parti–1 cles, including living organisms, as ‘hot spots.’” Thus, while the ocean as a whole has a low average nutrient concentraHighest Rank-ordered gene expression ratios tion, marine waters include a suspension of concentrated tangles of nutrient-rich substrates. Collectively, their global volabundance in the metagenome. The y-axis represents the ratio of cDNA to metagenomic ume is so large that their sedimentation rate influences calculations of Earth’s carbon cycle. highly expressed tend to be rarest in the genome (colored red). 

Marine plankton interact with each other as producers and of a food web is often called a “spaghetti diagram” because so many trophic interactions cross each other in various directions. 

The phototrophic producers are known as phytoplankton. this trophic category also includes myriad unrelated organisms, such as eukaryotic algae, diatoms, and dinoflagellates. In the food web, bacteria and protists are consumed by larger protists, which feed small invertebrates, which feed larger invertebrates and, ultimately, vertebrates such as fish. All levels of microbial plankton undergo intense predation by viruses. The degree of viral predation is difficult to measure, but recent studies indicate that cell lysis by viruses breaks down about half of microbial biomass (discussed in Chapter 6). Virus particles represent a significant sink for carbon and nitrogen. They accelerate the return of minerals to producers and necessitate a larger base of producers to sustain the ecosystem. Some marine viruses are highly host specific, infecting only certain species of dinoflagellates or cyanobacteria. Their presence selects for diverse communities containing numerous scattered species. Other viruses attack many hosts—and they transfer genes from one host to another, such as the genes encoding photosystems. Thus, marine viruses are a dominant force determining community species distribution and genome content. 

Because each trophic level spends 90% of its food intake for energy, ecosystems require a huge lower foundation to sustain the highest-level consumers. This is one reason why fisheries worldwide are now in danger of running out of fish for human consumption: Fish are being harvested faster than the ecosystem can replace them. Note that actual food webs are far more complex than the opportunity to grow at night, without light, and to acquire scarce minerals, such as iron, from prey. Mixotrophs include secondary endosymbiont algae (discussed in Chapters 17 and 20), such as kelp and sargassum weed, as between different kinds of protists, algae, and bacteria. 

marine water column, the vast majority of carbon transfer occurs among microbes. Arrows lead from organisms consumed and point to their consumers. The primary producers are phototrophic bacteria and algae, with a smaller contribution from lithotrophic bacteria and archaea. Grazers include heterotrophic bacteria and protists. Predators include protist flagellates and ciliates. About 50% of bacterial and protist biomass is degraded by viral lysis. Multicellular organisms cycle a relatively small complex view of the marine food web includes mixotrophs (organisms that combine phototrophic and heterotrophic nutrition) and symbiotic associations between protists and phototrophic bacteria or algae. 

hydrothermal vents, such as those of Guaymas Basin, in the Gulf of California (Fig. 21.28) (discussed in Chapter 19). The clouds rising from the thermal vent are minerals precipitating as the superheated solution meets cold seawater. The reduced minerals from the vents support entire ecosystems of lithotrophic bacteria, including mutualists of uniquely evolved giant clams and worms. Many vent-dependent microbes are thermophiles, adapted to high temperatures (discussed in Chapter 5). Many are hyperthermophilic archaea such as Pyrodictium are reached only at high pressure (1,000 atm; discussed in Chapter 19). The ocean floor provides reduced inorganic minerals such as iron sulfide (FeS) and manganese (Mn 2+) that can combine with dissolved oxygen to drive chemolithoautotrophy (discussed in Chapter 14). Chemolithoautotrophy by microbes in the sediment generates a permanent voltage potential between the reduced sediment and the oxidizing water. As a result, the entire benthic interface between floor and water acts as a charged battery that can actually generate electricity. The benthic redox gradient is enhanced dramatically at hydrothermal vents, where volcanic activity causes minerals are brought up by seawater that seeps through the sediment until it reaches a magma pool, where it becomes superheated and rises to the surface as steam. Sulfate-reducing bacteria reduce sulfate from seawater such as Thiomicrospira. Nearby anaerobic sediment supports methanogens, and the methane they produce seeps up into the oxygenated water, where it is oxidized by The high concentrations of sulfides near thermal vents the carbonates, generating organic metabolites that feed their animal hosts—species of worms, anemones, and giant clams, all closely related to surface-dwelling species that such a complete dependence on its symbionts that it has lost its own digestive tract. Surprisingly, microbial communities related to those at thermal vents are found in unheated benthic habitats known as cold seeps, where hydrogen and methane seep slowly through cracks in the rock. Cold-seep endosymbiosis within animals is presented in eTopic 21.2. 

Phosphates. Because phosphorus is commonly a limiting nutrient (nutrient in shortest supply) for algae, addition of phosphates from detergents and fertilizers can lead to an algal bloom. 

In a eutrophic lake, the lower layers have become depleted of oxygen as a result of overgrowth of microbial producers and consumers. Thermal stratification may break up, and the lake may mix one to several times per year, thus shows greatly decreased animal life. Anoxic water supports only anaerobic microbes. 

zone (epilimnion) reaches to the thermocline, below which only of a eutrophic lake. The oxygenated epilimnion is much shallower, and microbial concentrations are tenfold higher than in channel into the reservoir at Grand Lake St. Marys State Park, Ohio, in 2010. 

■ Absorbance spectra of chlorophyll from lake phototrophs. In the upper waters, algae and cyanobacteria absorb primarily blue and red. Below, where red has been absorbed by microorganisms above, anaerobic phototrophs such as Blastochloris absorb infrared (wavelengths beyond 750 nm). 

bacteria, such as Rhodospirillum rubrum, can grow anaerobically with or without light; others grow only by anaerobic metabolism, unassisted by light. These low-oxygen bacteria form a flourishing community, but they cannot support oxygen-breathing consumers such as fish. At the bottom of the water column, the water meets the sediment (benthos). In the benthic sediment, gradients develop in which successive electron acceptors become reduced by anaerobic respirers and lithotrophs (Fig. 21.31). Electron acceptors that yield the most energy are consumed first; as each in turn is depleted, the electron acceptor with the most energy is consumed next. First, molecular oxygen is used to oxidize organic material remaining organic material. As the nitrate is used up, still collects below and sometimes ignites when it escapes to the surface. Methane from freshwater lakes and streams is emerging as a major contributor to global warming (discussed in Chapter 22). 

Certain minerals and organic molecules occur in equilibrium between ionized and un-ionized states over the range of pH typical of most common habitats (pH 4–9). Examples include prevalent at pH 7 unless stated otherwise. 

Throughout the water column, protists consume algae and bacteria, while fungi decompose detritus. Protists and fungi also interact with invertebrates and fish as parasites. Other important consumers are the viruses, which lyse about half of microbial populations in lakes, as they do in the ocean. Viruses limit the number of microbes and keep the water clear enough for light to penetrate. 

The euphotic zone of the ocean is the upper part of the water column that receives light for phototrophs. Below, in the aphotic zone, only heterotrophs and lithotrophs can grow. The benthos includes the region where the water column meets the ocean floor, as well as sediment below the surface. Most marine microbes either cannot be cultured or require special culturing methods. Some can be cultured using conditions that mimic their natural habitat, and allow intimate association with other species that provide growth factors such as siderophores. Plankton are small floating organisms, including swimming microbes. Phytoplankton are phototrophs such as cyanobacteria and algae. Microbial consumers include protists and viruses. Many marine protists are mixotrophs (producers and consumers in one). Picoplankton include bacteria and small microbial eukaryotes. They are measured by fluorescence microscopy. Their biochemical rate of production is estimated by uptake of radiolabeled nutrients. Benthic microbes are barophiles. The seafloor supports psychrophiles, whereas hydrothermal vents support thermophiles. Vents and cold seeps support sulfur- and metaloxidizing bacteria, sulfur-reducing bacteria, methanogens, Freshwater lakes have stratified water levels. As depth increases, minerals become increasingly reduced. Anaerobic forms of metabolism predominate, with the more favorable alternative electron acceptors used in turn. Lakes may be oligotrophic or eutrophic. Eutrophic lakes may show such high biochemical oxygen demand low to support vertebrate life. 

In contrast to the ocean, where the base of producers is almost entirely microbial, the major producers of terrestrial ecosystems are macroscopic plants. Plants vary greatly in size and form, from mosses and bryophytes to prairie grasses and forest trees, but most terrestrial plants are rooted in soil. Soil is a complex mixture of decaying organic and mineral matter that feeds vast communities of microbes. Soil is arguably the most complex microbial ecosystem on our planet. And soil-based agriculture is the major source of food for our planet’s human inhabitants. The qualities of a given soil—oxygenated or water saturated, acidic or alkaline, salty or fresh, nutrient-rich or -poor—define what food can be grown and whether the human community will eat or starve. 

The general structure of soil (Fig. 21.32) includes a series of layers called “horizons” that arise as a result of soil-forming factors such as rainfall, temperature variation, wind, and biological activity. Note that the soils of different habitats, such as prairie, forest, and desert, vary greatly as to the depth and quality of each layer. The surface layer of soil we see is the organic horizon detritus, such as shreds of leaves fallen from plants. The detritus of the organic horizon is in the earliest stages of decomposition by microbes, primarily fungi and bacteria such as actinomycetes. Early-stage decomposition is defined loosely as a state in which the origin of the detritus may be still recognizable. Beneath the organic horizon lies the lighter-colored more advanced stages of decomposition combine with minerals from rock at lower levels. In the aerated horizon, the source of the organic particles is no longer recognizable, and decomposers have broken down some of the more difficult-to-digest plant structural components, such as lignin (a complex aromatic polymer found in wood; discussed in the next section). This partly decomposed material is often sold by garden stores as peat or topsoil. In well-drained soil, both the organic and aerated horizons are full of oxygen, as well as nutrients liberated by the decomposers and used by plants. Soil consists of a complex assemblage of organic and inorganic particles (Fig. 21.32). Between the soil particles are air spaces that provide access to oxygen, allowing aerobic respiration. Each particle of soil supports miniature colonies, biofilms, and filaments of bacteria and fungi that interact with each other and with the roots of plants (Fig. 21.33). 

Polysaccharide secretion by plants binds clay particles. 

crustal rock as deep as 3 km down contains endoliths, bacteria growing between crystals of solid rock. What energy source feeds microbes trapped within rock? For some endoliths, a surprising answer may be the radioactive decay of uranium. Uranium-238 decay generates hydrogen radicals that combine to form hydrogen gas. The hydrogen electron donor and a carbon source for methanogens and other endolithic lithotrophs. 

■ The soil profile. Soil forms layers in which are water saturated and anaerobic. 

The soil food web (aerated zone). Plants are the major producers, although some production also occurs from lithotrophs such as ammonia oxidizers. Detritus from plants is decomposed by fungi and bacteria, which feed protists and small invertebrates such as nematodes. Protists and small invertebrates are consumed by larger invertebrates and vertebrate animals. 

predators. Some predators, such as earthworms and burrowing animals, enhance the soil quality by turning over the matter, thus aerating the soil particles and helping to mix the organic matter from above with the mineral particles from below. (Fig. 21.36). Trees, in particular, accumulate vast stores of biomass in forms that are difficult to digest, such as lignin. Lignin is a highly complex and diverse covalent polymer composed of interlinked phenolic groups (benzene that help degrade the lignin portion of wood particles. In soil, fungi and bacterial decomposers possess enzyme systems to degrade lignin and other complex components of plants. Examples of decomposers include white rot fungi plays a much larger role in terrestrial ecosystems than in marine ecosystems. The first phase of microbial degradation (about 50% of the carbon) is complete within a year of deposition in the soil. The remaining phenolics, however, may be degraded isotope ratios have been shown to last 2,000 years. These phenolic molecules are called humic material or humus. Because of its slow degradation, humic material provides a steady slow-release supply of nutrients for plant growth. But forests whose rate of microbial decomposition is particularly low—for example, the New Jersey Pine Barrens— depend on fire to clear the mounting layers of humus and return its minerals to the ecosystem. 

a complex organic polymer that is a component of wood and bark. log. The fungus degrades lignin. 

The presence of plant roots provides yet another level of complexity to soil communities (Fig. 21.37). Plant roots influence the surrounding soil by taking up nutrients and by secreting organic substances and molecules that modulate their surroundings. The environment surrounding a plant root can be further subdivided into two categories: the rhizoplane, the root surface; and the rhizosphere, the region of soil outside the root surface but still influenced by plant exudates (materials secreted by the plant). Particular bacterial species are adapted to these environments. For example, in anaerobic wetland soil, the rhizoplane and rhizosphere of plant roots provide oxygen for methanotrophs that oxidize methane produced by methanogens. The rhizoplane and rhizosphere also provide the environment for symbiotic fungi that generate mycorrhizae. At least 80% of plants in nature, including 90% of forest trees, require mycorrhizae for optimal growth. 

microbes. The rhizoplane is the region of soil directly contacting the plant root surface. The rhizosphere is the soil outside the rhizoplane that receives substances from the root, such as mucilage, sloughed cells, and exudates. 

Ectomycorrhizal hyphae do not penetrate cells. 

may acquire 25% of the photosynthetic product of their hosts in exchange for tremendously expanding access to soil resources. Mycorrhizae greatly enhance the plant’s uptake of water, as well as minerals such as nitrogen and phosphorus. In addition, the hyphae sequester toxins, and they actually distribute organic substances from one plant to another. 

Mycorrhizae may join many different plants, even different species, in a vast, nutrient-sharing network. Thought Question 21.9 Design an experiment to test the hypothesis that the presence of mycorrhizae enhances plant growth in nature. 

and concentrate toxic metals such as arsenic, suggesting a possible use for bioremediation of metal-contaminated soil. They produce promising antibiotics and proteases for cleansing agents. Other kinds of endophytes protect plants from heat, salt, and drought—contributions of growing importance as our global climate changes. 

■ Endophytic bacteria within plants. Communities of bacteria colonize a new root tip of the plant Arabidopsis thaliana. The bacteria (green) and the root cell nuclei (blue) are laser scanning microscopy. Endophytes include species of Actinobacteria and Proteobacteria that may help the plant resist pathogens and survive environmental stresses such as high salt or temperature. Distinct clades of bacteria grow on the root surface or within the plant tissues. Source: Derek Lundberg et al. 2012. Nature 488:86. 

and bacteria. Thus, when we eat plants, we also consume all their endophytes, or endophytic microbes (Fig. 21.41). Some endophytes are obligate (can live only within the plant), whereas others, such as pseudomonads, have alternative lifestyles in the soil. The microbial partners may grow as mutualists, commensals, or parasites. Plants tolerate endophytes because they confer substantial benefits. For example, prairie grasses called fescue, grazed by cattle in the southeastern United States, host fungal epiphytes. The fungi, Neotyphodium coenophialum, produce alkaloids that deter insect predators, pathogens, and root-feeding nematodes. Unfortunately, some of the alkaloids poison cattle, but agricultural scientists have engineered fungal strains that still protect the plant from pathogens while allowing cattle to graze. as spinach and alfalfa. Endophytic pathogens pose a problem for the food industry because the bacteria cannot be “washed off” from raw produce. On the other hand, endophytes such as Stenotrophomonas species have potentially valuable uses. Stenotrophomonas bacteria produce enzymes that deter many plant pathogens. The bacteria also absorb that of nitrogen fixation by rhizobia (singular, rhizobium), a group of soil-dwelling Alphaproteobacteria (discussed in Chapter 18). Major rhizobial genera include Rhizobium, Bradyrhizobium, and Sinorhizobium. Rhizobia, associated with legumes such as peas and beans, fix more nitrogen than the plants absorb from soil, actually increasing the soil’s nitrogen content. For this reason, farmers often alternate crops such as corn with soybeans to restore nitrogen to the soil. The rhizobial bacteria develop specialized forms within plant cells, called bacteroids. Bacteroids lack cell walls and are unable to reproduce; their function is specialized for nitrogen fixation. The rhizobial infection of root hairs induces the formation of nodules within which the nitrogenfixing bacteroids are sequestered (Fig. 21.42). Thought Question 21.10 How do you think symbiotic rhizobia reproduce? Why do bacteroids develop if they cannot proliferate? 

1. Flavonoids from plant bind Nod protein of Rhizobium, attracting bacteria to plant. 

2. Rhizobium cell binds to root hair. 

3. Root hair is induced to curl around Rhizobium. 

4. Plant cell envelope opens tube inward as infection thread. 

6. Rhizobium bacteria reach cortical cells. 

5. Rhizobium bacteria travel down infection thread. Plant nucleus travels ahead. 

DsRed (pink) or green fluorescent protein (green). 

Bacteroid depends on plant cycle intermediates to form amino acids. 

(step 4). The tube growth is directed by the plant nucleus, which migrates toward the plant cortex (step 5). As the tube grows, bacteria proliferate, forming a column of cells that projects down the tube (steps 6 and 7). This column of cells is known as the infection thread. The infection thread As the infection thread develops, signals from the bacteria induce the cortical cells (below the epidermis) to prepare to receive the bacteria. The bacteria induce further tube formation into the cortical cells and continue penetration as they grow. The penetration of the infection thread into the in which the bacteria are engineered to express a fluorescent protein. The cortical cells invaded by bacteria are induced to proliferate in an organized manner, forming nodules. 

plant cells. The haustorium is surrounded by an invagination of the plant’s cell membrane. Plant nutrients such as sucrose flow into the haustorium and are transferred out to the fungal mycelia. 

wall, followed by ingrowth of a bulbous extension called a haustorium (plural, haustoria) (Fig. 21.46). The haustorium never penetrates the plant cell membrane, thus avoiding leakage and loss of plant cytoplasm. Instead, it causes the membrane to invaginate, while expanding into the volume of the plant cell. The haustorium takes up nutrients such as sucrose, generated by adjacent chloroplasts. Depending on the species of fungus, haustorial parasitism can lead to mild growth retardation, or it can rapidly kill the plant. 

21.12 Compare and contrast the processes of plant infection by rhizobia and by fungal haustoria. 

The uppermost horizons of soil consist of detritus and are largely aerated. Below the aerated layers, the eluviated horizon experiences water saturation. Lower layers are anoxic. 

The soil food web includes a complex range of microbial producers, consumers, predators, decomposers, and mutualists. Microbial mats and biofilms are complex multispecies communities of bacteria, fungi, and other Fungi decompose lignin, a complex aromatic tree component that is challenging to digest. Lignin decomposition forms humus. Certain fungi form symbiotic associations with plant roots called mycorrhizae. Mycorrhizae transport soil nutrients among many different kinds of plants. Wetland soils alternate aerated (dry) with anoxic (water-saturated) conditions. Anoxic wetland soil favors methanogenesis. Wetland soils are among the most productive ecosystems. Endophytes are bacteria or fungi that grow within plant transport vessels, conferring benefits such as resistance to pathogens. Rhizobia induce legume roots to nodulate for nitrogen fixation. The bacteria enter the root as infection threads. Some of the bacteria enter root cells and develop into nitrogen-fixing bacteroids, which gain energy from plant cell respiration but must remain anaerobic. Plant pathogens include bacteria, fungi, and viruses. Some pathogens only mildly affect the plant, whereas others cause devastation. Some fungi invade plants using haustoria, which grow into the plant cell by penetrating the cell wall and invaginating the cell membrane to avoid leakage of cytoplasm. 

This chapter has introduced the challenge of characterizing microbial ecosystems, with the promise and pitfalls of the metagenomes. We have seen how microbes colonize a vast array of habitats, from the deserts and oceans to the roots of plants and the digestive tracts of animals. Microbes are found from the upper layers of our planet’s atmosphere down to the deepest rock strata we can reach. Wherever found, microbes both respond to and modify the environment that surrounds them. Thus, microbes both fill available niches and construct their own. While this chapter has focused on food webs in local habitats, Chapter 22 takes a global perspective of microbial ecology and its roles in the cycling of Earth’s essential elements, such as nitrogen and iron. We will see how microbes interact with global climate change and examine the evidence for existence of microbial life beyond Earth. 

Nitrifying bacteria reshape the nitrogen cycle. Microcolonies of Nitrospira (yellow) and other bacteria (green) within nitrifying activated sludge. The microorganisms were rRNA–targeted oligonucleotide probes specific for Nitrospira or all bacteria, respectively. Nitrospira in activated sludge are canonical nitrite oxidizers or complete nitrifiers. 

icrobes throughout the biosphere recycle carbon, nitrogen, and other elements essential for all life. Through their biochemical transformations, diverse microbial activities largely determine the quality of soil, air, and water. Today, all of these geochemical cycles are altered profoundly by human activity. But microbes can help us manage environmental change. From local wastewater treatment to the control of greenhouse gases, microbes are our hidden partners on Earth. And Earth’s microbial cycles lead us to wonder whether biospheres exist on other worlds. 

How will this discovery revise our view of the global nitrogen cycle? Nitrification is a key process of the nitrogen cycle in all oxic ecosystems. The identification of complete nitrifiers, which were overlooked for decades, means that current concepts of nitrifier ecology and physiology need a thorough reevaluation. We should take this into account in future studies of microbial ecology, agriculture, wastewater treatment, and global climate change research. 

■ Global greenhouse gases. Atmospheric levels cores. The increase of these greenhouse gases since 1750 accompanies the rise in fossil fuel burning and fertilizer-intensive agriculture. 

Chapter 17. Oxygen is a powerful oxidant, lethal to most life in that anoxic era, when all living organisms were anaerobic microbes. To survive, anaerobes had to evolve mechanisms of protection against oxygen, such as antioxidant molecules and enzymes, or else retreat to anoxic habitats. Since then, microbes have shaped our biosphere by releasing oxygen, by fixing nitrogen and returning it to the atmosphere, and by fixing and producing carbon dioxide. These and countless other microbial processes have made Earth’s atmosphere what it is, and they continue their roles in its homeostasis. 

the rise of ancient cyanobacteria? Or can we use our knowledge of microbial ecology to channel microbial activities into recovering the balance—for example, by increasing Throughout most of this book, we present microbial biochemistry in the context of growth of individual organisms. Here in Chapter 22, we show how the collective metabolic activities of microbial populations contribute to global cycles of elements throughout Earth’s biosphere. We consider the ways that we humans enlist microbes for bioremediation, the use of microbial metabolism to reverse pollution and restore chemical cycles, such as the water cycle in the Florida Everglades (see Section 22.3). Finally, we explore how our awareness of global microbiology has renewed our quest for life beyond Earth. For example, the discovery of nitrate on Mars shows the surprising possibility of nitrogen “fertilizer” available for life on that planet (see Section 22.6). 

components such as the silicate shells of diatoms or the sulfur granules of phototrophic bacteria. All of these elements flow in biogeochemical cycles of nutrients throughout the biotic and abiotic components of the biosphere. The environmental levels of key elements can limit biological productivity. For example, the concentration of iron can limit marine populations of phytoplankton, which depend on iron supplied by wind blowing dust off a land mass. Other elements, such as zinc and copper, are micronutrients, nutrients required in still smaller amounts. Micronutrients, too, must be cycled, although their flux is challenging to measure. 

one of various intermediate states of oxidation. Nitrogen is excreted by many organisms in its most reduced form, serve in anaerobic respiration. 

Chemical and spectroscopic analysis. Bulk quantities by sophisticated chemical instrumentation. Atmospheric applied to samples from towers such as those of the including oxygen, nitrogen, sulfur dioxide, and carbon monoxide. Mass spectrometry detects extremely small quantities of different molecules, even distinguishing between elemental isotopes. 

Radioisotope incorporation. The influx and efflux of radioisotope tracers in the field using a field chamber. 

Stable isotope ratios. Some enzyme reactions show is measured using mass spectrometry. Measuring nitrogen isotope ratios can indicate whether denitrifiers could have conducted metabolism in the sample. 

22.1 Why is oxidation state critical for the acquisition, usability, and potential toxicity of cycled compounds? Cite examples based on your study of microbial metabolism (see Chapter 14). 

How do we figure out whether ecosystems are net sources availability of nitrogen? Rates of flux of elements in the biosphere are very difficult to measure, yet the questions have enormous political and economic implications. 

Most flux measurements apply to gases, which are the easiest forms to sample, but the data leave unanswered many questions about the deep ocean and subsurface. Subsurface studies require drilling for samples, or more exotic kinds of remote sensing such as airborne imaging of magnetic resistivity to reveal underground hydrology in Antarctica (described in Special Topic 22.1). 

Elements cycle between organisms and abiotic sources and sinks. The most accessible source of carbon and nitrogen is the atmosphere. Earth’s crust stores large amounts of key elements, but their availability to organisms is limited. Environmental flux of elements is measured through chemistry. Methods include infrared spectroscopy and mass spectrometry, gas chromatography, radioisotope incorporation, and the measurement of isotope ratios. 

Taylor Valley spurts a bizarre red stream known as Blood Falls (Fig. 1). For several years, Jill Mikucki and her students from the University of Tennessee–Knoxville have investigated Blood Falls and its mysterious microbial inhabitants. The microbes turn out to be lithotrophs, reducing iron (Shewanella frigidimarina) or oxidizing sulfur (Thiomicrospira arctica). These iron and sulfur metabolizers are also halophiles, growing in iron-rich brine. The brine concentrated over 5 million years from ancient marine water that once flowed there. The halophilic iron and process that plays a role in our planet’s carbon budget. But where does the Blood Falls brine come from? Mikucki hypothesized that a subsurface river of brine flows deep beneath the glaciers and permafrost of Taylor Valley, rising to the surface only at the edge of Taylor Glacier. To gain evidence for this model, Mikucki used an airborne sensor for electrical resistivity, a property that increases as water freezes but back and forth, the sensor mapped electrical resistivity of the geological mapping showed a dramatic drop in electrical resistivity in sediments 500 meters below the glacier surface, indicating salt-saturated groundwater. But this layer of brine rises dramatically at the glacier’s forward edge, emerging to the surface at Blood Falls. Thus, the concentrated remains of a million-yearold river flow underground, bearing with them a vast community of iron and sulfur bacteria. The existence of such a community suggests a possible mode of existence for subsurface microbes on the planet Mars. 

despite the vast quantities of carbon present in the ocean each other for a continuous cycle. 

c lilithotrophy: uced to organ biomass obic respiration: nic molecules e catabolized catabolized into er products. 

Anaerobiosis p us heat d pressure pr fossil fuels. 

Alaska’s Seward Peninsula. 

microbes that oxidize upwelling reduced minerals (such as sulfide oxidizers at thermal vents and cold seeps, discussed in Chapter 21). In 2012, researchers reported a different source of marine methane, from aerated water: the aerobic ammoniaoxidizing archaea, such as Nitrosopumilus (discussed in University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign showed that Nitrosopumilus species conduct reactions that degrade toxic phosphonates, organic compounds containing a direct carbon-phosphorus bond. The reactions release methylphosphonate, a compound that many kinds of bacteria convert to methane in order to acquire the scarce phosphate for phospholipids and nucleic acids. In addition, the sequence of the Nitrosopumilus enzyme for methylphosphonate production revealed homologs in the Global Ocean the bacterium Pelagibacter. Thus, both archaeal and bacterial methylphosphonate may be sources of methane from aerated habitats. 

The contribution of ocean ecosystems to carbon flux is even more difficult to measure. Studies of carbon and oxygen flux based on isotope ratios suggest a much greater level of biological production than earlier estimates suggested. The oceans conduct more than half of the global biological uptake of carbon from the atmosphere. Metagenomic surveys are revealing previously unrecognized communities of marine phototrophs, such as submicroscopic cyanobacteria, the prochlorophytes (Prochlorococcus species). In the deep ocean, similar studies reveal new methane-oxidizing From a political standpoint, ecosystems such as forests that act as carbon sinks by fixing carbon into stable biomass input into the atmosphere. Ecosystems that act as sources of carbon dioxide may be viewed with disfavor because they contribute to global warming. But what if CO2-generating ecosystems provide other environmental benefits? For example, wetlands are among Earth’s most productive ecosystems, supporting vast amounts of plant and animal life, methane. An example of research on wetland carbon cycles is presented in eTopic 22.1. 

Cyanobacteria and other phytoplankton cycle much phototrophs is used by aerobic heterotrophs and lithotrophs. Marine plankton, as well as terrestrial trees and mycorrhizal fungi, serve as major carbon sinks. Anaerobic environments cycle carbon through bacteria and archaea. Bacteria conduct fermentation and methane-oxidizing bacteria and archaea. In oxygenated water, bacteria may release methane via methylphosphonate. 

The fate and distribution of complex carbon compounds are largely functions of the hydrologic cycle, or water cycle, the cyclic exchange of water between atmospheric reservoir of water is supplied by the ocean. In the hydrologic cycle, water precipitates as rain, which is drawn by gravity into groundwater, rivers, lakes, and ultimately the ocean. All along this route, of course, evaporation returns water to the air. Human communities interact with the hydrologic cycle by drawing water for drinking and other purposes, and by returning wastewater. Before wastewater can be safely returned to the hydrologic cycle, organic contaminants must be removed. Key parts of that treatment are performed by microbes. 

What determines the health of an aquatic ecosystem? As discussed in Chapter 21, a major factor in the health of ecosystems is the balance between the level of oxygen and the levels of reduced organic nutrients. Organic contamination destabilizes marine, freshwater, and terrestrial ecosystems. Water passing through the ground and aquatic ecosystems carries organic carbon material from humus, sewage, and accelerates respiration by aquatic microbes. Microbial respiration then competes with respiration by fish, invertebrates, and amphibians for the limited supply of oxygen dissolved higher the concentration of organic substances, the higher aquatic animals. Thus, a routine part of monitoring the oxygen in water. The rate of decrease of dissolved oxygen environment will depend on the microbes actually present, as well as the plants and animals competing for oxygen and other resources. 

water samples are measured for dissolved oxygen over time; the rate of decrease of dissolved oxygen indicates biochemical oxygen samples is approximately proportional to the concentration of Water samples are mixed with a concentrated microbial biomass, oxygen decrease over time. 

exploded, releasing millions of barrels of oil into the Gulf over 3 months. The leaked oil killed wildlife throughout the Gulf, causing unprecedented environmental damage. Workers tried to contain the spill, but ultimately most of the oil was consumed by marine bacteria. Only bacteria and archaea possess the enzymes needed to degrade the complex organic mixture of petroleum, which includes waxy aromatic compounds such as paraffins (discussed in Chapter 21). Many of sediment. But the sudden large input of oil raised microbial components linger in the environment for decades, including toxins such as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs). Dead zones now occur along the coasts of industrial and developing countries throughout the world, including India and Australia. Dead zones deplete habitat for much marine life—for example, forcing sharks to swim out of hypoxic regions and nearer the shore. Dead zones contribute to the crash of fisheries worldwide, removing a critical food resource for human populations. To avoid such dead zones, release of industrial pollutants and fertilizers must be prevented. In addition, all the communities throughout the river drainage areas must treat their wastes to eliminate nitrogenous wastes before disposal. 

There are two common approaches to community wastewater treatment, both of which involve microbial partners: wastewater treatment plants and wetland filtration. Both approaches depend on microbes to remove organic carbon and nitrogen from water before it returns to aquatic systems and ultimately the ocean. 

Preliminary treatment consists of screens that remove solid debris, such as sticks, dead animals, and feminine hygiene items. 

eventually are recombined with the solid products of wastewater treatment to form what is known as sludge. The sludge ultimately is used for fertilizer or landfill. 

Secondary treatment consists primarily of microbial ecosystems that decompose the soluble organic content of wastewater, by aerobic and anaerobic respiration. The nutrient removal process may include biological removal of nitrogen and phosphorus. If included at this point, nitrogen is removed by nitrifying bacteria that oxidize ammonium, and phosphorus is removed by polyphosphate-accumulating bacteria. The microbes form particulate flocs of biofilm. The flocs are sedimented as sludge, also known as activated sludge, owing to their microbial activity. 

Tertiary (advanced) treatment includes fi ltration of particulates from the microbial flocs of secondary treatment, and may include chemical processes to decrease nitrogen and phosphorus. The fi nal step involves disinfection to eliminate pathogens, usually by a chemical process such as chlorination. The treated water is then returned to local freshwater sources. 

bacteria, enabling the bulk of the biomass to be removed by sedimentation. 

underground aquifers, which ultimately provide water through wells to human communities. Some agricultural operations are building artificial shows a hog farm where a series of terraced wetlands was built to drain liquefied manure. The wetlands were found to produce fewer odors and to remove organics more efficiently and at a lower cost than do traditional filtration which toxic wastes from factory chemistry enter an aquifer, at levels endangering human health. These chemicals may poison the treatment plants designed for human effluents. Large regions of land surrounding such a plant may require remediation that is expensive or impractical. And traces of pollutants such as chlorinated aromatics reach every spot on the globe; for example, dioxins are found in the tissues of Antarctic penguins. How can we remediate industrial pollutants before they poison the local countryside and spread throughout the globe? One way is to harness naturally occurring bacteria for bioremediation. The bacterial community’s reaction rate can be enhanced through selection by enrichment culture (described in Chapter 4). In the culture, organisms from the polluted site are cultivated repeatedly in the presence of added pollutant, and then tested for activity using radiolabeled substrates. An example of successful bioremediation is the case of Aberdeen Proving Ground, where a microbial mat was used to catabolize chlorinated hydrocarbons left by weapons manufacture (eTopic 22.2). 

The hydrologic cycle is the cyclic exchange of water between the atmosphere and the biosphere. Water precipitates as rain, which enters the ground and ultimately flows to the oceans. Along the way, some of the water evaporates, returning to the atmosphere. needed by fish. Oxygen minimum zones are hypoxic regions of ocean sandwiched between upper and lower oxygenated layers. Low oxygen levels are found at middle depth, where the oxygen from phototrophs meets upwelling organic nutrients. Dead zones occur where sewage and agricultural runoff expand the oxygen minimum zones. Dead zones exclude all aerobic life. treatment involves formation of flocs, microbial communities that decompose the soluble organic content. Wetlands filter water naturally. Wetland filtration helps purify groundwater entering aquifers. Industrial effluents are highly toxic and can reach all parts of the globe. Bioremediation with microbes may eliminate such toxins. 

Dependence on prokaryotes. Many steps of the nitrogen cycle require bacteria and archaea. Without bacteria and archaea, the nitrogen cycle would not exist. 

Extreme perturbation by human technology. Half the nitrogen in the biosphere now comes from anthropogenic (human-generated) sources. Thought Question 22.3 How many kinds of biomolecules can you recall that contain nitrogen? What are the usual oxidation states for nitrogen in biological molecules? 

Because of extensive fertilizer use, the nitrogen cycle today is the most perturbed of the major biogeochemical cycles. The ultimate effects of perturbation are not yet clear. Some models show that increased nitrogen fixation could will be too small to prevent global warming. Other models show that accelerated nitrogen use could limit nitrogen availability in the global biosphere, with unknown consequences. 

The numerous oxidation states available for microbial metabolism of nitrogen generate a complex cycle of conversions. One way to organize the complexity is to envision a “nitrogen triangle” whose corners include three key forms: base of the triangle, both reduced and oxidized forms of nitrogen are assimilated into biomass. 

All the intermediate reactions of nitrogen fixation are tightly coupled, so the intermediate compounds rarely become available for other uses. The final product, ammonia, exists in ionic equilibrium with ammonium ion: Nitrogen fixation is catalyzed by the enzyme nitrogenase (discussed in Chapter 15). The highly reductive reactions of nitrogenase require exclusion of oxygen, yet they also require a tremendous input of energy, usually provided by aerobic metabolism. Therefore, nitrogen-fixing bacteria generally isolate anaerobic nitrogen fixation from aerobic metabolism by one of several mechanisms, such as the heterocysts of cyanobacteria (also discussed in Chapter 15). Given the energy expense and the need to exclude oxygen, many species of bacteria, as well as all eukaryotes, lack the nitrogen fixation pathway. But all ecosystems, both marine and terrestrial, include some species of bacteria and of Klebsiella and Salmonella, as well as obligate respirers such as Pseudomonas. The rhizobia form nitrogen-fixing endosymbionts of legume plants. In oceans and in freshwater systems, cyanobacteria are the major nitrogen fixers. After fixation, all these organisms assimilate the reduced nitrogen into essential components of their cells. Within an ecosystem, nitrogen fixers ultimately make the reduced nitrogen available for assimilation by nonfixing microbes and plants, either directly through symbiotic association (such as that of rhizobia and legumes, discussed in Chapter 21) or indirectly through predation (marine cyanobacteria) and decomposition (soil bacteria). If nitrogen fixation is ubiquitous in soil and water, then why is nitrogen limiting? Nitrogen fixation is extremely energy intensive; thus, the rate of fixation usually fails to meet the potential demand of other members of the ecosystem. The one exception is legume symbiosis with rhizobia, which provide ample nitrogen for their hosts. In agriculture, symbiotic nitrogen fixation by rhizobial bacteria increases the yield of crops such as soybeans farmers apply molecules called isoflavonoids, which mimic the natural plant-derived attractants for rhizobia. 

Rhizobial nitrogen fixation enhances growth of soybeans and other followed by nitrification, generates nitrate and nitrite. Nitrate and nitrite runoff from oxidized nitrogenous fertilizers pollutes streams and groundwater. 

The pathway includes two separate energy generation and (2) nitrite to nitrate. Typically, soil contains both kinds of microbes, collaborating to complete the conversion to nitrate, while some species of Nitrospira perform the entire pathway oxidizing ammonia to nitrate. Nitrifying genera include Nitrosomonas, which oxidizes ammonia to nitrite, oxidize nitrite to nitrate. Nitrite can also serve as an electron donor for photosynthesis by Thiocapsa species. Note that the production of both nitrite and nitrate generates acid, which can acidify the soil. 

22.5 In the laboratory, which bacterial genus would likely source: Nitrosomonas or Nitrobacter? 

removed as ammonia (ammonification), and the ammonia is oxidized by lithotrophs. The major marine ammonia oxidizers include the Thaumarchaeota, such as Nitrosopumilus (discussed in Chapter 19). 

Certain conditions, however, favor off the coast of India. Circles represent 200 km tory nitrate reduction to ammo70 3 to a water sample from the zone of Nitrate reduction to ammonia is a form of anaerobic lithotrophy or hydrogenotrophy in which nitrate serves as an electron Anammox by bacteria has now been observed in all kinds of anaerobic habitats, including terrestrial soil and aquatic sediment. The reaction accounts for a majority of Bacteria reduce nitrate to ammonia mainly in anaerobic main anammox contributors are planctomycete genera fermentation, but low in reduced nitrogen, such as sewage such as Kuenenia and Scalindua (Fig. 22.16). Anammox sludge and stagnant water. Another carbon-rich habitat planctomycetes (discussed in Chapter 18) are an unusual favoring this pathway is the rumen, the digestive tract of kind of cell wall–less bacteria with a special interior memcattle, goats, and other ruminant animals (see Chapter 21). brane that segregates the toxic intermediates of the anamRuminants consume grasses whose cellulose requires digesmox reaction. Promising anammox microbes have been tion by mutualistic microbes. Ruminants also depend on identified from wastewater sludge, in the hope of using their digestive microbes to assimilate nitrate into ammonia them for more effective removal of excess nitrogen from and synthesize amino acids. Anaerobic ammonium oxidation (anammox). For many years, denitrification was considered the main way that To Summarize 2003, two research groups from Europe and Costa Rica, led by Tage Dalsgaard and Marcel Kuypers, showed that ■ Nitrogen in ecosystems is found in a wide range of oxidation states. Interconversion of most of these states conducting anaerobic ammonium oxidation by nitrite (the requires bacteria or archaea. anammox reaction, discussed in Chapter 14): In anammox, ammonium ion serves as electron donor, and nitrite serves as anaerobic electron acceptor—an unusual ■ Nitrogen fixation is conducted by symbiotic bacteria combination of two different oxidation states of the same key element, nitrogen. The reaction is a kind of anaerobic in association with specific plants. Legume-associated nitrogen fixation is critical for agriculture. 

these macronutrients, many toxic metals in the environment, such as mercury and arsenic, are either bioactivated or detoxified by microbes. 

In thermal vent ecosystems, several sulfur-based reactions drive metabolism. For example, thermal vent archaea such as Pyrodictium species use sulfur to oxidize hydrogen This type of sulfur-based hydrogenotrophy is enhanced by the vent conditions of extreme pressure and temperature (100°C)—conditions under which elemental sulfur exists in a molten state more accessible to microbes than solid Decomposition of biomass generates various organic sulfur compounds, many of which are volatile. Odors of certain microbial sulfur products contribute to the smell of rotting eggs, but others enhance the taste of cheeses (discussed in Chapter 16). 

Sulfur is reduced by sulfur-reducing bacteria in many subsurface environments, such as beneath deposits of oil respirers (sulfate-reducing bacteria that respire using sulfate as a terminal electron acceptor). The products of sulfate burned, these forms of sulfur cause severe pollution. Before turning to sulfur-oxidizing microbes for experimental use in “desulfuration,” the removal of sulfur from coal. One habitat that exhibits the entire range of sulfur oxidation states is a sewer pipe. In a concrete sewer pipe, to pH 2. In the concrete surface, sulfuric acid converts calcium hydroxide to soluble calcium sulfate. Over several years, this corrosion can eat away half the thickness of a sewer pipe. 

22.6 Compare and contrast the cycling of nitrogen and sulfur. How are the cycles similar? How are they different? 

Phosphorus is a fundamental element of nucleic acids, phospholipids, and phosphorylated proteins. Unlike sulfur and nitrogen, which are found in several different oxidation states, phosphorus is cycled mainly in the fully oxidized state of phosphate (Fig. 22.19). The absence of fully reduced phosphorus in ecosystems may be due to the fact spontaneous combustion in the presence of oxygen. Nevertheless, some anaerobic decomposers use phosphate as a terminal electron acceptor, reducing it to phosphine. In marshes and graveyards, where extensive decomposition occurs, phosphine emanates from the ground, where it ignites with a green glow. Microbial respiration of phosphate might be the cause of such “ghostly” apparitions. 

Soluble phosphate is taken up by bacteria and plants, and then passes on to consumers. 

oxygen carrier molecules such as hemoglobin. Other common micronutrients required for enzymes and cofactors are zinc, copper, and selenium. 

major component of Earth’s crust, and substantial quantities are present Insoluble inorganic in most soil and aquatic sediment. Yet phosphate in sediments the availability of iron to organisms is limited by its extremely low soluIndustrial bial biochemistry, the oxidized form, ferric iron (Fe3+), interconverts with the reduced form, ferrous iron (Fe2+). In the presence of oxygen, iron metal Insoluble organic (Fe0) “rusts” and is therefore available Soluble organic to organisms mainly as Fe3+. Ferric iron is especially insoluble at high pH, precipitating with hydroxide ions as ferric hydroxide [Fe(OH)3] or with phosthe form of inorganic or organic phosphate. Most phosphate precipitates as insoluble salts in sediment. The small amount of soluble phosphate is taken up by plants and bacteria, which phate ions as ferric phosphate (FePO4) may then be taken up by consumers. Decomposers return phosphate to the environment. oxidized by bacteria such as Gallionella, Leptothrix, and Mariprofundus. bond. These organic phosphonates, however, are cleaved pyrite (FeS2) is exposed to air, by marine archaea, the ammonia oxidizers such as Nitrospontaneous oxidation releases sulfuric acid: sopumilus. The archaea release methylphosphonate, which many bacteria can cleave to obtain phosphate. Phosphate scavenging from methylphosphonate releases methane, thus interacting with the carbon cycle. In agriculture, phosphate is often added as a fertilizer. Phosphate fertilizer is obtained by treating calcium phosphate rock with sulfuric acid, producing calcium sulfate (gypsum) and phosphoric acid. Excess phosphate from fertilizer or industry may drain into streams and lakes where phosphorus is the limiting element. The sudden influx of phosphate causes an algal bloom. The overgrowth of algae leads to overgrowth of heterotrophs, depletion of oxygen, and destruction of the food chain. 

Lithotrophs such as Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans can catalyze iron oxidation to yield energy, thus increasing the rate of production of sulfuric acid. Rapid sulfuric acid production leads to acid mine drainage. Where acid mine drainage enters an aquatic system, the reduced iron is oxidized by lithotrophs to ferric hydroxide, forming an Iron mine drainage causes severe pollution of streams (Fig. 22.21). In anoxic habitats, such as benthic sediment, Fe3+ is largely reduced to Fe2+ by anaerobic respiration. Reduction leads to loss of the reddish color, generating gray-colored sediment, as in wetland soil (discussed in Chapter 21). The reduction of Fe3+ to Fe2+ is one of the enriching contributions of anaerobic sediment to freshwater wetlands and coastal estuaries, because reduced iron is more available to plants and bacteria. Oxidized iron, in aerobic soils, can be taken up only by bacteria. Bacteria synthesize special iron uptake systems, including molecules called siderophores that bind ferric ion outside and then are taken up by the cell (see Section 4.2). Bacterial iron then becomes available to consumers in the ecosystem. Iron cycling often connects with the sulfur cycle in ways that can prove unfortunate for human engineering. 

(oxidized iron, Fe3+) precipitates with hydroxide or phosphate. Only bacteria can assimilate Fe3+. In anoxic sediment, bacterial respiration reduces Fe3+ to Fe2+, a (orange precipitate). 

The FeS flakes away, exposing more iron to react with water, resulting in cyclic corrosion. 

Mine drainage enters a stream. Lithotrophic oxidation of reduced iron yields the orange material polluting this stream in Preston County, West Virginia. 

of a limiting nutrient enter an ecosystem, the limited populations rapidly increase. The rise of algal populations following iron addition was demonstrated in an “iron fertilization” experiment conducted in 2007 by Phillip Boyd and colleagues at the University of Otago, New Zealand. Several thousand kilograms of ferrous sulfate (FeSO 4) was released in the Southern Ocean, near Antarctica. Within a week after the iron release, there was a bloom of phytoplankton. The dominant phytoplankton in the bloom were diatoms of the species Fragilariopsis kerguelensis. The diatom bloom was so large that it was detected by a The dramatic effects of iron fertilization led some researchers to propose that increasing iron throughout from the atmosphere. If a sufficiently large proportion of the diatoms were to escape predation and fall to the ocean floor, they would effectively remove their carbon from circulation. An alternative outcome, however, would likely be eutrophication, causing an ecological collapse comparable to a dead zone. While iron fertilization is unlikely to meet our need offset the perturbation of Earth’s carbon cycle by human technology. For example, bacteria and algae may be engineered to provide biofuels, such as hydrogen gas, whose use Our view of Earth’s biosphere increasingly is moving toward environmental management—the concept that wilderness as such no longer exists, but only a biosphere to be managed for better or worse. Microbes will have many roles as partners in environmental management. 

Besides iron, numerous trace metals interact with bacterial species as either electron donors or acceptors (Table 22.4). Bacterial conversion of metals can either produce toxic species or remove toxic metals from ecosystems. For example, chromium-6 [Cr(VI)] is an extremely toxic pollutant that can be reduced by soil bacteria to the much less toxic Cr(III). Microbial metal cycling is discussed further in eTopic 22.3. How can bioremediation remove toxic minerals from groundwater? An example is the bioremediation of arsenic, a critical water contaminant in densely populated countries such as India, Bangladesh, and Cambodia. Arsenic causes cancers and crippling skin disorders. Arsenic and other metals can be removed from groundwater via bioremediation. Bhaskar Sengupta and colleagues at Queen’s University, Belfast, developed a bioreactor technology for subterranean advantage of the fact that different oxidation states of arsenic differ in their solubility. For the bioreactor, groundwater is cycled through an oxygen pump and returned to the source. Naturally occurring lithotrophic bacteria oxidize arsenite (AsO33–, water-soluble) to arsenate (AsO43–, insoluble). Bacteria also oxidize iron and manganese to their less soluble forms, as discussed in Chapter 14. The negatively and positively charged ions precipitate together, effectively removed from the water. 

Complex Ecosystems that a single nutrient, such as phosphorus or iron, is limiting for a given ecosystem. The requirement for more than one limiting factor is known as resource colimitation. In highly oligotrophic marine water, populations often depend on multiple limiting factors. For example, in the Baltic Sea, both nitrogen and phosphorus are present in such low concentrations that they must be added together in order to stimulate a phytoplankton bloom. In another example, the North Atlantic is limited for both phosphorus nitrogen-fixing cyanobacteria. 

Another concern for environmental management is that of toxic metals and metalloids such as mercury and arsenic. 

Oxidized and reduced forms of sulfur are cycled in ecosystems. Sulfate and sulfite serve as electron acceptors for respiration. Hydrogen sulfide serves as an electron donor. Sulfur oxidation to sulfuric acid causes acid mine drainage and pipe erosion. 

Removal of poisonous AsO33– via use as terminal e– acceptor, converting to insoluble AsO43–. 

Methylarsines. Poisonous; inhalation of moldy wallpaper with arsenic pigment. 

CrO42– [Cr(VI)] is mutagenic and carcinogenic; as e– acceptor, reduced to Cr3+ [Cr(III)], less toxic. 

(CH3)Hg+ is a severe neurotoxin; accumulates at higher trophic levels, such as fish. 

Se is a trace element; small amounts in food help remove mercury. Larger amounts are toxic. 

Phosphorus cycles primarily in the fully oxidized form (phosphate). Phosphate limits growth of phototrophic bacteria and algae in some aquatic and marine Iron cycles in oxidized and reduced forms. Oxidized iron (Fe3+) serves as a terminal electron acceptor in anaerobic soil and water. Reduced iron (Fe2+) from rock is oxidized through weathering or mining. Bacterial lithotrophy accelerates iron oxidation, leading to Metal toxins can be metabolized by bacteria. Bacterial metabolism may either increase or decrease toxicity. Metabolic conversion to an insoluble form, such as arsenite to arsenate, offers an effective means of Marine habitats show resource colimitation. Multiple resources may be limiting for the phytoplankton community or for different populations. 

with strong covalent bonds. The same fundamental molecules that appear in early-Earth simulation experiments, such as adenine and glycine, also appear in meteorites. Thus, we suspect that the fundamental building blocks for biochemistry are universal. On the other hand, if life could indeed be founded on some other basis, how would we recognize it? If life is found on other planets, it will almost certainly include microbes. In fact, a case can be made that the majority of biospheres in our galaxy would consist entirely of microbial life, since microbes inhabit a wider range of conditions than do multicellular plants and animals. Even on Earth itself, the largest bulk of our biosphere— including deep sediments and rock strata—consists of microbial ecosystems. 

Geology. Of all the solar planets, Mars seems the most similar to Earth in its topography; indeed, some areas of Mars remarkably resemble desertscapes on Earth. Martian rock contains the fundamental elements needed for life on Earth. 

Day and year length. Mars has a day length similar to that of Earth, and a year only twice as long as ours. 

Earth, but its temperature rises above freezing at the would exclude stable macromolecules. 

Atmosphere. Overall, Mars has an atmospheric pressure of 6 millibars (mbar), barely a hundredth that of Earth (1,013 mbar), and it lacks molecular oxygen. Thus, aerobes could not grow. But the Martian atmosphere does content on Earth, so there would be plenty for photoautotrophic production of biomass. 

■ Evidence of past water on Mars. Sedimentary deposits in the Mars Jezero crater, mapped by the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter in 2007. The flow patterns resemble a river delta, best explained by a model involving the flow of liquid water. Green indicates claylike mineral deposits. 

Earth, during a time of heavy bombardment from space and outgassing of nitrogen and carbon dioxide. Unfortunately, however, life failed to generate sufficient atmosphere for a greenhouse effect to sustain temperate conditions. No oxygenic organisms produced molecular oxygen and an ozone layer. 

Life developed and still exists underground. In the absence of an ozone layer, the Martian surface is sterilized by cosmic radiation. Nevertheless, microbes may yet exist deep underground, similar to the endolithic prokaryotes on Earth, or the subsurface brine communities of Antarctica (see Special Topic 22.1). Subsurface microbes are protected from cosmic radiation. 

Microfossils. The mineralization of microbial cells leads to the formation of structures that can be visualized under a microscope. The cell fossils must be sufficiently distinct to establish that no abiotic process could have formed them. 

Mineral deposits. Certain mineral formations are observed to be caused only by microbial activity. For are almost always the result of microbial oxidation of reduced manganese. Reduced manganese ions are very stable, and their abiotic oxidation rate is extremely slow. 

Metabolic activity. Samples of soil can be incubated tested for metabolic conversion or incorporation into biomass. It must be established that the conversion could not have occurred abiotically and that no organisms from Earth were present. 

Various kinds of evidence for life on Mars have been reported, such as possible microfossils within a Martian meteorite that landed in Antarctica. Metabolic activity was 1975. As of this writing, however, no evidence has proved conclusive for active or past living microorganisms on Mars. 

If no life exists—or if it exists only in the form of microbes deep underground—should we consider human intervention, or terraforming, to make Mars habitable for life from Earth? Scenarios for terraforming, long explored in science fiction, are now receiving serious thought among space scientists. Terraforming Mars would require increasing the temperature and air pressure. The temperature of the atmosphere might be increased by release of greenhouse gases. In addition, sufficient carbon dioxide and nitrogen gases must be made available from the Mars surface rock. In principle, microbes from Earth could be seeded to grow and generate an atmosphere containing nitrogen, oxygen, The dilemmas and consequences of terraforming are depicted in the novel Red Mars (1993), by Kim Stanley Robinson. In favor of terraforming, it is argued that Mars offers enormous natural resources of potential benefit for humanity, especially as terrestrial resources are used up. Human settlements on Mars would be a major step forward for space exploration. On the other hand, it is argued that the planet Mars is a natural monument, a place with its own right to exist as such. It should be allowed to remain in its natural state for future generations to appreciate. As a practical matter, terraforming remains unfeasible for the near future. For example, the amount of chlorofluorocarbons required to raise Martian temperature is calculated to be 100 times greater than our global capacity to produce such substances. 

Farther out in the solar system, surprising candidates for microbial life are the moons of Jupiter. In 2000, the Galileo space probe passed several of Jupiter’s moons, including Ganymede, Callisto, and Europa (Fig. 22.25). While their distance from the Sun results in extreme cold, these bodies receive extra heat from friction generated by tidal forces from the giant planet Jupiter. In the case of Europa, the tidal forces have been calculated to provide enough heat to liquefy water without boiling it off. Furthermore, measurement of Europa’s magnetic field suggests that its composition includes a dense iron core surrounded by 15% water. 

Could Mars Be Terraformed to Support Earth Life? 

Most of the water must be locked in ice, but tidal heating could melt enough water for an underlying ocean of brine. On Earth, similar brine lakes beneath the ice of Antarctica If such oceans do exist, how could they support life without photosynthesis? Photosynthesis is impossible at Jupiter’s distance from the Sun. However, an alternative source of chemical energy might be the influx of charged particles accelerated in Jupiter’s magnetic field. Charged particles entering Europa’s ice can react with water to form hydrogen molecular oxygen. Oxygen reaching the brine layer below could combine with electron donors from crustal vents and occur on Earth in rock strata several kilometers below the surface, where it may support lithotrophs. On Europa, the hydrogen could then combine with oxygen gas or other oxidants to power life. These schemes are highly speculative— to take a closer look at Europa and its sister moons. 

Does Life Exist on Planets of Distant Stars? 

The past decade of astronomy has seen an extraordinary growth in our knowledge of solar systems beyond our own. Now that we know that so many other stars possess planets, we can only wonder whether they also possess biospheres of life-forms we would recognize. In recent years, astronomers have found several hundred “extrasolar” planets orbiting distant stars, including some the size of Earth. Could we ever hope to detect signs of life on in Baltimore, and collaborating institutions. They show that light scattered by marine phytoplankton exhibits a property called “circular polarization.” Circular polarization arises from substances that are homochiral—that is, present in only one of two mirror forms, such as the and metabolites. If someday we have telescopes capable of detecting light from distant planets, circular polarization might provide evidence of life. shows an infrared photograph through the Spitzer Space Telescope of nebula Recall from Chapter 17 that as stars form, they take up dust of supernovas that includes all the surrounded by disks coalescing into planets. The planetary disks contain icy particles full of organic molecules such as methanol, glycine, and ethylene glycol, a reduced form of sugar. Could there be biospheres in the making? 

Jupiter’s moon Europa is proposed as another possible site for life. Europa is bathed in a sea of brine similar to terrestrial habitats for halophiles. 

Astrobiology is the study of life in the universe, including possible habitats outside Earth. The search for extraterrestrial life is based on methods similar to those used to seek early life on Earth. Evidence includes chemical and physical biosignatures, isotope ratios, microfossils, and metabolic activity. Mars is the planet whose geology most closely resembles that of Earth. Geological features strongly support the past existence of flowing water, a prerequisite for microbial life. 

Our observations of distant molecules, as well as our analysis of meteorites (discussed in Chapter 17), suggest that the biomolecules of Earth fit into a universal pattern of interstellar chemistry. Whether life exists elsewhere or we are alone, we must remember that our Earth is the only place we know of at this time that can support humans and the forms of life we require for our own survival. The survival of our entire biosphere depends on our microbial partners cycling key elements and acquiring energy to drive the food web. For the first time in history, human technology now rivals the ability of microbes to alter fundamental cycles of biogeochemistry. But to manage and moderate our alterations—for our own survival and that of the biosphere—our fate still depends on the microbes. 

Inflammasomes. An inflammasome is a multimeric disk that forms in the eukaryotic cytoplasm to initiate inflammation. Hao Wu studies inflammasome assembly using cryo-EM. She the process of inflammation. Source: Zhang et al. 2015. Science 350:404–409. 

he human body teems with microbes (the microbiome) vital to our existence and is under constant attack from pathogens. How do we survive? Obstacles such as skin and stomach acid, which are nonspecific defenses, will repel most microorganisms. But for microbes able to breach these physical barriers, there await innate and adaptive immune defenses. Chapter 23 explores the microbiome and describes the series of barriers and elaborate innate immune defenses that keep microbes at bay. 

The field presumed that inflammasome assembly resembles that of the multisubunit apoptosome, a molecular machine that initiates programmed cell death in damaged cells. Every subunit of an apoptosome must bind to a ligand before assembly. Here we, as well as Jijie Chai’s group, needs to bind ligand. The conformationally activated sensor need to bind microbial ligands. Would interfering with the inflammasome have an effect on infection or cancer? 

An acute infection would likely worsen if we inhibited inflammasome assembly, because reduced inflammation means the microbe could grow more. Fortunately, other inflammasomeindependent mechanisms can still initiate inflammation. In the context of long-term, chronic inflammation, inhibiting inflammasome assembly may have hugely beneficial effects, such as in inflammatory diseases and autoimmunity. In contrast, activating inflammasomes could, in some cases, enhance antitumor immunity, as suggested by the protective role of caspase-1 protease in a model of colorectal cancer. 

Two vacationing tourists, unknown to each other, were swimming in the Gulf of Mexico along the Alabama coast. One, a 12-year-old girl, had a cut on her leg caused by the sharp edge of a scooter. The other, a man 66 years of age, had recently cut his arm on a nail protruding from a wooden handrail. Within moments of entering the water, several small Gram-negative microbes invaded both of their bodies through those cuts. Four days later, the young girl was heading back to Birmingham, sitting in the back of the family car, oblivious to the battle recently waged in her bloodstream. At the same time, the man lay dead of an aggressive blood infection. Both swimmers were attacked by the same pathogen, Vibrio vulnificus. Why did one live and the other die? As is the case for most healthy people, a variety of nonspecific, innate immune factors present in the girl’s body killed the invading pathogen before it could multiply. The man, on the other hand, was an alcoholic with liver disease. He was deficient in several of those defense mechanisms—mechanisms that made the difference between life and death. What are these powerful innate factors? How can they be nonspecific, able to attack many different microbes without ever previously encountering any of them? And why do they kill the invaders and not our own cells? The inflammasome described in the Current Research Highlight is one of those important innate factors. Before exploring questions of immunity and self-defense, we must understand that each of us is a self-contained ecosystem, home to numerous microbes inhabiting all sorts of body niches. The day-to-day presence of these microbial guests both shapes and sharpens our immune system, but it is a benefit that comes with considerable risk. 

From the moment of our birth to the time of our death, we are constantly populated by microbes. These include bacteria, archaea, fungi, viruses, and even some protozoa. The consortium of colonizing microbes has been dubbed the human microbiota or microbiome. 

Usage of the terms “microbiota” and “microbiome” has blurred. “Microbiota” originally referred to actual microbes inhabiting a body site, whereas “microbiome” referred to the gene pool within those microbes. 

To illustrate the significance of the microbiome, consider that our bodies carry about 10 times as many bacterial cells as that includes non-nucleated red blood cells places the bacterial/human cell ratio closer to between 1:1 and 2:1.) Microbes colonize wherever our body meets the external environment (for example, skin, mouth, gastrointestinal tract, and parts of the genitourinary tract). Most internal organs, blood, and cerebrospinal fluid are sterile. The presence of any microbes at these sites is considered an infection. The majority of species that make up our microbiota are unknown and have never been grown in the laboratory. Consequently, metagenomic strategies (described in Chapters 7 and 21) are being government announced the National Microbiome Initiative to advance understanding of how microbiomes contribute to our health and the environment. By and large, the body’s barriers of defense work well to prevent incursions by microbiota or, in the event of an incursion, to kill the invader. Unfortunately, these defenses break down when an immune system is compromised by medical treatments (such as anticancer drugs) or by diseases (for instance, a deficiency in complement factors, discussed in Section 23.6). Such a person is described as a compromised host and can be repeatedly infected by certain normal biota. Organisms causing disease in this situation are called opportunistic pathogens. We now understand that bacteria colonizing our bodies may be as important collectively as a kidney or liver. For instance, Gary Siuzdak and his colleagues at the Scripps Research Institute showed that our body cells are continually bathed in metabolites produced by gut microbes. It is now thought that these metabolites, which circulate in our blood, can have positive as well as negative effects on human health and development. 

Gollwitzer. 2014. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 14: 827. 

in levels of Bacteroidetes when comparing nasal and intestinal microbiomes, or of Candida in the microbiomes of the mouth and vagina. Composition within an individual’s microbiome remains relatively constant over time but can significantly fluctuate with diet, age, geography, or drugs. The hygiene hypothesis. For millennia, human microbiota were shaped by an intimate contact with natural environments composed of animals, caves, dirt, poop, and bugs. This natural outdoor world harbored a vast array of microbial taxa that could compete to populate our skin and mucosal surfaces. Today we are an indoor species spending almost all of our time inside closed buildings, segregated from nature—an arguably less diverse microbial environment. Add to that our use of soaps, antibiotics, and disinfectants and you can appreciate how severely we have restricted our access to microbes. As a result, our microbiota appear less diverse than those of our long-ago ancestors. Studies that have compared the modern-day human microbiome with those of closely related wild African apes and of uncontacted Amerindians (see Chapter 27) bear this out. Although improved hygiene limits exposure to pathogens, recent studies suggest that narrowing the diversity of our microbiome can contribute to inflammatory diseases such as asthma, inflammatory bowel disease, colorectal cancer, and obesity. Several intriguing studies find that, even today, children who grow up on dairy farms are less likely to develop allergies and asthma. The reason is that our microbiome helps train our immune system (discussed later and in Chapter 24). Exposure to more microbes and other environmental antigens, especially early in life, may produce a more tolerant, well-controlled immune system less prone to inflammatory and autoimmune diseases (disorders in which the immune system reacts against the self). The following sections describe the microbiota of various body sites and discuss the benefits and risks of a microbiome. 

readily degrades the triglycerides in this oil, turning them into free fatty acids that then promote inf lammation of the gland. One consequence of the inf lammatory response is the formation of a blackhead, a plug of f luid and keratin that forms in the gland duct. The result is the typical skin eruptions of acne. Because of its microbial basis, treatments for acne include tetracycline (oral) or clindamycin (topically applied) to kill the bacteria. 

The eye is exposed to the outside environment, so is it heavily colonized? Actually, it’s not, because colonization is inhibited by the presence of antimicrobial factors, such as lysozyme, in the tears that continually rinse the eye surface (conjunctiva). Despite this protection, a few transient commensal bacteria can be found on the conjunctiva. Skin microbiota such as Staphylococcus epidermidis and diphtheroids (Gram-positive rods that look like clubs), as well as some Gram-negative rods, such as Escherichia coli, Klebsiella, and Proteus, manage, at least temporarily, to make the eye their home without causing damage. (The traits of these genera were discussed in Chapter 18.) Occasionally, bacteria such as Streptococcus pneumoniae and Haemophilus influenzae, as well as some viruses, can cause an ocular disease known as pinkeye, in which the eye becomes reddened with a watery discharge. 

of periodontal disease include red, swollen gums; bleeding gums; gum shrinkage; and teeth drifting apart. 

microbiota. Estimates in the lower respiratory tract are 10–100 bacteria per 1,000 human cells, the most prominent members being from the phyla Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes. Many organisms entering the nasopharynx become trapped in the nose by cilia that beat toward the pharynx. The microbes are propelled toward the acidic stomach and death. Microorganisms that slip into the trachea are trapped by mucus produced by ciliated epithelial cells lining airways. Cilia usher the microbes up and away from the lungs. The ciliated mucous lining of the trachea, bronchi, and bronchioles makes up the mucociliary escalator (Fig. 23.5). The mucocilFIGURE 23.4 ■ Gross pathology of subacute bacterial endocarditis iary escalator constantly sweeps foreign particles up and out of the lungs. This action is extremely important for preventing respiratory infections. to show mitral valve fibrin vegetations due to infection. These growths are not When the mucociliary escalator fails, as when it present in a normal heart. is covered with tar from years of heavy smoking, or when it is overwhelmed by the inhalation of too many infectious microbes, infections such as the common cold The oral microbiota are normally harmless, but they can (for example, rhinovirus) or pneumonia (for example, Strepcause disease. Dental procedures, for instance, will often tococcus pneumoniae) can result. cause these organisms to enter the bloodstream, producing what is called bacteremia (infection of the bloodstream). Normal immune mechanisms typically clear these transient Genitourinary Tract bacteremias quite easily; but in patients who have a mitral Much of the genitourinary tract is normally free from valve prolapse (heart murmur), microbes can become microbes. These areas include the kidneys (which remove trapped in the defective valve and form bacterial vegetawaste products from the blood) and the ureters (which tions. Vegetations are biofilms that contain a large number remove urine from the kidneys). The urinary bladder, of bacterial cells encased within glycocalyx (a polysaccharide which holds urine until it is excreted, was thought to or peptide polymer secreted by the organism) and fibrin be sterile but is now known to harbor microbes, mainly (produced by clotting blood). Because the onset of disease anaerobes. The distal urethra, however—because of its is often insidious (slow), it is called subacute bacterial endocarditis (Fig. 23.4). Once ensconced within a vegetation, the microbes are extremely difficult to kill with antibiotics. Immunocompetent individuals are at very low risk of valve infection. Immunocompromised patients, however, are at much higher risk and receive prophylactic treatment with antibiotics before any dental procedure. 

23.1 How can an anaerobic microorganism grow on skin or in the mouth, both of which are exposed to air? 

Mucociliary escalator. Movement of these hairlike cilia ushers particles up and out of the trachea and lungs proximity to the outside world—normally contains Staphylococcus epidermidis, Enterococcus species, and some members of Enterobacteriaceae. Some of these organisms can cause bladder disease (known as urinary tract infection, or via catheterization). The large surface area and associated secretions of the female genital tract make it a rich environment for microbes, including bacteria and yeasts. Firmicutes are the largest bacterial contributor to the vaginal microbiome; however, composition changes with the menstrual cycle, owing to changing nutrients and pH. The mildly acidic nature of vaginal secretions (approximately pH 4.5) discourages the growth of many bacteria. As a result, the acid-tolerant Lactobacillus crispatus is among the most populous vaginal species. Healthy women appear to fall into two broad categories: 70% have lactobacillus as the primary member of their vaginal microbiota, while 30% have mixed species with few lactobacilli. Women in the latter group appear to be more susceptible to sexually transmitted infections. The balance between different species that comprise vaginal microbiota is crucial to preventing disease. Antibiotic therapy to treat an infection anywhere in the body can also affect the vaginal microbiota. The resulting imbalance can allow overgrowth of Candida albicans, otherwise susceptible to antibiotics designed to kill bacteria. 

Peptic ulcers can result. 

Estimates are between 10 and 1,000 organisms per gram. organism has a remarkable ability to resist acidic pH. (It survives at pH 1, using the enzyme urease to generate ammonia, strong acid pH conditions, but it can grow in the mucous lining of the stomach, where the pH is closer to 5 or 6 (Fig. 23.6). estimates that Helicobacter colonizes the stomachs of half the world’s population. Most of the time, Helicobacter does not cause any apparent problem, but on occasion, the organism can produce gastric ulcers and even cancer. On the plus side, associated with a reduced risk for allergic disease. 

the intestinal villi (blue) of the mouse intestine, in part because of these lectins. The separation between microbiome and host mucosal cells minimizes microbiome activation of an immune response that could severely damage the intestinal lining. Two of the antimicrobial lectins are RegIIIα and RegIIIγ. Hooper’s group discovered that map) forms a membrane-penetrating pore in Gram-positive microbes. RegIIIα and -γ, therefore, promote peaceful coexistence between host and microbiome. Other immune mechanisms that control microbiota in the intestinal mucosa, such as secretory IgA antibodies, are described in Chapter 24. 

Normal microbiota can cause disease if organisms gain access to the circulation or deeper tissues. Opportunistic pathogens infect only compromised The intestine is populated by 1011–1013 microbes per gram of feces. Principal phyla are Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, Proteobacteria, and Actinobacteria. The ratio of anaerobes to facultative bacteria is 1,000:1. The gut microbiome includes bacteria, archaea, fungi, and viruses. 

23.2 Why do many Gram-positive microbes that grow on the skin, such as Staphylococcus epidermidis, grow poorly or not at all in the gut? 

host gene expression and can influence host immune system function. Acetate, for instance, tends to promote inflammation, whereas butyrate tends to inhibit inflammation. We, for our part, maintain our gut microbiome by secreting complex carbohydrates that members of the microbiome can use, and chemical factors, such as hormones, that can alter microbiome gene expression. 

An important gut microbe that promotes host tissue rejuvenation is Akkermansia muciniphila, a Gram-negative, anaerobic bacterium (Verrucomicrobia phylum) that degrades mucin, the glycosylated protein layer that covers gut epithelium. rejuvenation of the protective mucin layer. The short-chain fatty acids produced by this organism feed epithelial metabolism and modulate inflammatory responses of immune cells. to taking many of the complex carbohydrates we eat and breaking them down into products that can be absorbed by the body or used by other members of the microbiome. We humans actually absorb 15%–20% of our daily caloric intake Other benefits our microbiota provide include limiting infections by competing with pathogens for food sources and attachment receptors on host cells. Colonizing bacteria can also make antimicrobial compounds that limit growth coli produces bacteriocin (a secreted protein toxin), which by Bacteroides fragilis stimulates production of an antiinflammatory cytokine that will prevent gastrointestinal colitis caused by Helicobacter hepaticus. Cytokines are small, secreted host proteins that bind to cells of the immune system and regulate their function. (Cytokines are discussed in Sections 23.5 and 24.3.) The intestinal microbe Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, a member of the order Clostridiales (Firmicutes phylum), elicits powerful anti-inflammatory effects on human immune cells through secreted bacterial factors and interactions with Toll-like receptors (see Section 23.5). For example, it inhibits induction of the inflammatory cytokine has been linked to painful inflammatory intestinal diseases such as Crohn’s disease. 

Another important group of intestinal anaerobes consists of the segmented filamentous bacilli (SFBs) in mice and probably humans (see Special Topic 18.1). These spore formers are important for developing a healthy immune system. We will discuss the connections between gut microbiota and the immune system more fully in Chapter 24. The antiinflammatory effects of these and other microbes protect the intestinal mucosa from an overzealous immune system. 

result of bowel surgery. Organisms escaped from the intestine and initiated infection in the abdominal wall. 

Clostridioides difficile (formerly Clostridium difficile). The or- ganism is often a part of the normal intestinal microbiota, but antibiotic form on the intestinal wall. The small plaques coalesce to form a large pseudomembrane that can slough off into the intestinal contents. 

health include competitive bacterial interactions (normal biota prevent growth of pathogenic bacteria), production of antimicrobial compounds, and immunomodulation (an ability to change the activity of cells of the immune system). Claire Fraser and colleagues at the University of Maryland School of Medicine recently showed that ingestion of does not alter microbiome composition but will orchestrate broad transcriptional changes in other members of the microbiome—functions that could promote antiinflammatory pathways in the resident microbes. Probiotics are now being tested for treating several gastrointestinal disorders, including inflammatory bowel disease An extreme, but clinically proven, form of delivering probiotic microbes to the intestine is the so-called fecal transplant (fecal bacteriotherapy). In its original forms fecal transplant transferred the intestinal microbiome of a healthy person to a relative with a severe intestinal disease such as pseudomembranous enterocolitis. Restoring a “normal” microbiome in this procedure uses a “super donor” rather than relatives and may someday be a personalized bacterial cocktail delivered in pill form. Probiotics in the form of vaginal suppositories are also used to treat patients prone to vaginal infections. 

left) is a recipient of the 2015 Keio Medical Science Prize. He stands with some of the researchers who work in his lab at Washington University School of Medicine (from the left: Tarek Salih, Lihui Feng, Mark Charbonneau, Sid Venkatesh, and Laura Blanton). 

an increased capacity to absorb energy compared to their lean counterparts. The ratios of major bacterial phyla in the colon also seem to differ between obese and lean individuals. For instance, the gut microbiomes of obese children have Firmicutes-to-Bacteroidetes phylum ratios that are higher than those of lean children. Studies looking at this ratio among adults are less clear. Some find that obese adults have higher Firmicutes-to-Bacteroidetes ratios compared to lean adults. Other studies indicate the opposite, and some show no difference. The real key to microbiome effects on obesity may be the difference in species makeup and metabolic output rather than broad phylum differences. 

microbiomes. The scientists collected fecal contents from of Mucor species increased when obese subjects lost weight, sets of monozygotic human twins, one of whom was obese much as was found for Bacteroidetes. and the other lean, and then orally transplanted the fecal preps into germ-free mice (Fig. 23.13). Mice receiving fecal How might the microbiome influence obesity? Microbiota microbiota from the lean human co-twin remained lean, can influence obesity in two major ways. One is the haras measured by change in fat mass (“Ln” in Fig. 23.13). vesting of energy from ingested foods; the other is the trigHowever, mice receiving fecal microbiota from the obese gering of intestinal inflammation. co-twin gained adiposity over a mere 10-day period (“Ob” As noted in Chapter 21, the metabolic dexterity of intesin Fig. 23.13). Even more remarkable, when Ob and Ln tinal microbes allows them to digest many foods that we co-twin fecal-transplanted mice were cohoused (“ch”) in a cannot. In the process, these microbes produce short-chain single cage, the Obch mice gained less weight than the confatty acids (SCFAs) that our cells use in a variety of ways. trol Ob mice. Metagenomic analysis of fecal contents from The major SCFAs are butyrate, propionate, and acetate. the mice revealed that the microbiome of Obch mice came Numerous investigations suggest that the amounts and to resemble that of the Ln mice. Essentially, the microratios of these SCFAs influence obesity (Fig. 23.14). biota of the Lnch mouse transferred to the Obch mouse and was maintained. Transfer took place because mice are naturally coprophagous (eat feces). Even though Lnch mice also consumed Obch mouse feces, Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron the Lnch fecal microbiome did not Alter transcriptome change. The most successful Lnch More acetate invaders of the Ob microbiota Methanobrevibacter (archaeon) were Bacteroides species. Another aspect of this study asked lumen High-fat diet what would happen to germ-free mice promotes transport if they were cohoused with Ob and Ln fecal-transplanted mice. Up to 5 days after cohousing, the microbiome acquired by GFch mice resembled Intestinal that of noncohoused Ob mice, but cells surprisingly, after 5 days the profile dramatically shifted to that of their Lnch cage mates. GFch mice then lost Gut hormone weight (see Fig. 23.13). This result receptor on host cells) confirmed that the Ln-derived microbial taxa had greater fitness over the cytokines made Ob-derived taxa. From these studies, Gordon concluded that a higher FirCholesterol and Limit Hunger lipid synthesis micutes-to-Bacteroidetes ratio favors Decrease fat obesity, while the opposite favors leanness. His studies also found that as fat people lose weight, the proportion of Bacteroidetes to Firmicutes in Lipid synthesis the gut microbiome increases. and storage Bacteria may not be the only microbial link to obesity. The fungal mycobiome was also found to differ between obese and thin human subgut microbiome ferment ingested complex carbohydrates and produce short-chain fatty acids were the species most represented Gram-negative bacteria can be transported across the mucosal barrier and interact with pattern in non-obese subjects compared to rows and terms in red promote weight gain. 

The small intestine is connected to the stomach pouch. 

Generally, acetate is thought to promote obesity. Acetate is absorbed well by intestinal epithelial cells, travels to the liver where it is used for lipid synthesis, and is distributed throughout the body to be used as a substrate for cholesterol synthesis (particularly in adipose tissues). Butyrate, however, seems to prevent obesity. It is used primarily by intestinal epithelial cells for energy and stimulates production of gut hormones that limit hunger. Butyrate also reduces the synthesis of the pro-inflammatory cytokine interferongamma (IFN-gamma), described in Sections 23.5 and 24.3. Propionate, for its part, has effects that can either with obesity. But propionate is also involved in gluconeogenesis, which diverts fatty acids away from cholesterol synthesis and toward glucose synthesis. It also stimulates the production of gut hormones that limit hunger, both of which are anti-obesity effects. So, is there a correlation Toronto found that a cohort of obese or overweight patients generally had higher levels of SCFAs (propionate, butyrate, and acetate) than did healthy lean patients on similar Bacteroidetes ratios. The more Firmicutes there were, the more SCFAs were produced. However, obese and lean subjects actually had similar Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratios, suggesting that the most important factor is which species of Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes are present (and what they are doing), rather than the overall phylum ratios. 

blood and tissue levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines and markers of inflammation such as C-reactive protein (discussed in Section 23.6). The source of inflammation is also called endotoxin, produced by Gram-negative members oxygen species that interfere with the normal metabolism of liver, adipose, and skeletal muscle; all of which are important to the regulation of glucose and lipid homeostasis. While some gut bacterial groups correlate with energy prausnitzii, for example, reduces the low-grade inflammation associated with obesity and diabetes. Can individual members of a lean-associated microbiome treat obesity? We have gained tremendous insight into host-microbe relationships from the various microbiome projects under way. The data obtained thus far suggest that different blends of microbiota influence the efficiency of calorie harvesting from the diet, alter how derived energy is stored, and modulate chronic inflammatory processes. But can we pick out individual microbes or blends of microbes to treat obesity or other gastrointestinal diseases? Research is under way to identify individual members of the microbiome that might individually, or in combination, or perhaps obesity. For example, Section 7.6 describes the identification of the intestinal Firmicute Christensenella minuta from human twins, which prevents weight gain when transferred to germ-free mice. There is great hope that we may one day cure or prevent these disorders using this novel form of probiotic treatment. 

Probiotics are foods, or solutions, containing helpful members of a microbiome. Different probiotics can restore balance to the intestinal or vaginal microbiomes. Obesity has been linked to intestinal dysbiosis. An increase in species able to harvest energy from ingested foods and a decrease in species that temper inflammation are involved. 

Given that we are surrounded by and host numerous bacteria, how is it we are not constantly infected? Here we begin our discussion of the many layers of protection designed to prevent infection and disease. As you will see, numerous physical and chemical barriers provide an effective first line of defense against infection by invading microbes. As such, they play a critical role in managing our resident ecosystems. But these barriers are not unbreachable. Organisms can still slip through. Consequently, humans, as well as other mammals, have a more aggressive defense called the immune system. The immune system is an integrated system of organs, tissues, cells, and cell products that differentiates self from nonself and neutralizes potentially pathogenic organisms or substances. This complex collection of cells and soluble proteins is capable of responding to nearly any foreign molecular structure. 

immune response to a specific antigen is not launched until the body “sees” that antigen. Adaptive immune mechanisms can recognize at least 1010 different antigenic structures and specifically launch a directed attack against each one. Once such an attack has been activated, the organism keeps a “memory” of the exposure in the form of specific memory cells, and an encounter with the microbe years later will reactivate the memory cells specific to the antigen. The two types of immunity are illustrated by the response of the immune system to infection by the microorganism Neisseria gonorrhoeae, which causes the sexually immune response is complement, composed of several soluble protein factors constantly present in the blood. Within moments of an initial infection, especially upon entering the bloodstream, complement proteins form holes in the bacterial membrane, thereby killing the microbe (see Section 23.6). Over time, the adaptive immune response will infects a person. Together, innate and adaptive immunity “memory,” so reinfection with this organism is possible. It is important to know that the innate and adaptive immune systems are interconnected. Antibodies made by the adaptive immune system will trigger parts of the innate immune system, such as the complement cascade that we will discuss later. Likewise, activation of innate resistance mechanisms will cause the release of small immunomodulatory peptides (cytokines) that influence the type and strength of adaptive immunity brought to bear. In military terms, it is similar to the army coordinating its actions with those of the air and naval forces. 

Contact with an infectious agent does not guarantee that a person will actually contract the disease. If the number of infecting organisms is small and the immune system (innate and adaptive) is effective, the individual may not develop disease, although a person known to have been exposed to certain microorganisms will be treated with antibiotics as a preventive measure. Chapter 26 more fully discusses the difference between being infected and having a disease. Any microbe that launches a successful attack on a human or other animal and causes disease must first breach the host’s physical and chemical barriers to gain entrance to the body. It must then survive the innate defense mechanisms and begin to multiply. Finally, the microbe must surmount the last line of defense, adaptive immunity, which begins to respond as the microbe struggles to overcome innate immune defenses. The rest of this chapter will discuss the various innate defense mechanisms. Adaptive immunity is discussed in Chapter 24. Although innate and adaptive immunity are often treated as separate entities, certain kinds of cells and organs play a role in both types of immunity. We thus introduce various cells and organs of the immune system as a whole before focusing on innate immunity. Our coverage of innate immunity will include physical and chemical barriers to infection, inflammation and nonspecific killing through phagocytosis, neutrophil extracellular traps, interferon, natural killer cells, and complement. 

1. Bacterium binds to the surface of phagocytic cell. Antibody or complement can aid binding. 

3. Invagination of phagocyte membrane traps the organism within a phagosome. 

making up the vast majority of white cells in the blood, can engulf microbes by phagocytosis. Phagocytosis involves the extrusion of pseudopods that attach to and envelop the pathogen, which ends up in a phagosome vacuole. The phagocyte then kills the organism by fusing enzyme-gorged lysosomes with the phagosomes (Fig. 23.19 ). Enzymes spilling from the lysosome 2. Phagocyte extend and engulf the organism. 

row divide to form two lineages. One lineage consists of the myeloid stem cells, which develop into polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs) and monocytes. These cells function primarily as part of innate immunity. The other branch consists of the lymphoid stem cells, which ultimately form natural killer cells, adaptive immunity) occurs in the bone marrow and thymus, respectively. Colors indicate a group of differentiated cells that arise from the same progenitor. 

It started with slight joint pain in her hands. Then, within weeks, Annette developed searing pain in all her joints. Blood “lupus” (Greek for “wolf”) comes from a butterfly-shaped facial rash that resembles the pattern of fur on a wolf’s face may have heart arrhythmias, abdominal pain, difficulty breathing, fatigue, fever, and swollen lymph nodes—depending on which parts of the body are under attack. An important test used to diagnose lupus looks for antinuclear antibodies in the patient’s blood. Antibodies are small proteins that usually bind substances foreign to the body (see Chapter 24). Lupus patients, however, are autoreactive, fully defined. One component that seems important is the as discussed in Chapter 24). Both cell types can cause tissue making autoreactive antibodies. But what leads to increased interferon production in lupus patients? illustrates that these special neutrophils, called low-density granulocytes (LDGs), more easily undergo NETosis, as compared to typical healthy control neutrophils or to normaldensity neutrophils from lupus patients. NETosis generates an ample source of autoantigen, such as chromatin, to which autoantibodies can be made, and helps propagate tissue damage, especially to blood vessel endothelial cells, by NETentangled peroxidases and proteases. release by LDGs could be a way to lessen those symptoms. 

really stimulates interferon-alpha production by plasmacytoid dendritic cells? Design an experiment using components of the system and wells of a microtiter plate. 

NETs have also been implicated in certain autoimmune diseases, such as systemic lupus erythematosus (Special Topic 23.1). 

23.4 shows how a neutrophil extracellular trap can ensnare a nearby pathogen. What bacterial structure might blunt the microbicidal effect of NETs? 

2. Neutrophils release NETs coated 3. Autoantibody-dependent plasmacytoid dendritic cells. 

Section 24.7). 

infected mouse lung shows a Klebsiella pneumoniae bacterium (colorized; size approx. 1 μm) snared in a neutrophil extracellular trap (green), a web of decondensed chromatin released by neutrophils to catch and kill pathogens. 

macrophage, the bacteria are destroyed. Subsequently, as the first step in adaptive immunity, the remnants are processed (degraded) into smaller peptides (called antigens), which are then presented on the macrophage cell surface. become activated as part of the adaptive immune response. Thus, macrophages are considered antigen-presenting cells (APCs; see Chapter 24). 

molecules on the surfaces of other cells in the body. An the same person will not attack that cell. However, if a the target as foreign and a potential threat. Host cells can pore-forming protein (perforin) into the membrane of the target cell, through which cytotoxic enzymes are delivered. Natural killer cells also contain antibody Fc receptors on their cell surface. The second killing mechanism, called antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity links to an antibody-coated host cell. Why would host cells be coated with antibodies? During their replication, many viruses place viral proteins in the membrane of the infected the same way as described for cells lacking MHC—namely, by insertion of a perforin molecule. This killing mechanism is another example of cooperation between innate Diagnostic value of white blood cell ratios. Many diseases, including infections, can alter the ratios of white blood increase or decrease in response to infections with bacteria, viruses, or parasites (protozoa or worms). 

from one place to another, surveying tissues for possible infection or foreign antigens. Consequently, most lymphocytes are found in the lymph nodes or spleen. No more than 1% of the total lymphocyte population circulates in the blood at any one time. The tissues of the immune system, where the great majority of lymphocytes are found, are classified as primary or secondary lymphoid organs or tissues, depending on their function (Fig. 23.23). The primary lymphoid organs and tissues are where immature lymphocytes mature into organ located above the heart. The secondary lymphoid organs serve as stations where lymphocytes can encounter antigens. These encounters as will be discussed in Chapter 24. The spleen is an example of a secondary lymphoid organ. It is designed to filter blood directly and detect microorganisms. Macrophages in the spleen engulf these organisms and destroy them, and The lymph nodes are another kind of secondary lymphoid organ. Lymph nodes are arranged to trap organisms from local tissues, not from blood. Lymph nodes are situated at various sites in the body where lymphatic vessels converge (for example, under the armpits). Lymphoid tissues are also present in the mucosal regions of the gut and respiratory tracts (for example, Peyer’s patches and Other secondary lymphoid organs are the tonsils, adenoids, and appendix. 

Adaptive immunity is a cellular response to specific structures (antigens) in which a memory of exposure is Myeloid bone marrow stem cells differentiate to form cells of the innate immune system—namely, phagocytic PMNs, monocytes, macrophages, antigen-presenting dendritic cells, and mast cells. Platelets are derived from a different cell line. Lymphoid stem cells differentiate into natural killer cells that continually patrol tissues for cancer cells, cells infected with microbes, or host cells coated with antibody (antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity, into target cell membranes. Primary lymphoid organs include bone marrow (where Secondary lymphoid organs (spleen, lymph nodes, Peyer’s patches, tonsils, appendix) are where lymphocytes encounter antigens. 

infectious disease are composed of physical, chemical, and cellular barriers designed to prevent a pathogen’s access to host tissues. Although generally described as nonspecific, some innate defense systems are more specific than others. 

Do not confuse phagocytic Langerhans cells with the pancreatic “islets of Langerhans,” which secrete insulin. 

23–26 feet, long). Mucous membranes in general present ntt a containment problem. They must be selectively permeable in order to exchange nutrients, as well as to export products and waste components. At the same time, they mustt conco stitute a barrier against invading Tight junction pathogens. Mucosal membranes are covered with special tightly Plasma membranes knit epithelial layers that support of adjacent cells this barrier function. The mucus secreted from stratified squamous epithelial cells coats mucosal surMembrane proteins that form tight junctions faces and traps microbes. Compounds within the mucus can Tight junction serve as a food source for some commensal organisms, s, but b t Epithelial cell other secreted compounds—like the enzymes lysozyme (which cleaves cell wall peptidoglycan) and lactoperoxidase (which produces superoxide radicals)—can kill an organism trapped in the mucus. Semispecific innate immune mechanisms are also associated with mucosal surfaces. Host cells, even epithelial cells, in mucosa have evolved mechanisms to distinguish harmless compounds from microorganisms. Patterns of conEpithelial cell served structures on microbes, called microbe-associated molecular patterns (MAMPs), are recognized by host cell-surface receptors such as various Toll-like receptors and together. Tight junctions are formed by an interconnected series of glycoproteins (blowup). By tightly linking adjacent cell membranes recognized, the host cell sends out chemicals that can actitogether, tight junctions produce a barrier through which bacteria, viruses, and other host cells cannot easily pass. vate immune system cells involved with innate and adaptive immune mechanisms. 

MAMPs were previously called PAMPs, for “pathogenassociated molecular patterns.” Because the structures recognized are also present on nonpathogenic bacteria and viruses, the term also serve as a portal for some pathogens to gain entry to the body. 

Antigens or bacteria that up by macrophages. 

threat produce a thick slimy material (alginate) that retards other lung clearance mechanisms (Fig. 23.26). How and killing of the microbe by phagolysosome mechanisms. airway pH optimal for the activity of secreted antimicrobial guarding against lung infection. 

Some examples of chemical barriers were mentioned previously, such as the acidic pH of the stomach, lysozyme in tears, and generators of superoxide. In addition, a variety of human cells generate small antimicrobial, cationic (positively charged) peptides called defensins (Table 23.2). These antimicrobial peptides are important components of innate immunity against microbial infections. Defensins range in length from 29 to 47 amino acids and are found in mammals, birds, amphibians, and plants. Defensins (and other antimicrobial peptides) destroy an invading microbe’s cytoplasmic membrane and are effective against Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria, fungi, and even some viruses (those with membranes, of Gram-negative bacteria and move into the periplasm. Defensins are then pulled into the cytoplasmic membrane of either Gram-positive or Gram-negative bacteria by the transmembrane electrical potential, about –150 mV in bacteria (that is, the cell interior is more negative than the exterior). The peptides assemble into channels that destroy the cytoplasmic membrane barrier, killing the bacterial cell. Defensins generally do not affect eukaryotic cells, which have a much lower membrane potential (–15 mV). Antimicrobial peptides are produced by many human cells, including cells of the skin, lungs, genitourinary tract, and gastrointestinal tract (Fig. 23.27). Specific defensins produced by different animals may partially explain pathogenhost specificity (see eTopic 23.1). 

Phagocytic alveolar macrophages inhabit lung tissues, contributing to nonspecific Chemical barriers against disease include cationic defensins, acid pH in the stomach, and superoxide produced by certain cells. Microbe-associated molecular patterns (MAMPs) are recognized by Tolllike receptors (TLRs) found on many host cells, such as macrophages. Binding triggers release of chemical signaling molecules that activate innate and adaptive immune mechanisms. 

23.5 Why do defensins have to be so small? Do defensins kill normal microbiota? 

Skin defenses against invading microbes include closely up largely of phagocytic Langerhans cells. Mucous-membrane defenses involve secreted enzymes, immune system cells. 

One form of vertebrate defensins (alpha) are stored in membrane-enclosed granules within neutrophils and in stimulated, these cells degranulate (release their granule contents) by fusing their granule membranes to cytoplasmic or vacuolar membranes, dumping their contents into the surroundings or into phagocytic vacuoles, where the alpha contrast, the beta defensins are not stored in cytoplasmic granules. The synthesis of beta defensins is activated only after contact with bacteria or their products. Other cationic antimicrobial peptides are listed in Table 23.2. Neutrophil cathelicidins are discussed in eTopic 23.2. 

Paneth cells (blowup) that discharge their granules into the crypt causes blebs of membrane to ooze from the surface of the cell. 

infected sites within tissues. Movement of these cells out of blood vessels is called extravasation or diapedesis, which we discuss shortly. Once at the infection site, the neutrophils begin engulfing microbes. The white pus associated with an infection is teeming with these white blood cells. The five cardinal signs of inflammation, first described over 2,000 years ago, are: redness, warmth, pain, swelling, and altered function at the affected site. In this section we describe the pathophysiology of these signs and other aspects of innate immunity. Although many things can trigger inflammation, we focus here on how microbes cause the response. The process begins with the infection itself. Microorganisms introduced into the body—for example, on a wood splinter—will begin to grow and produce compounds that host cells sense or that damage host cells (Fig. 23.29 ). Resident macrophages that wander into the infected area engulf these organisms and then release inflammatory mediators (chemoattractants) that “call” for more help. These mediators include vasoactive factors such as leukotrienes, platelet-activating factor, and prostaglandins, which act on blood vessels of the microcirculation, increasing blood volume and capillary permeability to help deliver white blood cells to the area. In addition, small protein molecules called cytokines are secreted, diffusing to the vasculature and stimulating the expression of specific receptors (selectins) on the endothelial cells of capillaries and venules. But how are cytokines made in response to an infection? 

Resident macrophages engulf pathogens and release cytokines. 

Vasoactive factors and cytokines help deliver additional phagocytes. 

Some cytokines initiate healing as pathogens are destroyed. 

■ Basic inflammatory response. Neutrophils (a type of phagocyte) circulate freely through blood vessels and can squeeze between cells in the walls of a capillary (extravasation) to the site of infection. They then engulf and destroy any pathogens they encounter. 

Signal is sent to nucleus to induce cytokine synthesis. 

2. Some cytokines are synthesized and released. 

6. Some cytokines made as precursors must be cleaved via before release. 

3. NLRs bind intracellular MAMPs. 4. Some NLRs activate transcription of cytokines. 

5. Other NLRs trigger assembly of inflammasomes. 

■ TLRs, NLRs, and inflammasomes. Stimulation of TLRs and some NLRs activates transcription factors to induce production of cytokines and other factors. Some cytokines that must be cleaved by inflammasomes. Inflammasome assembly is orchestrated by certain NLRs. 

large, inactive precursor proteins (procytokines) that must be processed by caspase-1 cleavage to make an active cytokine. The array of cytokines released stimulates inflammation and activates adaptive immune mechanisms. 

When a community is threatened by a thief, a neighbor who has been robbed alerts others to take precautions. Something similar happens during viral infections. In 1957, it was discovered that cells exposed to inactivated viruses produce at least one soluble factor that can “interfere” with viral replication when applied to newly infected cells. The term interferon was coined to represent these molecules. Interferons are low-molecular-weight cytokines (14–20 kDa) produced by many eukaryotic cells in response to intracellular infection. The action of interferons is usually species specific (interferon from mice will not work on human cells) but virus nonspecific (human interferon will help protect against both poliovirus and influenza virus, for example). There are two general types of interferons, which differ in the receptors they bind and the responses they generate. of IFN-alpha (IFN-α), IFN-beta (IFN-β), and IFN-omega of an immunomodulatory function, discussed in Chapter 24. uninfected host cells and render those cells resistant to viral infection. The host cell becomes resistant because interferon induces the intracellular production of two classes of proteins. One class encompasses double-stranded RNA-activated endoribonucleases that can cleave viral because protein synthesis is required for the propagation blood cells—for example, macrophages, natural killer cells, immune system. They are discussed more fully in Chapter 24. 

2. Selectins capture neutrophils, which begin to roll along the vessel wall. 

3. White-cell integrins are made and bind to 4. Neutrophils squeeze between endothelial cells. 

a splinter or infectious agent is introduced into the body. Chronic inflammation develops over long periods of time. The function of acute inflammation is to wall off, kill, or digest the intruder, thereby quickly resolving an infection and promoting healing of the affected area. Neutrophils play a central role in the inflammatory process. Neutrophils, however, normally reside in the circulation. How do they find the infection site? Certain cytokines synthesized after MAMPs bind to PRRs are called chemokines (examples are from a site of infection toward nearby capillaries and form a concentration gradient. Then, like a fox following a prey’s scent, neutrophils leave the bloodstream and follow the gradient back to the infection. But how do neutrophils pass through blood vessel walls? The events leading to extravasation begin when the cytokines interleukin 1 (TNF-alpha), released by macrophages, stimulate the production of adhesion molecules (selectins) on the inner lining of the capillaries. P-selectin is produced first, followed by E-selectin. The 1. Bacteria infect tissue. 

3. Cytokines induce selectins on capillary endothelia that bind to neutrophils. 

23.7 What happens to all the neutrophils that enter a site of infection once the infection has resolved? 

Once neutrophils have passed through the vascular wall, chemokines lure them to the proper location. In addition, neutrophils can sense certain microbial chemoattractants— fMet-Leu-Phe peptide, for instance. Many bacterial proteins have fMet (N-formylmethionine) as their N-terminal amino acid, but mammalian proteins, in general, do not. Bacteria will often cleave off the fMet peptide, which can then diffuse away from the bacterium. The fMet peptide binds to neutrophil receptors and stimulates pseudopod projections aimed toward the microbe. As a result, the white blood cell migrates in the direction of the infection. Once phagocytes arrive at the site of infection, they begin devouring microbes. Realize, however, that much of the damage caused by an infection is not due directly to the microbe but is the result of the body’s reaction to its presence. 

23.6 As illustrated in integrin is important for neutrophil extravasation. Some individuals, however, produce neutrophils that lack integrin. What is the likely consequence of this genetic disorder? 

between phagocyte and target microbe, illustrating how phagocytes “grab” and capsule (India ink preparation). The slippery nature of the polysaccharide capsule makes phagocytosis more difficult. 

the surface of another body cell, the phagocyte becomes temporarily paralyzed (unable to form pseudopods). Paralysis allows the phagocyte to evaluate whether the other cell is friend or foe, self or nonself. Self recognition involves glycoproteins located on the white blood cell membrane binding inhibitory glycoproteins present on all host cell membranes. The inhibitory glycoprotein on human cells is pneumoniae, possess polysaccharide capsules that are too where innate immunity and adaptive immunity join forces. Adaptive immunity produces anticapsular antibodies that aid the innate immune mechanism of phagocytosis through a process known as opsonization (Fig. 23.34). The anticapsular antibodies coat the surface of the bacterium, leaving the tail end of the antibodies, called the Fc region (see Section 24.2), pointing outward. These bacteria are said to be “opsonized.” The Fc regions of these antibodies are recognized and bound by specific receptors on phagocyte cell surfaces. As a result, the antibodies stick the opsonized bacteria to phagocytic Fc receptors, which allow the phagocyte to more easily engulf the invader. 

■ Opsonization. Opsonization is a process that facilitates phagocytosis. Here, macrophage Fc receptors bind to the Fc region of antibodies binding to bacteria. 

species attack bacterial membranes and proteins. These mechanisms greatly increase oxygen consumption during phagocytosis, called the oxidative burst. The reactive chemical species formed during the oxidative burst do little to harm the phagocyte because the burst is limited to the phagosome and because the various reactive oxygen species, such as superoxide, are very short-lived. Although phagocytes are very good at clearing infectious agents, many bacteria have developed ways to outsmart this aspect of innate immunity. 

clear themselves of intracellular pathogens. During autophagy, the cell constructs a double membrane around the organism (or damaged organelle). This structure, called the autophagosome, sequesters the microbe from the nutrientrich cytosol. Lysosomes then fuse with the autophagosome, depositing degradative enzymes that digest the organism. Ever-adapting intracellular microbes, however, have found ways to suppress autophagy and survive. 

Inflammation that persists over months or years is called chronic inflammation and is provoked by the long-term presence of a causative stimulus. Chronic inflammation inevitably causes permanent tissue damage, even though the body attempts repair. The causes of chronic inflammation are many. For example, infectious organisms such as Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Actinomyces bovis, and various protozoan parasites can avoid or resist host defenses (Fig. 23.35). 

Damaged cells or tissue macrophages release vasoactive factors that produce vasodilation and increased vascular permeability, cytokines that stimulate the production of blood vessel selectin receptors, and chemoattractant molecules that cause neutrophil movement (extravasation) from the bloodstream into infected tissues. Bradykinin causes the release of prostaglandins, which produce pain in the affected area. The cardinal signs of inflammation include redness, warmth, swelling, pain, and loss of function. 

NOD-like receptors (NLRs) in most host cells recognize microbe-associated molecular patterns (MAMPs) and synthesize cytokine proteins that diffuse and activate other cells of the immune system. Phagocytic cells have oxygen-independent and oxygen-dependent mechanisms of killing initiated by the fusion of lysosomes and bacteria-containing The oxidative burst, a large increase in oxygen consumption during phagocytosis, results in the production of superoxide ions, nitric oxide, and other reactive oxygen species. Autophagy is a process by which intracellular bacteria can be sequestered from the cytoplasm (via an autophagosome) and killed following fusion with a Chronic inflammation results from the persistent presence of a foreign object. 

White blood cells (WBCs) engulf and kill pathogens, but can simple serum proteins also kill microbes? Yes, a series of 20 serum proteins (complement factors) that make up the complement cascade can also attack bacterial invaders. Complement was first discovered as a heat-labile component of blood that enhances (or complements) the killing effect of antibodies on bacteria. Several complement factors are proteases that sequentially form and cleave other complement factors. (The liver is the main source of complement proteins.) Once a complement cascade is triggered, several things happen. Pores are inserted into bacterial membranes, causing cytoplasmic leaks, while pieces of some complement proteins attract WBCs and facilitate phagocytosis (opsonization). 

depends on antibody, so it is part of adaptive rather than innate immunity and is discussed in the next chapter (Section 24.4). The lectin pathway requires the synthesis of mannose-binding lectin by the liver in response to macrophage cytokines. Lectin coats the surface of invading microbes and activates complement without antibody. The lectin pathway connects to the classical complement pathway. We focus here in Chapter 23 on the alternative pathway because it is a well-characterized part of innate resistance. Like the lectin pathway, the alternative pathway is a nonspecific defense mechanism that does not require antibody for activation. The alternative complement pathway can attack invading microbes long before a specific immune response can be launched. One goal of the complement cascade is to insert pores into target microbial membranes. The pores destroy membrane integrity, and thus kill the cell. The alternative (Fig. 23.36, step 1). C3b, under normal circumstances, cleaves slowly into C3a and C3b. 

invading Gram-negative microbe, the bound C3b becomes stable and binds another factor, 4. The resulting complex, called convertase by properdin, another serum protein. 

7. The resulting C5bC6C7 complex binds to destructive pore in the membrane of the target cell. 

membrane pores and cleaves peptidoglycan, making the cell membrane more susceptible to the membrane attack are ways to activate complement that involve antigenantibody complexes (see Section 24.4). Eukaryotic cells infected with viruses and coated with antibody can also activate complement via the antibody-dependent classical complement pathway. 

and muscles are the major generators of heat and will warm the blood that passes through them. In a healthy person, How do we normally maintain a body temperature large organs and along the spinal cord send information about the body’s temperature to the thermoregulatory center in the hypothalamus, a small organ located in the brain near the brain stem. The hypothalamus acts as a thermostat by controlling blood flow through the skin and subcutaneous areas. Vasoconstriction (tightening of blood vessel diameter) prevents the release of body heat when we are cold, whereas vasodilation secures its quick release when we are hot. If skin temperature is too high, the hypothalamus directs vasodilation to accelerate heat release. If body temperature is too low, blood flow will decrease to conserve heat, and shivering begins as a way to generate more heat. Fever is a natural reaction to infection and is usually accompanied by general symptoms such as sweating, chills, and the sensation of being cold. Substances that cause fever are known as pyrogens. Exogenous pyrogens (for example, certain bacterial toxins) originate outside the body, whereas internal or endogenous pyrogens (such as tumor necrosis External pyrogens generally cause fever by inducing the release of internal cytokine pyrogens. Pyrogenic cytokines cross the blood-brain barrier and and changes the responsiveness of thermosensitive neurons. The body “thinks” it is cold, so the hypothalamus sends signals via the autonomic nervous system (which acts below the level of consciousness) to constrict peripheral blood vessels (vasoconstriction). Heat is not released and builds up to cause fever. Involuntary muscle contractions (shivering and chills) also generate heat. What are the advantages of fever? Because the ideal temperature can place the pathogenic organism outside its “comfort zone” of growth. There is also evidence that fever reduces iron availability to bacteria (cytokine release causes an increase in iron storage protein). Slower growth of the pathogen “buys” the immune system time to subdue the infection before it is too late. Consequently, interventions that reduce a moderate fever caused by infection may actually slow recovery. 

Complement is a series of 20 proteins naturally present in serum. Activation of the complement cascade results in a pore being introduced into target membranes. The three pathways for activation are the classical, alternative, and lectin pathways. The alternative activation pathway begins when complement factor C3b is stabilized by interaction with the attack complex in target membranes. C-reactive protein in serum is activated when bound to can start the complement cascade. The hypothalamus acts as the body’s thermostat. Exogenous and endogenous pyrogens elevate body temperature by stimulating prostaglandin production. Prostaglandins change the responsiveness of thermosensitive neurons in the hypothalamus. 

The human body plays host to numerous species of microbes (our microbiota), many of which contribute to our health and well-being. The various “hardwired” innate immune mechanisms described here in Chapter 23 keep our microbiota at bay and provide an effective first line of defense against potential pathogens. The next chapter addresses what happens when microbes breach these innate defenses. Unlike the general protective mechanisms just discussed, the system of adaptive immunity generates a molecular defense specifically tailored to a given pathogen. Keep in mind that innate and adaptive immune systems “talk” to each other and collaborate to present the most effective response to a given pathogen, whether bacterial, viral, or parasitic. 

Lymphocyte traffic. Lymph node follicles contain separate (see figure below). Chemokines emanating from the B-cell Source: Zu et al. 2013. Nature 496:523–527. 

nce an infecting pathogen eludes our innate immune defenses, it faces an even more daunting foe: an adaptive immune system that stirs only when challenged. Adaptive immunity is trained lymphocytes are poised to respond quickly to a second infection by the pathogen. Left unregulated, however, adaptive immunity can turn on us, producing autoimmune disease. 

B-cell zone? 

Available data indicate that a factor made in the follicle antagonizes chemokinedependent phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase for optimal cytoskeleton reorganization into the B-cell zone. This is why ICOSL-mediated activation of to make antibody? These mice do not efficiently make antibody to T-dependent antigens. However, they are still able to respond to T-independent antigens. Do you foresee a potential clinical application for your fighting infections but detrimental to tissue homeostasis. 

The terms “adaptive immune response” and “immune response” are often used interchangeably. 

several regions separated in the linear sequence can reside next to each other to form a conformational epitope. Denaturing the protein with the detergent and reducing agents like dithiothreitol (to remove disulfide bonds) will unfold the protein and separate the various amino acid stretches that formed the protein structure showing, in red, four amino acids that form a conformational epitope. 

engulfs a microbe and places pieces (antigens) of the microbe on its surface. 

Lymph node node and presents the antigen recognizes the antigen and becomes activated. 

The presentation of antigens on APCs forces the antigen to be placed on a membrane surface protein structure (discussed later). The more tightly an antigen can bind to recognize the complex. Each specific antigen shows a different threshold dose lower than that threshold will generate a weaker immune exceedingly high doses of antigen can cause B-cell to the point that they do not respond to subsequent antigen exposures and make antibody. Tolerance is part of the reason your immune system does not react against your own protein antigens. As you might expect, the body must regulate the immune system carefully so that a response is not leveled against itself. In effect, the immune system must become “blind” to its own antigens; as a result, the host will often be blind to foreign antigens that resemble epitopes of its own cells. Therefore, the more complex the foreign protein is, the more likely it will possess antigenic determinants that a lymphocyte can recognize as nonself. The farther an antigen is from “self,” the greater its immunogenicity will be. 

(live, attenuated) strains of the pathogenic microbe or inactivated microbial toxins (for example, diphtheria toxin). Cross-protection, in which immunization against one microbe protects against a second, will work only if two proteins critical to the pathogenesis of the two different microorganisms share key antigenic determinants. Cross-protection will not closely related rhinovirus strains (rhinitis, a runny nose, is one of the symptoms of this viral disease). Infection with one strain will not immunize the victim against a second strain. The reason is that the structures of rhinovirus proteins that attach to the neutralizing antibodies, which bind to the attachment protein on one strain of rhinovirus, will prevent infection by key to one lock will not work in a different lock. 

smallpox virus, variola major (300 nm long; vaccinia virus that causes cowpox (360 nm long; between the deadly smallpox and less severe cowpox diseases and used cowpox scrapings to vaccinate humans against smallpox. 

24.2 How does a neutralizing antibody that recognizes a viral coat protein prevent infection by the associated virus? 

cause of immune hypersensitivity reactions in some individuals (see Section 24.7). immunogen because it elicits an immune response to itself. In contrast, a mouse injected with the hapten benzene sulfate fails to produce antibodies to benzene sulfate. However, the hapten-BSA complex is injected, the mouse produces other antibodies that react against the benzene hapten. The reason for this carrier effect will become evident later in the chapter, when we describe how antigens are processed by cells of the immune system. Thus, antigens include immunogens that elicit an immune response by themselves, and haptens that must be attached to an immunogen in order to generate an immune response. Karl Landsteiner uncovered the antigen-immunogen-hapten relationship in group system that first defined the concept of immunological specificity (eTopic 24.2). Thought Question 24.3 The attachment proteins of different rhinovirus strains won’t antibodies directed against one rhinovirus strain block the attachment of other rhinovirus strains? 

Attaching the h hapten hapten to to a larger l er carrier molecule d ti off antibodies to both the carrier and the hapten molecules. 

■ This basic schematic shows how haptens can elicit antibody production. 

What are antibodies, and why are they important? Antibodies, also called immunoglobulins, are members of the larger immunoglobulin superfamily of proteins. Made by the body in response to an antigen, antibodies are the keys to immunological specificity. Members of the immunoglobulin superfamily of proteins have in common a 110-amino-acid domain with an internal disulfide bond. The immunoglobulin superfamily includes antibodies and other important binding proteins, such as the major histocompatibility proteins and parts of the B-cell receptor described later. 

Antibodies are called immunoglobulins and belong to the immunoglobulin superfamily of proteins. However, this superfamily includes many other cell-surface-binding proteins, such as cytokine receptor proteins. These latter proteins are not antibodies and are not called immunoglobulins. The term “immunoglobulins” is reserved for antibodies. 

Like miniature “smart bombs,” antibody immunoglobulins individually circulate through blood, ignoring all antigens except those for which they were designed. When an antibody finds its antigenic match, it binds to the antigen and initiates several events designed to destroy the target. Antibodies, in addition to being free-floating, are strategically situated on recognize specific antigens (B-cell receptors are discussed later in this section). There are two large heavy chains and two smaller light chains (Fig. 24.7). The four polypeptides combine to form a Y-shaped tetrameric structure held together by disulfide bonds. Two bonds connect the two identical heavy chains to each other. One light chain is then attached near its carboxyl end to the middle of each heavy chain by a single disulfide bond. The antigen-binding sites are formed at the amino-terminal ends of the light and heavy chains. One antibody molecule possesses two identical antigen-binding sites, one on each “arm” of the molecule. 

each of which binds identical antigens. Because a single antibody can bind two identical epitopes, antibodies can cross-link antigens in solution, ultimately forming complexes that are too large to remain soluble, so they fall out of solution (Fig. 24.8). The phenomenon, called immunoprecipitation, is normally observed only in vitro, where the concentrations of antigen and antibody can be manipulated experimentally. Immunoprecipitation occurs only with appropriate ratios of antigen and antibody molecules. Too many complexes too small to immunoprecipitate. Large complexes are formed only at an appropriate antigen/antibody ratio, where the number of antigenic sites is roughly equal to the number of antigen-binding sites. Immunoprecipitation is the basis for many experimental immunological techniques. For example, the concentration of an antigen can be determined in vitro, or antibodies can be used to identify and remove specific antigens from a complex mixture because the specific antigenantibody complex precipitates. eAppendix 3 describes some experimental uses for immunoprecipitation, such as radial immunodiffusion and western blotting. 

No complex is possible, because there are more antigens than antigen-binding sites. 

No complex is possible, because there are more antigen-binding sites than antigens. 

Complexes are possible when antigen numbers equal the number of antigen-binding sites. 

representation of IgG shows, the variable sequences present at the amino termini of the heavy and light chains form the antigen-binding sites. Functional parts of the antibody can be separated following certain protease treatments. Papain specifically cleaves the hinge regions of the heavy chains and releases separate constant region and releases the two F(ab) regions as one piece [F(ab´)2] from the Fc region. 

Papain digestion separates individual antigen-binding sites [F(ab) fragment] from the antibody molecule. 

Fc region from the F(abv)2 portion that contains both antigen-binding sites. 

Antibody diversity involves a hierarchy of protein sequence differences found among antibodies. 

Isotype sequences defi ne the various heavy chains of a species. 

Idiotype sequences define antibodies within an individual. 

taken from Sherrie raise when injected into John (for example, anti-isotype, anti-allotype, or anti-idiotype)? 

All antibody isotypes have the same basic structure. However, each isotype has a unique superstructure (for example, monomer or dimer), and each is designed to carry out a different task. Some key properties of the five different immunoglobulin classes are listed in Table 24.2. 

IgM forms a pentamer held together by disulfide bonds bind ten antigens. 

receptors that can attach to the Fc region of the antibody to gain a fi rmer “grip” on the microbe, facilitating phagocytosis (discussed in Section 23.5). IgG can also directly neutralize viruses by binding to virus attachment sites, and it is one of only two antibody types that can activate complement by the classical pathway (described in Section 24.4). Another critical feature of IgG is that it can cross the placenta and enter a fetus. Other antibody isotypes cannot. This selectivity is due to an antibody transport system in the placenta, called the neonatal Fc transporter, which is specific for the Fc region of IgG. The transporter does not recognize the Fc amino acid sequences of other antibody isotypes. 

IgA is secreted as a dimer held together can bind four identical antigens. 

IgM. Circulating IgM is a huge, Ferris wheel–shaped molecule formed from five monomeric immunoglobulins tethered It can also be found in monomeric form on the receptor. IgM is the first antibody isotype detected during the early stages of an immune response. 

Primary versus secondary antibody response. Primary vaccination or infection leads to the early synthesis of IgM, followed by IgG. Reinfection or a second, booster response. Note that the time course and level of antibody made vary with the immunogen and the host. 

The secondary antibody response is why vaccinations work. Before vaccinations, the only way to be protected from an infection by a given pathogen was to have already been infected by that pathogen. Memory cells made during the primary response will protect you against a second infection, but pathogens can do considerable harm during the lag phase of the primary response. To avoid this harm, an innocuous version of a pathogen, or a harmless piece of it, can be injected into a person to trigger a primary response without producing disease (or, at worst, producing only a mild form of the illness). Immunization thus primes the immune system to respond efficiently and without delay upon encountering the real pathogen. Table 24.1 lists a variety of viral and bacterial diseases for which immunizations are available. Thought Question 24.6 The mother of a newborn was found to be infected with rubella, a viral disease. Infection of the fetus could lead to serious consequences for the newborn. How could you determine whether the newborn was infected in utero? 

B-cell receptors to cluster (capping) and activate Igα and Igβ. 

B-cell receptors can bind two identical epitopes on a pathogen. The resulting capping process initiates a signal cascade that activates help. Antigens with repeating epitopes, such as polysaccharides, can directly cross-link B-cell receptors. 

cells first requires that antigen bind to B-cell receptors antigens successfully stimulate B-cell differentiation without antigens are large molecules with highly repetitive structures; In a surprising finding, Bruce Beutler (who received the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center discovered sequences are the “footprints” of previous retroviral infections (see Chapter 11). Mammalian genomes, including human, are rife with latent retroviruses, some of which can still replicate to form virus-like particles. It is startling that these remnants of past infection may also play a role in immunity. So, what led the scientists to this conclusion? 

cascade leading to the production of the NF-κB transcription and the resulting RNAs are transported to the cytoplasm. (3) The result is B-cell activation and differentiation to IgM-producing plasma cells. increase the expression of endogenous retroviruses. The effect that retroviral expression might then have on antibody production at mucosal surfaces is unclear. 

cells. Extensive cross-linking activates a signal cascade leading to activate the cytoplasmic RNA-sensing (e.g. Rig-1) and/or DNAsensing (e.g. cGAS-STING) pathways. Resulting signals induce plasma cells. 

Bone Marrow progenitor B-cell heavychain and light-chain genes antigen-binding sites. 

antigen and differentiate into plasma cells without T-cell help. There is no isotype switch, so these plasma cells secrete IgM (primary response). Memory cells are also produced. 

5. T-cell helps initiate heavy-chain class switching. Resulting plasma antibody isotypes (one per cell), all with the same antigen-binding site. 

All have same antigen-binding site. 

Memory cell isotype switching (or class switching) can occur at the gene from making the IgM isotype to making the IgA isotype. summarizes the basic steps of antibody formation leading to the production of plasma cells and memory cells. More detailed descriptions of these events follow in the next section. 

joined segment and sometimes the µ constant region. 

4. Heavy-chain peptide is made with either the µ or δ constant region. 

5. Light-chain peptide is formed by separate recombination events. 

this recombination event has all of its introns spliced out produced will have the same antigenic specificity as the original IgM. However, the heavy-chain switch selection process is not random. The type of cytokine present at Note that any heavy-chain peptide (alpha, gamma, delta, and so on) can combine with any light chain (lambda or type of heavy chain and one type of light chain. 

antibodies, but the delta region has no switch region. Why does the delta region have no switch region? 

Antibodies, or immunoglobulins, are Y-shaped molecules that contain two heavy chains and two light chains. There are five classes (isotypes) of antibodies. Each antibody isotype is defined by the structure of the heavy chain. Antibodies are members of the immunoglobulin superfamily. Each antibody molecule contains two antigen-binding sites. Each binding site is formed by the hypervariable ends of a heavy- and light-chain pair. The Fc portion (“tail”) of an antibody can bind to specific receptors on host cells. This binding is antigen independent. Antibody diversity (idiotype) occurs via a complex the hypervariable regions of heavy and light chains. IgD antibodies on its surface (part of B-cell receptors). antibody in association with the Igα and Igβ proteins. Binding of antigen to the B-cell receptor triggers B-cell proliferation and differentiation. Clonal selection is the rapid proliferation of a subset of The primary antibody response to an antigen begins first class of antibodies made during the primary response. plasma cells. IgG is the predominant antibody made. Isotype switching (or class switching) from IgM production to other antibody isotypes occurs after naive specifically binds one epitope. 

The ratios of these cells and the cytokines they produce tilt the immune system toward either more humoral or more first must be activated by antigen. 

Extracellular space molecules contain an alpha chain (30–34 kDa) and a beta chain (26–29 kDa). The peptide-binding regions of both classes show variability ty in in amino i o acid id se nce th hatt yie i ld ds d different shapes and grooves. 

1. Foreign proteins made in the cytoplasm (e.g., viruses) are degraded by the proteasome chains associating with the invariant chain used for all will bind antigen. 

2. Peptides (microbial antigens) 3. Peptides are loaded into late endosomal compartments. Golgi complex 3. The invariant chain is degraded to open the peptide-binding site. 

4. Secretory vesicles with fuse with membrane. 

4. The microbe is phagocytosed into the endosome and degraded by proteases. The The complex is exported to the cell surface. 

can bind viral antigens present on any virus-infected cell, whether or not that cell is normally considered The T-cell receptor is composed of several transmembrane proteins. Two molecules—alpha and beta—make up the part that recognizes antigen. Much like antibodies, the alpha and beta proteins of the rearrangements analogous to, but different from, the immunoglobulin genes. complex with four other peptides, which together form proteins recruit and activate intracellular protein kinases and launch a phosphorylation cascade that triggers that we describe later in the chapter. 

How are foreign antigens placed, or presented, on host cell surfaces? In the initial stages of an immune response, antigen-presenting cells internalize the pathogen, such as a virus or a bacterium. Inside the APCs, pathogen proteins are degraded into smaller peptides (epitopes). These epitopes are placed within the MHC-binding clefts of initially entered the cell (Fig. 24.21). Endogenous antigens, which are synthesized by viruses and intracellular bacteria and are moved to the cell surface (Fig. 24.21 left). In contrast, exogenous antigens, which are produced outside moved to the acidic phagosome or lysosome (Fig. 24.21 to the cell surface. Once the antigen is presented on the Interactions between antigen-presenting cells and naive patches in the gut. So APCs must make their way to those locations to generate an immune response. 

surface. Antigen binds to the alpha and beta subunits. The positive and negative charges holding the complex together come from amino acids in the peptide sequences. Once bound to antigen, the complex transduces a signal into the cell. This signal triggers T-cell proliferation. 

self antigens are not made tolerant; they are killed in a process called T-cell education. 

Greek mythology tells of Narcissus, a young man punished by the gods for scorning the women who fell in love with him. One day Narcissus saw a beautiful face in a pool of water. Not knowing it was his own reflection, he fell in love, tumbled into the pool, and drowned. His inability to recognize himself is analogous to the danger posed by an immune system. Immune systems must be able to distinguish what is self (meaning antigens present in our own tissues) from what is not self. Otherwise our immune system would constantly attack our own cells. Innate immunity accomplishes this important task, in part, through the use of pattern recognition proteins such as the Tolllike and NOD-like receptors (see Section 23.5). How adaptive immune mechanisms avoid recognizing self is equally important. At the outset of development, the immune system is fully capable of reacting against self. One mechanism the body uses to avoid attacking “education” process in the thymus to recognize self versus epithelial cells are allowed to survive (positive selection) and leave the thymus to seed secondary lymphoid organs from the population (negative selection). Almost 95% of negative selection processes. This weeding out is important because if our T-cell molecules, regardless of which antigen peptides were are allowed to survive and are converted into regulatory of harmful, self-reactive (autoimmune) lymphocytes that escape deletion and enter the circulation. Note that this is the first way that Tregs can be made. The second involves Why is positive selection that promotes weak binding to one individual normally do not recognize peptides placed on antigen-presenting cells from another individual—a Rolf Zinkernagel (University of Zurich) and Peter Doherty (St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis) with a simple experiment. They demonstrated that mouse Thus, T-cell recognition has two components: self (the won Zinkernagel and Doherty the 1996 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine. explained in eTopic 24.3. education is limited to the thymus. But if the thymus respond to antigens expressed on other host cells (for example, heart cells) be removed? The answer is a special the synthesis of all human proteins in small amounts. This expression is necessary to complete T-cell education within the thymus. You might ask how someone whose thymus has been removed (done as a treatment for myasthenia gravis) can live if the organ is critical for T-cell maturation and for losing function shortly after birth, such that very little function remains in adults. Fortunately, a large amount of T-cell education occurs during fetal development. Once maintained throughout life outside of the thymus. Some tissues. Thus, adults without a thymus can live relatively normal lives. Babies born without a thymus, however, have a severe, life-threatening T-cell deficit. 

stimulates proliferation of secrete molecules such as perforin and granzymes that destroy infected target cells. 

cells binds to matching antigen presented on B-cell activation (in lymph node). 

■ Summary of the activation of humoral and cell-mediated pathways. Left: Extracellular pathogens tend to extracellular pathogens). See text for more details. 

During the early phase of a primary response, one type of a bacterium (see Section 23.6), or if a microbe-associated IgM is secreted by the resulting plasma cell. This is partly why the primary response starts with IgM (see Fig. 24.13). 

B-cell receptor binds antigen (Fig. 24.23, step 3). This called follicles (see the Current Research Highlight). The but to a lesser extent.) B-cell receptor capping mechanism (antigen cross-linking internalized and processed to be presented back on the into a plasma cell (Fig. 24.23, step 3). The isotype class switch from IgM to another antibody IgM to IgE and IgG, respectively. During the secondary immune response, memory directs differentiation into antibody-secreting plasma cells. 

molecules are found on all nucleated cells, any infected cell closer look at signal 1 interaction. 

proteins and facilitates docking of the T-cell destroy the virus-infected target cell. 

The immune system is full of checks and balances. Two and macrophages, and granulocyte-macrophage colonystimulating factors (GM-CSFs) to enhance synthesis of the innate acute inflammatory response to infection. 

However, the problem with inflammation is that it also causes damage to local tissues. This is where Treg cells become crucial. Treg cells either form during T-cell selection in the cells in a lymph node. Treg cells are involved in shutting down immune responses after an invading organism has successfully been eliminated, and can prevent autoimmunity. Once activated by an antigen presented to severity of an infection, either exacerbating or quelling inflammation. The cytokines produced by APCs and other cells during an infection can tilt the balance one way or the cell functions. 

various cytokines that incite other cells to do the killing. as macrophages and natural killer cells. However, sets of and differentiate into plasma cells that secrete antibody (see Fig. 24.23, step 3). Table 24.4 lists a fraction of the many different cytokines produced by various cell types and describes their influence over the immune system. during an infection? Part of the answer is found in the blend of cytokines generated by macrophages or mast cells during different types of infection. Infections by viruses and intracellular bacteria, for instance, generate cytokines, by extracellular bacteria and parasites, however, generate antibody-mediated immunity is favored (see Fig. 24.23, step 2a). 

As a result, once the immune system starts to go down one pathway, the other pathway is held back. But this is not an all-or-none response. For instance, a viral infection will also (TFH)—will more effectively clear a particular infection. illustrated by acquired immunodeficiency syndrome below its normal level of about 1,000 per microliter. When the ability of the patient to mount an immune response is jeopardized. The patient not only becomes hypersusceptible to infections by pathogens, but also becomes susceptible to actually die from these opportunistic infections. 

1990 from complications of pneumonia caused by a potent superantigen produced by Streptococcus pyogenes. This example is but one of many ways that overreaction by the immune system causes morbidity (disease) and mortality (death)—effects more pronounced than the direct effects of the pathogen involved. 

As efficient as our immune system is, numerous viral and bacterial pathogens have developed effective means for avoiding the adaptive immune response. Many viruses should expose the infected host cell to natural killer cells in Section 23.5). To surmount this obstacle, for example, difference between the presentation of antigen and superantigen. Antigen presentation requires the antigen to bind within the binding pockets not require processing. They can bind directly to is one example of a potent superantigen. Alpha helices are shown as red ribbons, while sections of the beta sheet are shown as blue ribbons. 

Like viruses, bacteria are masters of illusion when it ulcers, Helicobacter pylori, expresses proteins from a cluster of pathogenicity genes that trigger apoptosis evolved mechanisms that interfere with signal transduction pathways controlling the expression of cytokines. For example, YopP from Yersinia enterocolitica, one cause of gastroenteritis, inhibits a specific signal transduction Yersinia avoids the detrimental effects of those proinflammatory cytokines. Another method of immune avoidance is employed by various mycobacteria, some of which cause tuberculosis and leprosy (Fig. 24.26). These bacteria induce the production of anti-inflammatory cytokines, which dampen the immune response. Mycobacterium-infected macrophages produce humans, in most cases the immune system catches on to these tricks and, through redundant humoral and cellular mechanisms, manages to resolve these infections. 

Treg cells is influenced by different cytokine “cocktails” plasma cell usually requires two signals: antigen binding by the same antigen. turn, destroy infected host cells. 

24.11 Why does attaching a hapten to a carrier protein allow antihapten antibodies to be produced? 

5. C5b leads to formation of the membrane attack complex. 

all the other defenses, such as antibodies and cytotoxic surface change shape over generations in a process called phase variation (see Section 10.1). The new antigens are “invisible” to antibodies made against earlier versions. 

C5b-C8 complex trying to form in the membrane and and the host cell is spared. (Complement will not normally attack uninfected or infected host cells, since both contain Another regulatory mechanism hinges on a normal activation of complement can damage host cells despite C3b. Without C3b, the complement cascade stops. Some bacteria, such as certain strains of Neisseria gonorrhoeae, have learned to protect themselves from complement by Microbiota can also assist host cells in resisting complement. The intestinal microbe Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron protects host cells from complement-mediated cytotoxicity by up-regulating a decay-accelerating factor present in host cell membranes. Decay-accelerating factor stimulates decay of complement factors and prevents their deposition at the cell surface. 

The C3a, C4a, and C5a cleavage fragments generated formation but are important for amplifying the immune reaction. These peptides act as chemoattractants to lure more inflammatory cells into the area. C3b, which does a protein factor that can facilitate phagocytosis. Because phagocytes contain C3b receptors on their surfaces, it is easier for them to grab and engulf cells coated with C3b. Additional roles for complement fragments were discussed in Section 23.6. 

The classical pathway for complement activation begins with an interaction between the Fc portion of an (The alternative pathway does not need antibody but the classical pathway. is the same as the alternative pathway, resulting in the formation in host cells. 

The mucosal surface of the gastrointestinal tract is exposed to a vast number of food, chemical, and other ingested antigens. The gut also harbors an expansive microbiome whose members must be controlled and nurtured. Monitoring this large antigen load requires localized and highly integrated innate and adaptive immune systems, and a system gut microbes at bay were described in Chapter 23, but the intestine also has a dedicated adaptive immune system that monitors and shapes our microbiota, usually without causing excessive inflammation. In this section we describe how the innate and adaptive immune systems in the gut shape the microbiome while protecting the host. 

is altered electrolyte transport—inhibition of Na+ uptake and stimulation of Cl– transport. In response to the resulting electrolyte imbalance, water leaves the cell. 

such toxin, exfoliative toxin of Staphylococcus aureus, breaks the connection between dermis and epidermis, giving victims the gruesome appearance of scalded skin. 

depolymerizes actin by cross-linking actin fibers. Modifying actin polymerization can alter cell shape or cause cell membranes to wrap around the pathogen, inviting the organism into the cytoplasm. 

Helicobacter pylori) actually has several modes of action, depending on the host cell. The most visually striking effect is its ability to cause vacuolization, which is the fusion of numerous intracellular vesicles. 

Superantigens. Members of the ninth and last class of toxins activate the immune system without being processed by antigen-presenting cells (discussed in Section 24.3). The pyrogenic (fever-producing) toxins of Staphylococcus aureus (such as toxic shock syndrome superantigen toxins. 

signal transduction. Superantigens were described in Section 24.3, and exotoxins that affect exocytosis (tetanus and botulism toxins) will be discussed in Section 26.7. 

Toxins that disrupt membranes include pore-forming proteins that bind cholesterol and insert themselves into target membranes, and phospholipases that hydrolyze membrane phospholipids into fatty acids. General descriptive terms for these toxins are hemolysins, which lyse red blood cells (but other cells as well), and leukocidins, which more specifically lyse white blood cells. One example is streptolysin cause pharyngitis (sore throat) and necrotizing fasciitis, also known as “flesh-eating” disease. 

pore-forming leukocidin is Panton-Valentine toxin, produced by most strains of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. 

perfringens, a cause of gas gangrene, cleaves phosphatidylcholine in host plasma membranes. At high concentrations the toxin causes membrane disruption, but at sublethal concentrations the exotoxin will generate signaling molecules from membrane lipids that can activate cytokine production. Some phospholipases, also called lecithinases, can increase the permeability of capillaries to cause edema (fluid accumulation in tissues). Escaping vacuoles. Other membrane-disrupting exotox- ins specifically target vacuolar membranes. Many bacterial pathogens enter eukaryotic host cells by inducing phagocytosis and then end up in a phagosome vacuole. Some of these intracellular pathogens need to break out of the phagosome to grow in the cytoplasm. One example is Listeria monocytogenes, a gastrointestinal pathogen that can also cause meningitis (described later). This Gram-positive rod uses listeriolysin (a pore-forming exotoxin) and two phospholipases to escape the phagosome to grow in the cytoplasm. 

ADP-ribose to an amino acid regulates adenylate cyclase. 3. The phagosome the endoplasmic reticulum. 

rise and activate ion transport systems, causing an electrolyte imbalance. Water from the cell follows the ions, causing diarrhea. 

the escaping water enters the intestinal lumen, leading to watery stools, or diarrhea (Fig. 25.19, step 6). 

25.2 illustrates how cholera toxin works to cause diarrhea. To develop a vaccine that generates protective antibodies, which subunit of cholera toxin should be used to best protect a person from the toxin’s effects? 

How is diarrhea a benefit to the microorganism? The more diarrhea is produced and expelled, the more organisms are made and disseminated throughout the environment. In this way, diarrhea increases the chance that another host will ingest the organism, ensuring survival of the species. Diarrhea can also benefit a pathogen by decreasing competition with other organisms as they are swept away. In fact, the vast majority of organisms found in the diarrheal fluids Different pathogens have discovered alternative ways to alter host cAMP levels. The Gram-negative pathogen Bordetella pertussis causes a childhood respiratory infection called whooping cough, so named for the whooping sound made as a child tries to take a breath after a fit of coughing. This microbe also secretes an ADP-ribosylating toxin, but this toxin modifies Gi (the inhibitory factor that normally downregulates adenylate cyclase activity). ADP-ribosylation in this instance prevents that inhibition, with the result (again) of runaway cAMP synthesis. Pertussis toxin, however, is structurally different from cholera toxin. In addition, the organism makes a “stealth” adenylate cyclase that is secreted from the bacterium but remains inactive until it enters host cells, where it becomes active by binding the calcium-binding protein calmodulin. The resulting increase in cAMP levels causes inappropriate triggering of certain host cell signaling pathways and damages lung cells. 

bloody diarrhea. These organisms produce an important toxin known as Shiga toxin (or Shiga-like toxin). The gene that produce high levels of this toxin are associated with acute kidney failure, known as hemolytic uremic syndrome. 

Shigella dysenteriae is the only Shigella species that produces Shiga toxin. 

1. Protective antigen as a single peptide. 

autoassemble in the membrane to form a pore. 

4. The other two components of anthrax toxin−EF and LF−bind to the ring and are carried into the cell by endocytosis. 

organism can colonize cattle intestines without causing resistance mechanisms that rival that of the gastric pathogen Helicobacter pylori. This acid resistance makes these pathogens infectious at a very low infectious dose. What activates stx expression? Iron availability is a key factor for inducing the expression of stx and many other virulence genes in pathogens. The body holds its iron tightly in proteins such as lactoferrin and transferrin. To an invading organism, the body is a very iron-poor environment. In the presence of low iron, expression of Shiga toxin increases, the toxin kills host cells, and dead cells release their iron. Shiga toxin, then, offers a way to rob the host of its iron stores. An intriguing question often pondered by scientists is, What roles do virulence factors play in the natural ecology of these bacteria? Surely, factors such as Shiga toxin did not evolve after Shigella started infecting humans. William Lainhart, Gino Stolfa, and Gerald Koudelka from the State University of New York at Buffalo discovered that Shiga toxin is actually a natural defense against Tetrahymena thermophila, a ciliated protist that grazes on bacteria. Lainhart and his colleagues found that Tetrahymena was killed when cocultured with Shiga toxin–producing bacteria. 

They proposed that reactive oxygen species produced by then activates phage replication and the expression of stx example of altruistic behavior by members of a bacterial species in which some individuals sacrifice themselves (as a result of phage lysis) to save the population. For further discussion of the beneficial roles of viruses, see Chapter 6. 

Corynebacterium diphtheriae, the cause of the respiratory disease diphtheria. The two-component diphtheria exotoxin, discussed more fully in eTopic 25.7, kills cells by ADP-ribosylating eukaryotic protein synthesis elongation and is part of a prophage genome integrated into the bacterial chromosome. Recall that a prophage is phage genome that has integrated into a bacterial chromosome. 

25.4 Would patients with iron overload (excess free iron in the blood) be more susceptible to infection? 

The major differences between exotoxins and endotoxins are summarized in Table 25.4. 

patient. Untreated Gram-negative sepsis is, however, almost always fatal, so its treatment, albeit risky, is imperative. An approach to prevent endotoxic shock currently under during an infection? Several investigators have shown that approach has not yet proved successful in human trials. 

There are nine categories of protein exotoxins based on mode of action. These include toxins that disrupt membranes, inhibit protein synthesis, or alter the synthesis of host cell signaling-molecules, as well as toxins that are superantigens or target-specific proteases. 

Staphylococcus aureus alpha toxin forms pores in host cell membranes. 

that affect cAMP levels (edema factor) and cleave host protein kinases (lethal factor). 

integral component of Gram-negative outer membranes and an important virulence factor that triggers massive release of cytokines from host cells. The indiscriminate release of cytokines can trigger fever, shock, and death. 

Cholera toxin, discussed in Section 25.4, is a well-known duplicated at some point during evolution and redesigned the unusual ability to extend and retract from the outer membrane—a property that produces the gliding motility of Myxococcus (see Section 4.6) and the twitching motility of Neisseria and Pseudomonas. As you might guess, assembly/disassembly of these appendages is quite complex. cyclically assemble and disassemble the pilus-like structure, using it as a piston to ram folded toxins or effector proteins through an outer membrane pore structure and into the surrounding void (Fig. 25.23). 

related to flagellar genes, whose products export the flagellin proteins through the center of a growing flagellum (discussed in Section 3.6). It appears that flagellar genes were evolutionarily reengineered to encode proteins that which cause dramatic rearrangements of host cytoskeleton at the cell membrane that lead to engulfment of the microbe other microbial sources. Many bacterial pathogens use this type of secretion system, including plant pathogens such as Pseudomonas syringae (the cause of blight, a disease of many plants in which leaves or stems develop brown spots). Secretion is normally triggered by cell-cell contact between host and bacterium. 

Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium from the bacterial cytoplasm into the host cytoplasm. The Spector. 2002. Microbial Physiology, 4th ed. © Wiley-Liss, Inc. 

apparatus) its invasin proteins, which choreograph a local actin-rich membrane ruffle at the host cell. The ruffle engulfs the bacterium and eventually disassembles, internalizing the bacterium. 

of events, an enzyme-packed lysosome would fuse with the phagosome and release its contents in an effort to kill the invader. Salmonella, however, possesses a second pathogenicity proteins that alter vesicle remodeling (step 2) and vesicle trafficking (step 3), thereby reducing phagosomelysosome fusion so that the intracellular bacteria are spared. TNF-alpha to limit inflammation; other effectors inhibit migration of 4). Salmonella eventually escapes from traffics to the cell periphery and fuses with the host membrane. In addition, cell apoptosis (step 5), a programmed cell death that kills the host cell in a way that prevents further inflammation. Freed from the initial cell, Salmonella can now infect other cells, including macrophages. Because of their importance to are the subject of intensive research designed to exploit them as potential drug targets. 

are injected into host cell. 

2. Effectors trigger membrane ruffling for entry. 

3. Effectors alter host transcriptional activators; induce cytokine synthesis. 

from PMNs convert thiosulfate to tetrathionate. Salmonella uses tetrathionate as an alternate electron acceptor. 

4. Effectors loosen tight junctions, increase chloride secretion and fluid loss. 

5. Proinflammatory attracts polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs). PMNs migrate to gut lumen. 

5. Effector protein initiates apoptotic cell death. 

2. Effectors modify surface of SCVs. 

along microtubules to nucleus and then periphery. 

TNFα, and limit dendritic cell motility. 

The bacterium that causes whooping cough in humans, to export pertussis toxin, but it simply exports the toxin, systems also differ with respect to whether the protein is taken directly from the cytoplasm, like CagA from Helicobacter, or from the periplasm, as with pertussis toxin. In the latter case, the SecA-dependent general secretory system first delivers the toxin to the periplasmic space. resembles a harpoon or blowgun (see Special Topic 25.1). 

Many pathogens use specific protein secretion pathways to deliver toxins. retraction mechanism to push proteins out of the cell. either the cytoplasm or the periplasm. 

Once inside a host, how does a successful pathogen avoid detection and destruction? Many of the virulence factors in the pathogen’s arsenal help the microbe escape or resist innate immune mechanisms. Others are dedicated to stealth—that is, hiding from the immune system. But before discussing how these organisms survive in a host, we must ask how the pathogen knows it is in a host. 

must adjust its physiology to match its whereabouts. Why around? But how do microbial pathogens know whether they are in a host or in a pond? And which bacterial genes are expressed exclusively while in a host? 

Bordetella pertussis takes pertussis toxin from the periplasm (moved there by SecA-dependent transport) across the outer membrane. 

The same types of regulatory mechanisms that sense environmental conditions in a pond are used by the microbe to intuit its whereabouts in a host. That is, various sensing systems act in concert to recognize a specific environmental niche. Two-component signal transduction systems, discussed in Section 10.1, are used to monitor magnesium concentrations, which are characteristically low in a host cell vacuole. Other regulators measure pH, which will be low (acidic) in the same vacuole. The point is that there is no single in vivo sensor system. The various regulators collaborate to trigger the expression of virulence genes. effector proteins into gastrointestinal cells, so synthesis of up in the intestine because fucosidases from the nonpathogenic gut microbe Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron cleave fucose from the host glycans present on intestinal epithelial cells. 

Jensen (standing, with Martin Pilhofer at of the VipA-GFP structure from one side of the cell to another (arrows), followed by a contraction event and apparent disassembly of the contracted VipA-GFP structure. 

Target cell 2. Extension. Ready to fire. 

3. Contraction. Contact with host cell triggers contraction of VipA/B sheath. VgrG is fired into the host cell. 

survives the Vibrio attack and launches a counterstrike that kills the Vibrio. How Pseudomonas senses the attack is still With its role in virulence, its prevalence among Gramnegative bacterial genomes, and its predicted phage-like novel targets for treating bacterial disease. 

experiment(s) could you do to determine whether a single from many different organisms? secretion requires a dynamic contractile phage tail-like structure. Nature 483:182–186. 

Nuclei are stained blue; actin is stained red. Notice that the intracellular Burkholderia form actin tails. This image shows many infected macrophages fusing into a giant cell. Source: Paul Brett, University of South in unfavorable body sites. Andrew Roe and his team at the Many bacterial pathogens will sense the concentration of free iron, which is typically very low in the host, to regulate virulence genes. For instance, Corynebacterium diphtheriae sensing a low iron environment will induce synthesis of diphtheria toxin (see eTopic 25.7; ). The toxin kills host cells to release their iron, which the bacteria can now use. For other pathogens, iron concentration alone is usually not enough to provoke virulence. Regulators sensitive to other in vivo signals must be activated to achieve a successful infection. Cell-cell communication is also important during infections. Pseudomonas aeruginosa, for example, has at least two quorum-sensing systems that detect secreted autoinducers. As the number of bacteria in a given space increases, so, too, does the concentration of the chemical autoinducer. When the autoinducer reaches a critical concentration, it diffuses back into the bacterium or binds to a surface receptor and triggers the expression of bacterial target genes. Genes Why would a pathogen employ quorum sensing to regulate virulence factors? One reason may be to prevent alerting the host that it is under attack before enough microbes can accumulate through replication. Tripping the host’s alarms too early would make eliminating infection easy. Waiting until a large number of bacteria have amassed before releasing toxins and proteases will increase the chance that the host can be overwhelmed. 

This topic was first covered in the discussions of host defense (Chapter 23) and immunology (Chapter 24). Many bacteria, such as Streptococcus pneumoniae and Neisseria meningitidis, produce a thick polysaccharide capsule that envelops the cell. Capsules help organisms resist phagocytosis in several ways. 

Recall that phagocytes must recognize bacterial cell-surface structures or surface-bound C3b complement factor to begin uniformity and slippery nature of capsule composition make it difficult for phagocytes to lock on to the bacterial cell. But what about complement factor C3b, which can bind to the bacterial cell? Phagocytes have surface C3b receptors that latch on to C3b molecules. Capsules will envelop any C3b complement factor that binds to the bacterial surface, thereby hiding it from the phagocyte. Fortunately, immune defense mechanisms can eventually circumvent this avoidance strategy by producing opsonizing antibodies (IgG) against the capsule itself (see Section 24.2). The Fc regions of antibodies that bind to the capsule point away from the bacterium, so they are free to bind Fc receptors on phagocyte membranes. Binding of the Fc region to the phagocyte’s Fc receptor triggers phagocytosis. Pathogens can also use proteins on the cell surface to before the antibody-binding site ever finds its bacterial target. Thus, the business end of the antibody—that is, the part with antigen-binding sites—is pointing away from the microbe. However, even if the antibody finds its antigen target on one that Fc region, once again blocking phagocyte recognition. Some microbes can trigger apoptosis in target host cells. Proteins made by the pathogen enter the host cell and trigger this programmed cell death. How does this help the pathogen? If a macrophage is targeted for self-destruction, it cannot destroy the microbe. Another immune avoidance strategy used by microorganisms, both the extracellular and intracellular types, is to change their antigenic structure. Genes encoding flagella, pili, and other surface proteins often use site-specific gene inversions to express alternative proteins (for example, Salmonella phase variation) or slipped-strand mispairing (see eTopic 10.1) to add or remove amino acids from a sequence (see Section 10.1). You can think of these processes as shape-shifting to avoid recognition. 

called LegC7, for instance, inhibits endosome trafficking that would lead to lysosome fusion. its ability to survive in amebas, which serve as a natural reservoir for this pathogen. Salmonella Typhi is another pathogen that prevents phagosome-lysosome fusion, but this organism eventually leaves the host cell (exocytosis) and enters extracellular tissue spaces where macrophages await (Fig. 25.29, fate 2). The bacterium is once again engulfed, by a macrophage this time, but again survives inside the macrophage phagosome. The infected macrophage homes to a regional lymph node, enters the bloodstream, and, like a Trojan horse, disseminates Salmonella throughout the body. 

3. Once inside the phagosome, the pathogen has one of three fates, depending on the pathogen. 

Shigella and Listeria assemble actin-polymerizing proteins at only one pole? 

Coxiella burnetii allow fusion and differentiate into a form able to replicate in the resulting in inclusion the “bring it on” strategy, some intracellular pathogens prefer the harsh environment of the phagolysosome. Coxiella burnetii, for example, grows well in the very acidic phagolysosome intracellular organism (an organism that grows only inside another living cell) causes a flu-like aches, headache, and high fever. The illness has a mortality rate of about 1%, so most people recover to good health. The organism allows phagosomelysosome fusion because the acidic environment that results is needed for it to survive and grow. 

Different pathogens have different strategies for surviving in a host cell. Some tolerate phagolysosome fusion (Coxiella), others prevent phagolysosome fusion (Salmonella), and still others escape the phagosome to replicate in the cytoplasm (Shigella and Listeria). 

25.8 How can you determine whether a bacterium is an intracellular pathogen? 

Fate 3: Pathogens like Shigella and Listeria break out of the phagosome and then move throughout the cytoplasm into adjacent cells by forming actin tails. 

Salmonella can remain inside a phagosome and prevent fusion with the lysosome. 

Typhi will remain in the phagosome, which moves to the host membrane and expels Salmonella into extracellular space. 

Fate 2, step 3: From there the bacterium can be engulfed by a macrophage and survive within the phagosome. 

Fate 2, step 4: The macrophage can travel to regional lymph nodes and disseminate the organism through the circulatory system. 

0.7 μm in length), the cause of Rocky Mountain spotted fever, in association with host actin (gold). Several pathogens propel themselves through host cytoplasm by polymerizing host actin at one pole of the bacterial cell. 

moves through the host cytoplasm propelled by actin tails, stained infected with Coxiella burnetii at 2 hours (left) and 6 hours (right) undergoes a form of differentiation that changes its shape and alters its interactions with the host cell. 

in are designed to buy the microbe more time to overwhelm the host. Molecular mimicry and subverting antigen presentation. 

■ Summary of microbial strategies that misdirect the immune system. Bacteria and viruses produce different molecules that can mimic cytokines or transcriptional regulators, alter cytokine production, prevent programmed cell death, alter antigen presentation, or inhibit autophagy. 

protein central to autophagosome production. Interactome proteins, suggesting that autophagy is widely targeted by Shigella, a cause of bacterial dysentery, avoids autophagy by making tails of polymerized host actin that propel the microbe through host cytoplasm (described earlier). This tactic may sometimes work, but the host can stop the bacterium from making actin tails by wrapping Shigella then they inhibit actin polymerization. The septin-caged microbe is now trapped and marked for autophagy. One of the discoverers of autophagy, Yoshinori Ohsumi, won the 2016 Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine. 

2. The pathogen uses the to escape the phagosome. 

3. An autophagosome forms around the ria and viruses misdirect the immune system? One way is to target a regulatory mechanism common to many host systems—namely, ubiquitylation (ubiquitination). Ubiquitin is a highly conserved, 76-amino-acid polypeptide in eukaryotes that can be covalently attached to other proteins. Attachment involves an enzymatic cascade of three can be activated or, alternatively, tagged for destruction by enzymes that recognize and tag target proteins with polyubiquitin. There are also deubiquitylation enzymes that can reverse the process. 

4. ...and fuses with a lysosome. 

5. Lysosomal enzymes kill and digest the microbe. 

When a pathogen escapes the phagosome, the host cell will try to form an intracellular vacuole (autophagosome) around the organism in a second attempt to kill it. 

■ Entrapment of intracytoplasmic bacteria by septin cage-like structures. Shigella may move in the host cytoplasm by actin tails or may become trapped by a septin cage and marked for autophagy. 

Triggers cytokine synthesis and inflammation. 

marks component in pathway for proteolysis. Inhibits inflammation. 

mediated ubiquitylation, activates the transcriptional regulator NF-kappaB, which activates transcription of inflammatory cytokine genes. The cytokines are secreted and initiate can ubiquitylate other components of the NF-kappaB activation pathway and mark them for destruction. As a result, cytokine synthesis is inhibited and inflammation is limited. Salmonella makes a deubiquitylase that removes polyubiquitin from an inhibitor of NF-kappaB activation. Deubiquitylation saves the inhibitor from destruction, allowing continued inhibition of NF-kappaB activation. 

3. Salmonella deubiquitylase stops proteolysis of inhibitor. Limits inflammation. 

modifies surface proteins of Listeria monocytogenes. Using what has been presented about toxin entry and protein secretion in Chapter 25, suggest some strategies for delivering this enzyme into host cells infected with this pathogen. 

is found in the interferon signal cascade. Interferons are secreted by virus-infected host cells, bind to interferon receptors on uninfected cells, and induce the expression of numerous genes that protect the uninfected cell from cascade, which marks them for destruction. The host cell then becomes quite vulnerable to virus attack. These examples demonstrate that ubiquitylation is a crucial part of immune regulation and a popular target of pathogens. Gaining an understanding of the ways ubiquitylation directs the immune system and how pathogens influence that direction could lead to new ways of enhancing host defense. (SidH) for destruction by the host cell proteasome. LubX triggers SidH degradation late during the infection. The role of SidH during the early phase of Legionella infection, however, is not yet known. Clearly, facultative and obligate intracellular pathogens have developed many ingenious strategies to take control of host cell defenses, but the host, for its part, has also evolved effective countermeasures. 

restoring virulence by replacing the mutant gene. But how do you identify which genes to test? Earlier, in Section 25.2 (and see also eTopics 25.1 and 25.2), we discussed how virulence genes in microbes can be identified using some clever selection techniques. Today there exist amazing molecular techniques that can broadly, and quickly, reveal a microbe’s overall pathogenic strategy and help scientists focus on likely virulence genes. In addition, powerful techniques can now deeply probe how pathogens and hosts respond to each other during an infection. 

lead to other successes in growing previously unculturable intracellular pathogens. 

Other major goals of infectious disease research include learning how a pathogen causes an infection, how the host responds to the infection, and how the pathogen responds to the host’s response. The situation is much like watching two armies waging war with numerous weapons at their disposal. Is there a way to view the molecular drama of host-pathogen interactions? There is now. the University of Würzburg and colleagues recently used RNAseq to simultaneously profi le the changing host and pathogen transcriptomes during Salmonella infection of human host cells. The scientists started by infecting human cells at two different stages of infection: 4 hours (10 bacteria see also Fig. 25.27). The researchers then used Illumina technology (see Sections 7.6 and 10.6) to simultaneously sequence pathogen and host cell transcripts. Their analysis showed that 4 hours postinfection, bacterial transcripts of host response to Salmonella invasion. infection. The most highly induced was the 80-nt sRNA called PinT (PhoP-induced sRNA in intracellular Salmonella). This sRNA was found to control the transition from transition, PinT also influenced many other aspects of host mitochondrial gene expression. shows how the loss of PinT led to relocalization of mitochondria (red) in infected host cells. The simultaneous examination of host and pathogen transcriptional profiles by dual RNAseq techniques will reveal other hidden gene functions in pathogens with profound effects on host cells. 

2. Host cells are collected, fixed, and passed through separate infected and uninfected cells. 

converted to cDNA, and bacterial and host cDNA sequences are analyzed. Transcriptomes are separated by computer. 

between an effector protein and β-lactamase is constructed in the bacterial cell. 

2. Protein secretion system translocates fusion protein to target host cell. 

3. After incubating the pathogen and host cells together, the fluorescent added to all host cells. Host cells that received the fusion protein can cleave the probe and will fluoresce blue. 

of the released donor fluorophore is detected (blue). The emission wavelength of the acceptor fluorophore (green) is different from that of the donor. 

monolayers were infected with dot+ (T4SS-positive) and Δdot (T4SS-negative) Legionella and probe (green). Column 2: Infected host cells were scanned for cleaved probe (blue). Column 3: Infected cells were immunostained for Legionella (red). The immunostain does not differentiate live from dead bacteria. Column 4: Merged images from columns 1, 2, and 3. 

he impact of infectious disease on the world’s population is staggering. The number of deaths caused directly by infections or as a consequence of underlying conditions such as cancer, smoking, or drug abuse, makes infectious disease the leading contributor to death in the world. There are over 1,400 different species of viruses, bacteria, fungi, and protozoa that infect humans. In Chapter 26 we explore the major types and etiologies of infections and introduce the art of diagnosis. 

Uganda, this Aedes mosquito–borne virus was thought to cause only mild rashes and fever. In May 2015, however, Zika virus spread from central Africa to South America, where it infected thousands. Many pregnant women became infected and delivered babies with very small heads, a consequence of incomplete brain development. Could the virus have caused neonatal microcephaly? Recently, Tatjana AvŠiČ Županc and colleagues discovered direct evidence of the link when they found Zika virus in the brain of a microcephalic fetus (arrows in the figure). 

Zika and microcephaly after receiving autopsy material from a fetus suspected of having an intrauterine infection. The mother was a volunteer in Brazil when she became pregnant. At 28 weeks of pregnancy she returned to Europe, where ultrasound uncovered fetal anomalies. By week 32, there were clear signs of intrauterine growth retardation, microcephaly, and brain calcifications. The fetus was given a poor prognosis, and the mother decided to terminate the pregnancy. 

Zika virus is not common in Slovenia, where you work. What compelled you to study this virus? 

What is the significance of recovering the entire genome of Zika virus in fetal brain tissue? Our results present strong evidence of the teratogenic the brain samples, noting the absence of other pathogens, and recovering a complete Zika genome sequence represent compelling evidence that congenital brain malformations associated with Zika virus infection during pregnancy are a consequence of viral replication in the fetal brain. 

Infectious diseases have challenged human existence for millions of years. Our tenacity as a species is due in no small way to our growing ability to diagnose, treat and prevent known infections, and to identify new emerging ones. The Current Research Highlight is an example of the latter. By discovering the viral genome in the brain of a microcephalic fetus, Tatjana Avšič Županc and neuropathologist Mara Popović (Fig. 26.1) provided a direct link between Zika virus and microcephaly. The story of Zika virus is still unfolding; we don’t yet know how discovering Zika virus in fetal brain tissue will impact diagnosis or treatment. But ultimately it will. In Chapter 26 we discuss a wide variety of infectious microbes by describing their infectious routes, the pathologies they cause, and the symptoms that result. We also examine prevention strategies such as vaccinations when available. Antimicrobial treatments are surveyed later in Chapter 27, while laboratory diagnostics and epidemiological considerations are examined in Chapter 28. What we present in this chapter is not an exhaustive compendium of microbial illnesses, but a representative sampling of infections that illustrate key aspects of microbial disease. The material is arranged and presented so as to integrate your knowledge of microbiology and immunology within the framework of the practice of medicine and the study of infectious disease. 

to provide an important link between the Zika virus and neonatal microcephaly. The background image shows a fetal brain affected by Zika (left), which is threefold smaller than the age-matched control patient. An individual who goes to a clinician complaining of a fever, cough, and chest pain does not typically report having encountered a particular bacterium. The clinician must determine from the patient that the disease is localized to the chest and then theorize that it may be a respiratory tract infection. Appropriate samples are then collected and sent to a clinical microbiology laboratory, where data are generated to confirm or dispute the presence of a specific etiological agent, such as Streptococcus pneumoniae or other lung pathogens. So how is the infectious cause of a disease diagnosed? 

culprit. For example, Vibrio cholerae and enterotoxigenic cramps, lethargy, and liters of watery stool each day. So when a patient presents these symptoms, how does the clinician know what microbes to look for? Here is where a good patient history can make all the difference. Although cholera is not commonly seen in the United States, a clinician might suspect cholera if the patient recently traveled to or emigrated from an endemic area where the disease is regularly observed. This travel information is not gained by examining the patient but comes from talking with the patient and taking a patient history. Many questions asked during the course of taking a patient’s social history can seem irrelevant or intrusive to the patient, who only wants relief from the symptoms. For instance: “Do you have any hobbies? What is your occupation? What foods have you eaten recently? Does your child attend day care? Has anyone in your family had similar symptoms?” All of those questions address possible sources of the infectious agent. Other questions can reveal highrisk behavior that can lead to certain infections. “Do you smoke, drink, or take recreational drugs? Have you had multiple sex partners? Do you use contraception?” Answers to these questions can provide important diagnostic clues to the astute clinician. For example, learning that a man suffering from enlarged glands, fever, and headaches also likes to hunt and recently killed rabbits can be important. The patient may have been exposed to the infects various wild animals and is the cause of tularemia, an illness also known as “rabbit fever.” The patient could have accidentally infected a cut while cleaning his kill. Tularemia is an example of a zoonotic disease, an infection that normally affects animals but can be transmitted to humans. Or consider the case of a woman with acute pneumonia. Upon learning that the woman is a sheep farmer, the clinician considers Coxiella burnetii as one of the possible causes of the infection (the list of possible causes is called as a farmer) who inhales the dried particles can develop the Because patient histories are so helpful in diagnosing infectious diseases, we will present several case histories in the following sections and segue into discussions of various microbes that can infect each organ system. Key aspects of infectious diseases will emerge as we proceed. 

Pathogens can be classified as food-borne, airborne, blood-borne, or sexually transmitted. Understanding infectious disease requires knowledge of the organ system, the portal of entry, and the infectious organism. 

Gram-positive organism, often a normal inhabitant of the nares (nostrils), can infect a cut or gain access to the dermis via a hair follicle. It possesses a number of enzymes that contribute to disease, including coagulase, which helps coat the organism with fibrin, thereby walling off the infection from the immune system and antibiotics. As a result, boils generally require surgical drainage in addition to antibiotic T-cell receptors. Antigen recognition is not required. As a flood of cytokines (see Chapters 24 and 25). infections are commonly treated with penicillin-like drugs, resistance to methicillin (oxacillin) and many other penicillinlike drugs through a mutation that alters one of the proteins synthesis (see Chapter 27). Because methicillin is normally we need to use alternative drugs, such as vancomycin. (nosocomial) infections, are no longer contained only in hospitals. Individuals who have not been in a hospital are (an incidence of approximately 20 per 100,000 population). 

The basic shape and appearance of the human body is dictated by bones, skin, and soft tissues such as muscle and underlying connective tissues. Because these organ systems and tissues collectively shape and maintain body architecture, infections that threaten their integrity will be discussed together. Infections that can affect one of these tissues can also spread directly to another tissue. Skin and soft-tissue infections range from simple boils to severe, complicated, so-called flesh-eating diseases that can be caused by a variety of bacteria, fungi, and viruses (see Table 26.1). Recall that the integrity of the skin, as well as the presence of normal skin microbiota, prevents infection. However, even minor insults to the skin (such as a paper cut) can result in infections, most of which are caused by the Gram-positive pathogen Staphylococcus aureus. Healthy individuals develop infections of the skin only rarely, whereas people with underlying immunosuppressive diseases such as diabetes are at much higher risk. 

Table 26.1 presents this and other common infections of the skin and soft tissues. 

a good growth environment for the organism, leading to the secretion of potent toxins and death of surrounding tissues. The bacteria will spread in subcutaneous tissue, destroying fat and fascia without initially harming the skin itself. Fascia is the sheath of thin, fibrous tissue that covers muscles and organs. Rapid, aggressive surgical removal of affected tissue and antibiotic treatment is required in these extreme cases, even before the clinical microbiology lab has had time to identify the organism. In this approach to antibiotic treatment, called empiric therapy, one or more antibiotics are given to “cover” (kill) the most likely causative agents. Therapy can include clindamycin and metronidazole (which act against anaerobes and Gram-positive cocci) and gentamicin (a drug particularly effective against Gram-negative microbes). (Chapter 27 further discusses these and other antibiotics.) Often, however, antibiotic treatment of patients with necrotizing fasciitis is ineffective because of insufficient blood supply to the affected tissues. Cellulitis is a non-necrotizing inflammation of the dermis that does not involve the fascia or muscles, but is characterized by localized pain, swelling, tenderness, erythema, and in immunocompetent adults, but a number of other bacteria, including Staphylococcus aureus, Gram-negative bacilli, and anaerobes, can also cause this skin infection. Streptococcus pyogenes wields many different virulence DNase (some of these are described in Chapter 25). The approximately 10% of the organism’s genome. One study found that a soluble factor produced by human pharyngeal cells can facilitate activation of at least some of these phages and cause horizontal transfer of the associated virulence factors between strains of this pathogen. Prophage activation and phage production are discussed in Chapter 6. 

26.2 Why would treatment of some infections require multiple antibiotics? 

spread from peripheral sites of infection to bone through the circulation (hematogenous seeding), most commonly the vertebrae because they are well vascularized. Organisms that commonly cause osteomyelitis include staphylococci (Staphylococcus aureus), streptococci (Streptococcus pyogenes), Gram-negative bacilli (Pseudomonas, Escherichia), and some anaerobes (Bacteroides). Bone biopsy is usually needed to identify the organism. Host factors that contribute to osteomyelitis include diabetes (when a diabetic foot wound goes untreated), children with sickle-cell disease, joint prosthetics, and intravenous drug use. Antibiotic treatment of osteomyelitis is challenging because most bones are not well vascularized. So debridement is also necessary. 

Several viruses can produce skin rashes, although their route of infection is usually through the respiratory tract. Measles, for example (see Section 6.1), is a highly contagious viral infection caused by a paramyxovirus, whose signs of measles, also known as rubeola, are fever, cough, mouth, along with a sore throat. Then a skin rash develops that typically starts on the face and spreads down the body. The virus replicates in the lymph nodes and spreads to the bloodstream (viremia), where it can infect endothelial cells interact with these infected cells. Although skin rash is the main symptom of measles, infection can also cause respiratory symptoms and complications, including pneumonia, bronchitis, croup, and even a fatal encephalitis in immunocompromised patients. In the problem in places where vaccinations are not routine. Rubella virus, a togavirus, causes a maculopapular rash known as German measles, or three-day measles. The rash is similar to but less red than that of measles (Fig. 26.5). German measles is an infection that affects primarily the skin and lymph nodes and is usually transmitted from person to person by aerosolization of respiratory secretions. It is not dangerous in adults or children; the virus can, however, cross the placenta in a pregnant woman and infect her fetus. If the virus crosses the placenta within the first trimester, the result is congenital rubella syndrome, which can cause death or serious congenital defects in the developing fetus. Other viruses affecting the skin, such as chickenpox, the related disease shingles, smallpox, and human papillomavirus, are included in Table 26.1 and discussed in eTopic 26.1. The vaccination schedule for preventing these diseases is provided in Table 24.1. 

Staphylococcus aureus and Streptococcus pyogenes are common bacterial causes of skin infections. The organisms usually infect through broken skin. has become an important cause of community-acquired staphylococcal infections. Necrotizing fasciitis is usually caused by Streptococcus pyogenes, but it can be the result of other infections. Infections of the skin can disseminate via the bloodstream to other sites in the body. Osteomyelitis, usually caused by Staphylococcus aureus, begins with direct bone trauma, hematogenous seeding, or contact with a nearby soft-tissue infection. Rubeola and rubella viruses infect through the respiratory tract, but their main manifestation is the production of similar maculopapular skin rashes. 

Lung and upper respiratory tract infections are among the most common diseases of humans. Many different bacteria, viruses, and fungi are well adapted to grow in the lung. Successful lung pathogens come equipped with appropriate attachment mechanisms and countermeasures to avoid various lung defenses (such as alveolar macrophages). One reemerging bacterial pathogen, Bordetella pertussis, the cause of whooping cough, inhibits the mucociliary escalator by binding to lung cilia (eTopic 26.2). Although many microbes can infect the lung, most respiratory diseases are of viral origin, and most viral infections (such as the common cold) do not spread beyond the lung. Fortunately, viral diseases by and large are self-limiting and typically resolve within 2 weeks; however, the damage caused by a primary viral infection can lead to secondary infections by bacteria. Bacterial infections of the lung, whether of primary or secondary etiology, require intervention. Today this means antibiotic therapy. Before the advent of antibiotics, the only recourse was to insert a tube into the patient’s back to drain fluid accumulating in the pleural cavity around the lung (a pathological process known as pleural effusion). Unless released, the pressure on the lung will collapse the alveoli and make breathing difficult. Viral infections predispose patients to secondary bacterial infections in several ways. Viral lung infections cause the patient to dehydrate, which increases mucus viscosity in the airways. Increased mucus viscosity limits motility of the mucociliary escalator (described in Section 23.1), making it harder to eliminate bacterial pathogens. To keep the escalator moving, cold sufferers are advised to drink plenty of fluids to decrease mucus viscosity. Another factor leading to secondary bacterial infections is that viruses can inhibit key aspects of lung innate-immune mechanisms that prevent bacterial growth. Note that many deaths resulting from viral influenza are caused by secondary bacterial infections. 

While there are over 80 antigenic types of pneumococcal capsular polysaccharides, the injected vaccine contains only the 23 types that are most often associated with disease to multiple antigens is called a “multivalent vaccine.” The resulting immune response will protect vaccinated individuals against infection by those antigenic types. The vaccine is recommended for individuals over 65, as well as for those who are immunocompromised. The patient in this case history failed to receive the vaccine. In addition to causing serious infections of the lungs (bacteremia) and the covering of the brain (meningitis). The death rates for these infections are about one out of every 20 who get pneumococcal pneumonia, about four out of 20 who get bacteremia, and six out of 20 who get meningitis. Individuals with special health problems, such of their compromised immune systems. An emerging infectious disease problem throughout the pneumoniae to antibiotics. At least 30% of the strains isolated are already resistant to penicillin, the former drug of choice for treating the disease. Chapter 27 discusses why antibiotic resistance is on the rise for this and other microbes. 

commonly used to treat bacterial infections of the respiratory tract) and discharged. Despite antibiotic treatment, the cough and weight loss continued. Physical exam at the time of admission revealed several painful subcutaneous nodules (one admission showed normal counts and differential. 

In this case, the expression of frankly purulent material (pus) from the left-leg nodule suggested an infectious process. The infection in this patient probably started in the lung (clued by the cough), after which the organism spread throughout the body via the bloodstream. Fungus is a probable cause, given the chronic nature of the patient’s symptoms. An alternative possibility would be tuberculosis, caused by the tuberculosis will exhibit a localized delayed-type hypersensitivity reaction at the site of injection, although this does not equate to currently active disease. Cryptococcus, an encapsulated yeast, is not the likely cause, since it typically requires an immunocompromised host to cause disease—not the case in this instance. (Cryptococcus, which causes cryptococcosis, is an opportunistic pathogen although disease can also involve the skin, lungs, prostate gland, urinary tract, eyes, myocardium, bones, and joints. The most likely fungal causes of infection in this case history are the endemic mycoses, such as histoplasmosis, blastomycosis, and coccidioidomycosis. This patient had never traveled to the western United States, where coccidioidomycosis is endemic, so exposure to Coccidioides was ruled out. Histoplasmosis most commonly presents as a flu-like pulmonary illness, with erythema nodosum (tender bumps on skin) and arthritis (swollen joints) or arthralgia (joint pain), none of which the patient had. Blastomycosis can disseminate to the lung, skin, bone, and genitourinary tract, consistent with the pattern of organ involvement seen in this patient. almost immediately, and the skin nodules diminished. After 2 weeks, a fungus was found in the cultures of the nodule biopsy, bronchoalveolar lavage (washes), and urine. 

soil of the Ohio and Mississippi river valleys and the southeastern United States. The portal of entry is the respiratory tract, and infection is usually associated with occupational and recreational activities in wooded areas along waterways, where there is moist soil with a high content of organic matter and spores. The incubation period ranges from 21 to 106 days. This patient most likely inhaled conidia (fungal spores) from the soil while crawling underneath houses installing insulation. The physician learned that the patient used only a T-shirt to cover his mouth and nose—not an effective method of keeping spores from entering the respiratory tract. He should have worn a respirator. Several critical features of this case help differentiate it from the preceding case of pneumococcal pneumonia. First, the initial macrolide antibiotic, azithromycin, should have killed most bacterial sources of infection. Second, the X-ray finding of diffuse infiltrate is more indicative of fungal lung infection than bacterial infection, which in a patient of this age would likely be confined to one lobe. The patient was young and in good health prior to the infection, making it unlikely to be pneumococcal pneumonia. The blood count was also a clue. Fungal infections do not usually cause an increase in WBCs or an increase in band cells. Finally, the metastatic lesions (infectious lesions that develop at a secondary site away from the initial site of infection) on the leg were in no way consistent with Streptococcus pneumoniae. They arise when the organism moves through the bloodstream from the primary site of infection to another body site, where it can begin to grow. Many infectious diseases start out as a localized infection but end up disseminating throughout the body to cause metastatic lesions. 

The term “metastasis” means the spread of disease from one organ to another, noncontiguous organ. Only microbial infections and malignant cancer cells can metastasize. 

Tuberculosis, caused by the acid-fast bacillus Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Fig. 26.8 inset), was once considered of passing historical significance to physicians practicing strains not only produced fulminant (rapid-onset) and fatal highly infectious. Tuberculin skin test conversion rates of up to 50% were reported in exposed health care workers (the conversion rate today is less than 1%). 

macrophages, and if not killed, they survive ensconced within modified phagolysosomes. The bacilli can multiply in these vacuoles, kill the macrophage (via induced apoptosis), and then be released to infect other macrophages. Four to six weeks postinfection, an infected person can develop active primary disease marked by a productive cough that generates sputum. The patient also experiences fever, night sweats, and weight loss. Patients with active disease are contagious and produce a delayed-type hypersensitivity that makes them tuberculin-positive. An alternative to primary disease is an asymptomatic bacilli remain hidden in macrophages and may even become dormant. The delayed-type hypersensitivity response to the organism builds small, hard tubercles around these cells. Over time, the tubercles develop into caseous lesions that have a cheese-like consistency and can calcify into the hardened Ghon complexes seen on typical X-rays (Fig. 26.8). The bacteria can remain dormant in these tubercles for many years. Even primary tuberculosis can resolve and become latent tuberculosis, unless the organisms were killed with antibiotics. years after initial infection, overcome the imposed confinement of the immune system. The bacteria begin to multiply and cause secondary, or reactivation, tuberculosis. include severe coughing, greenish or bloody sputum, lowgrade fever, night sweats, and weight loss. The gradual wasting of the body led to the older name for tuberculosis: Ten drugs are currently approved by the Food and Drug treatment of active disease is aggressive and involves a fourdrug regimen of what are called first-line drugs (or drugs of defined as being resistant to two or more first-line drugs. An that do not include the first-line drugs to which it is resistant. resistant to three or more second-line drugs (drugs used when drugs of choice fail), as well as two or more first-line drugs. These strains are almost untreatable. 

An elevated white cell count in blood is an indicator of bacterial infection. Pneumococcal vaccine should be administered to the elderly because they are often immunocompromised. Fungal agents commonly cause long-term, chronic Localized bacterial infections in the lung can disseminate via the bloodstream to form metastatic lesions at other body sites. Tuberculosis is an ancient bacterial disease with an increasing indigent population. Respiratory syncytial virus is one of several viruses that can cause lung disease, but it rarely disseminates. 

Nearly everyone has experienced diarrhea, a condition characterized by frequent loose bowel movements accompanied by abdominal cramps. Hundreds of millions of cases occur each year in the United States and are a major cause of death in developing countries. As with respiratory tract infections, most diarrheal disease is viral in origin, with rotavirus being the primary culprit. Among the bacteria, the Gram-negative rod Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium and the spiral-shaped or curved bacillus Campylobacter are the most frequent causes of self-limiting diarrheal disease. You might wonder why some microbes prefer the chaos of diarrhea to the relative stability of a nice commensal relationship. After all, isn’t finding a niche and sticking to it the goal of every microbe? The simple answer is that diarrhea enables the dissemination of microbes that might otherwise kill their host or be killed themselves after too robber fleeing from city to city to avoid capture and find more banks to rob. 

Lung infections are mostly viral, but most deadly lung infections are caused by bacteria. The mucociliary escalator is a primary defense mechanism used by the lung to avoid infection. 

enters the intestinal lumen. The excess water loosens stool, and diarrhea results. There are several types of diarrhea. 

Osmotic diarrhea follows the intake of nonabsorbable substrates, such as lactulose, a synthetic sugar, used to treat constipation. Lactulose increases osmolarity in the intestine, which causes water to leave mucosal cells. The result is osmotic diarrhea. Infectious organisms (such as rotavirus) that prevent nutrient absorption can cause osmotic diarrhea. Osmosis is discussed in eAppendix 2. 

Secretory diarrhea develops when microbes cause mucosal cells to increase ion secretion, as seen with cholera toxin. Mucosal cells expel water to try to equilibrate the resulting electrolyte imbalance. 

Motility-related diarrhea can develop when enterotoxins made by pathogens such as rotavirus cause intestinal hypermotility. Food moves so quickly through the intestine (hypermotility) that there isn’t sufficient time to absorb water or nutrients. 

Diarrhea due to viral growth, bacterial growth, or toxin production can cause large amounts of water and electrolytes to leave the intestinal cells and enter the intestinal lumen. As a result, the patient not only suffers diarrhea but can become dangerously dehydrated. Most deaths resulting from infectious diarrhea are the result of dehydration. 

She was admitted to the hospital 5 days after a kindergarten field trip to the local dairy farm. When the parents were questioned about Tammy’s activities during the trip, they said she had purchased a snack while at the farm. Upon laboratory analysis, a fecal smear was positive for leukocytes, and isolation of organisms confirmed the presence of Gram-negative developed additional problems. Her face and hands became fluids (suggesting kidney damage), and she was beginning to develop some neurological abnormalities. Laboratory analyses of blood samples revealed thrombocytopenia (reduced blood platelet count) and confirmed hemolytic uremic syndrome electrolyte replacement. Antibiotics were not administered. Tammy eventually recovered. In this case history, the presence of leukocytes in a fecal smear is a sign that the intestinal pathogen may have invaded the epithelial mucosa of the intestine (or severely damaged it). Breaching this barrier sends out a chemical call to neutrophils, which then enter the area and, in an effort to kill the pathogen, also damage the intestinal cells. 

dialysis throughout the critical period until kidney function resumes. Antibiotic treatment can increase the release of Shiga toxins from the organisms and actually trigger In contrast to the case just described, many gastrointestinal infections do not produce fecal leukocytes or blood in the stool. Diarrheal diseases caused by Vibrio cholerae intestinal lining by the microbe, and they yield copious amounts of watery diarrhea. In these two toxin-driven diseases, the bacteria attach to cells lining the intestine and secrete toxins that are imported into the target cells (see Section 25.4). 

In May 2011, people in Germany began dying from hemolytic 35 deaths had been reported. By then, a massive epidemiological hunt was under way for the cause of the disease and its source. The organism isolated in each case was a form the attaching and effacing proteins often associated with Unfortunately, this unique pathovar also harbored a plasmid that conveyed resistance to all penicillins, cephalosporins, and co-trimoxazole. Another feature was the presence of enteroaggregative adherence fimbriae (aaf), which allow series of unfortunate events produced this “chimeric” patho- the aaf and drug resistance characteristics is less apparent and under investigation. produces high amounts of Shiga toxin (Stx-2) as compared the University of Lethbridge and the Public Health Agency that conditions in the gastrointestinal tract could induce a similar response. finger-pointing had begun. Germany initially blamed Spanish cucumbers, which led to a huge economic loss in Spain as foreign countries refrained from importing these vegetables. Later it was shown that Spain was not the source of this organism. Finally, the German agricultural minister of Lower Saxony announced that an organic farm near Uelzen, which produces a variety of sprouted foods, was the likely source however, several tourists visiting Germany ingested the organism and returned to their home countries, including the Fortunately, as of this writing, no further major outbreaks caused by this pathogen have been reported. 

Note the biosafety precautions taken by the medical personnel (gloves, gown, and mask). 

secretion systems directly inject proteins from the cytoplasm of a bacterial pathogen into the cytoplasm of a target eukaryotic host cell. The system delivers proteins across three membranes—two from the Gram-negative bacterial pathogen and one surrounding the target cell. In addition to stimulating bacterial entry into host cells, cause host cells to secrete pro-inflammatory cytokines. The cytokines then “call in” inflammatory cells and alter ion transport through the epithelial membrane. Excessive export of ions such as chloride causes water to leave the cell in an attempt to equilibrate the internal and external ionic concentrations. The water entering the intestine results in diarrhea. Type III–translocated effector proteins induce many host cellular responses that contribute to intestinal inflammation during an infection. 

Many people wrongly think that most cases of diarrhea are caused by a bacterial agent. Actually, two viruses— rotavirus and norovirus—cause more intestinal disease is highly infectious, spreading by the fecal-oral route; it is endemic around the globe, and it affects all age groups, although children between 6 and 24 months are the most severely affected. It is estimated that by age 3, all children have had a rotavirus infection. The incubation period is approximately 2 days, after which the victim commonly suffers frequent watery, dark green, explosive diarrhea. All of this may be accompanied by nausea, vomiting, and abdominal cramping. Severe dehydration and electrolyte loss due to the diarrhea will cause death unless supportive measures, such as fluid replacement, are undertaken. There is no cure, but most patients recover if rehydrated properly. Few deaths from rotavirus occur in the United States, but each year more than 400,000 children worldwide die from this viral diarrhea (2014 estimate). The mortality and incidence of this disease have decreased because of the introduction in 2006 of a safe and effective vaccine (see Section 24.6). In Mexico alone, the vaccine resulted in a 50% decline in diarrheal deaths. With the success of the rotavirus vaccine, norovirus is set to become the most common worldwide cause of nonbacterial gastroenteritis. Norovirus infections have already surpassed rotavirus in the United States. The virus is perceived as the scourge of cruise ships and assisted-living facilities, but norovirus can also spread quickly in hotels or anywhere there are many people in a small area. The virus spreads by the fecal-oral route among children or adults, via contaminated food or person-to-person contact. Within 24 hours of infection, the victim experiences sudden vomiting, stomach cramps, and watery diarrhea that mercifully resolves within 12–24 hours. Treatment is similar to that for rotavirus, and there is no vaccine. Death is rare, but most common among infants and the elderly. 

Norovirus infection is sometimes called the “stomach flu,” but that is a misnomer. It is not the flu and has nothing to do with influenza virus. 

Diarrhea and the gut microbiome. An obvious question to study headed by Shannon Manning (Michigan State University) found that the composition of intestinal microbiota of patients with diarrhea differs significantly from that of their healthy family members. For one thing, the gut microbiomes of diarrhea patients who were not given antibiotics were less diverse than those of their uninfected family members. Abundance of Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes was higher in the healthy individuals, whereas Proteobacteria dominated the patient microbiomes. Escherichia coli, for instance, predominated in all patients regardless of the pathogen causing the infection. The composition of diarrheal microbiomes also varied with the bacterial cause of infection. As one example, the microbiome of Campylobacter-infected patients differed from that of patients infected with Salmonella or Shigella. How does the intestine restore its bacterial population after being decimated by diarrhea or antibiotic treatment? Lawrence David (Duke University), Peter Turnbaugh used metagenomic procedures to characterize the stools of 41 people in Bangladesh (children and adults) who had The researchers identified a consistent succession of repopulation events in nearly every case, regardless of the treatment for the diarrhea) clears out much of the microbiome, carbohydrates and oxygen accumulate in the gut. Carbohydrates and oxygen would normally be metabolized by gut microbiota. During the early stage of repopulation, facultative, oxygen-respiring and carbohydrate-utilizing bacteria (especially those using simple carbohydrates, such as Escherichia, Enterococcus, and Streptococcus) colonize the gut and consume these nutrients. Midstage recovery begins when the lack of simple sugars and oxygen (as well as increased phage predation) leads to a decline in the earlystage species. This decline allows succession to anaerobic, complex carbohydrate-fermenting bacteria (Bacteroides). 

Peter Turnbaugh unravel the complexities of the human microbiome. diarrhea (dpp). Patients were given a single dose of azithromycin on the contacts of patients are shown on the left. Letters indicate patient identifications; numbers indicate separate healthy contacts for each patient. Colored boxes reflect groups of different genera that are prominent during the infection and afterward during early, mid, and late stages of repopulation. The x-axis values reflect relative abundances of genera. “All swab” microbes were present only in rectal swab samples. 

intestines and reproduces. Offspring quickly encyst and are excreted out of the host’s body. manifests as greasy stools alternating between a watery diarrhea, loose stools, and constipation. However, some patients will experience explosive diarrhea. Diagnosis usually comes from observing the cysts or trophozoite forms of the protozoan in feces. Metronidazole is a drug often used to cure the disease. To prevent it in the first place, proper treatment of community water supplies is Although most gastrointestinal disease is intestinal in locale, specialized microbes can also target the stomach, with its harsh acidic environment. 

Pepcid to reduce acid secretion and provide relief. Recently, an upper-GI endoscopy had been performed, in which a long, thin tube tipped with a camera and light source was inserted into Gary’s mouth and threaded down into his stomach. The view through the endoscope showed some reddened areas in the antrum (bottom part) of the stomach. The endoscope was also equipped with a small clawlike structure that obtained urease test performed on the antral biopsy turned positive in 20 minutes. Histological examination of the biopsy confirmed moderate chronic active gastritis (inflammation of the stomach lining) and revealed the presence of numerous spiralshaped organisms. Cultures of the antral biopsy were positive for Helicobacter pylori. Painful and sometimes life-threatening gastric ulcers were for many years blamed on spicy foods and stress. These factors were believed to cause increased acid production that ate away at the stomach lining, even though the gastric mucosa is normally well protected from stomach acid, which can fall as low as pH 1.5. This protection argued (a medical intern at the Royal Perth Hospital at the time) Their hypothesis was viewed with skepticism and declared as heresy by the established medical community. 

Marshall was so sure he was right about the cause of stomach ulcers that he to gastric mucosa. 

2. The pathogen produces extracellular urease, which locally raises the pH of the stomach. Urease protects the bacterium from the stomach's acid defense barrier. 

3. Collagenase and mucinase assist bacteria in reaching the stomach’s epithelial lining. 

6. CagA injected into host epithelial cells activates host signal transduction pathways that can stimulate growth, possibly leading to cancer. 

the mucosa (Fig. 26.12, step 1). As it approaches the mucosa, the pathogen produces intracellular and extracellular urease, an important virulence factor that converts around Helicobacter and allows the organism to survive the extreme acidity of the stomach (step 2). Two other enzymes—collagenase and mucinase—then soften the mucous lining, which allows the bacteria to reach step 3). The epithelial lining is much less acidic than the lumen, so the organism can grow and divide. Once at the epithelium, Helicobacter produces various adhesins, such as BapA or HpaA, to bind host cells (step 4). After the organism has adhered, tissue damage develops with the release of vacuolating cytotoxin (VacA) and neutrophil-activating damage local tissue (step 5). VacA forms a hexameric pore in the host membrane and induces apoptosis (programmed cell death) by damaging mitochondria. Apoptotic cells decrease the immune response, which will stabilize a chronic infection. Another protein, CagA, is injected into host epithelial cells, where it is phosphorylated; CagA then interacts with host signaling proteins and activates host signal transduction pathways that can stimulate growth, possibly leading to cancer (step 6). assay, described more fully in Section 28.2, is performed by coating wells in a plastic dish with an antigen (for example, Helicobacter CagA). Serum from the patient is then added to the well. If antibodies to CagA are present, they will bind to the CagA antigen. Unbound antibody is removed by washing, and a secondary antibody that binds human IgG is added to the well. The anti–human IgG antibodies have an enzyme linked [CagA protein]–[anti-CagA antibody]–[anti-human IgG antibody]–[enzyme]. When substrate is added to the well, the enzyme acts on it to produce light or a chromogenic (colored) product. The more anti-CagA antibody present in the serum, the more light or product that is produced Section 28.2. 

We have examined in this section only a handful of the bacterial, viral, and protozoan microbes that cause gastrointestinal infection. Others are listed in Table 26.3 and are described in Chapter 20. 

Staphylococcal food poisoning is not an infection. It is a toxigenic disease. Antibiotic treatments can sometimes cause gastrointestinal disease (for example, pseudomembranous enterocolitis by Clostridium difficile). The presence of red and white blood cells in fecal contents is an indication of invasive bacterial infection by intracellular pathogens such as Shigella, Salmonella, the attachment and effacing lesions it produces result in bloody stools. Bacterial toxins produced by bacterial enteric pathogens can cause systemic symptoms. Rotavirus is still the single greatest cause of diarrhea worldwide. Increasing use of rotavirus vaccine may eventually leave norovirus as the world’s leading cause of diarrhea. Giardia lamblia is a major protozoan cause of diarrhea The bacterium Helicobacter pylori, a common cause of gastric ulcers, lives in the stomach and is highly acid resistant. 

Although the genital and urinary tracts are different organ systems with different purposes (procreation versus the filtering and excretion of waste products from blood), the close association of these organ systems in the body has often led them to be grouped together when discussing infections. Note that viruses and bacteria are capable of infecting the genital tract, but viruses rarely cause urinary tract infections. Also, very few pathogens can infect both organ systems. 

Deposition of bacteria from the bloodstream to the kidney. Kidney infections (called pyelonephritis) can arise when microorganisms from infections elsewhere in the body disseminate via the bloodstream. 

Descending infection occurs when bacteria from an infected kidney are shed into the ureters. The microbes are then carried by urine into the bladder. 

Infection from the urethra to the bladder. This is the most common route for bladder infections (called cystitis). Bacteria residing along the superficial urogenital membranes of the urethra can ascend to the bladder. This is a more common occurrence in women than in men. Uropathogenic bacteria colonizing the urethra can also be introduced into the bladder by means of mechanical devices such as catheters or cystoscopes that are passed through the urethra into the bladder. 

is given in map units within the circle representing the genome. The 0–100 map units are called centisomes. Each centisome is approx. 

26.5 Urine samples collected from six hospital patients were placed on a table at the nurses’ station awaiting pickup from the microbiology lab. Several hours later, a courier retrieved the samples and transported them to the lab. The next day, the lab reported that four of the six patients had UTIs. Would you consider these results reliable? Would you start treatment based on these results? 

but genomic analysis has exposed five pathogenicity islands these pathogenicity islands are still under investigation. 

Sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) are defined as infections transmitted primarily through sexual contact, which may include genital, oral-genital, or anal-genital contact. The organisms or viruses involved are generally very susceptible to drying and require direct physical contact with mucous membranes for transmission. Because sex can take many forms in addition to intercourse, these microbes can initiate disease in the urogenital tract, rectum, or oral cavities. Condoms can prevent transmission but do so, of course, only when used. Examples of common sexually transmitted diseases are listed in Table 26.4. 

case history are classic symptoms of syphilis. Syphilis was recognized as a disease as early as the sixteenth century, but the organism responsible, the spirochete Treponema (Chapter 18 describes spirochete structure.) The illness has several stages. The disease has often been called the great imitator because its symptoms in the second stage, as exhibited in the case history, can mimic many other diseases. The incubation stage can last from 2 to 6 weeks after transmission, during which time the organism multiplies and spreads throughout the body. Primary syphilis is an inflammatory reaction at the site contains spirochetes. Patients are usually too embarrassed to seek medical attention and, because it is painless, hope it will just go away. It does go away after several weeks, and without scarring. The disease has now entered the primary latent stage. Over the next 5 years, symptoms may be absent, but at any time, as described in the case history, the infected person can develop the rash typical of secondary produced by many different diseases, which contributes to the “great imitator” label. The patient remains contagious in this stage. The symptoms eventually resolve, and the patient reenters a latent phase of syphilis. Some patients eventually progress over years to tertiary syphilis and develop many of the cardiovascular and nervous system– associated symptoms. Neurological symptoms resulting from syphilis at any stage of the disease are referred to as neurosyphilis. The patient can develop dementia and eventually dies from the disease. with fluorescent antibody, but the initial screen is usually serological (that is, patient serum is tested for antibodies). Antibiotics are useful for eradicating the organism, but there is no vaccine, and cure does not confer immunity. 

to sign informed consent forms. An interesting treatise on the Tuskegee experiment can be found on the Internet at the National Center for Case Study Teaching in Science (search the site for “Bad Blood”). 

1. Elementary bodies (EBs) bind and enter eukaryotic cell by endocytosis. 

Chlamydia is the most frequently reported sexually transmitted infectious disease in the United States, accordRBs 3. Reticulate bodies ing to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, but many people are unaware that they are infected. Three-fourths of infected women, for instance, 4. Reticulate bodies have no symptoms. differentiate to The chlamydias are unusual Gram-negative elementary bodies and form inclusions. organisms with a unique developmental cycle. (Chapter 18 describes chlamydial morphology.) They are obligate intracellular pathogens that start as a small, nonreplicating, 5. Elementary infectious elementary body that enters target bodies are eukaryotic cells. Once inside vacuoles, they begin to enlarge into replicating reticulate bodies (Fig. 26.15). As the vacuole fills, the reticulate bodies divide to become new nonAttachment replicating elementary bodies. Chlamydia trachomatis and Chlamydophila pneumoniae can both cause STDs, as well as other diseases, Intermediate form such as trachoma of the eye or pneumonia. People most at risk of developing genitourinary tract infections with chlamydias are young, Reticulate body sexually active men and women; anybody who hass Elementary body recently changed sexual partners; and anybody who ase. The has recently had another sexually transmitted disease. others may also be present. th probrob bbLeft untreated, chlamydia can cause serious health lems. In women, the organism can produce pelvic infl inflam1,000 nm matory disease, a damaging infection of the uterus and Chlamydia trachomatis fallopian tubes that can be caused by several different microbial species. The damage produced can lead to inferinfected cell, showing an elementary body, a reticulate body, and an intermediate form. tility, tubal pregnancies, and chronic pelvic pain. Men left untreated can suffer urethral and testicular infections and a serious form of arthritis. 

discharge. The organism produced characteristic colonies on chocolate agar (agar plates containing heat-lysed red blood The case was subsequently reported to the state public health department. When the patient came back for his return visit, his symptoms had resolved, and a repeat culture was negative. The disease here is classic gonorrhea caused by Neisseria infections from Chlamydia infections is that bacterial cells are seen in gonorrheal discharges but not in chlamydial discharges. Gonorrhea has been a problem for centuries and remains epidemic in this country today. Symptoms generally occur 2–7 days after infection, but they can take as long as 30 days to develop. Most infected men exhibit symptoms; only about 10%–15% do not. Symptoms include painful urination, yellowish white discharge from the penis, and in some cases, swelling of the testicles and penis. The gonorrhea, which means “flow of seed.” In contrast to men, most infected women (80%) do not exhibit symptoms and constitute the major reservoir of the organism. If they are asymptomatic, they have no reason to seek treatment and thus can spread the disease. When woman will experience a painful burning sensation when urinating and will notice vaginal discharge that is yellow or occasionally bloody. She may also complain of cramps or pain in her lower abdomen, sometimes with fever or nausea. As the infection spreads throughout the reproductive organs (uterus and fallopian tubes), pelvic inflammatory disease occurs (see earlier discussion of chlamydia). There is no serological test or vaccine for gonorrhea, because the organism frequently changes the structure of its surface antigens (phase variation is discussed in Section 10.1 and eTopic 10.1). owing to its sensitivity to complement, certain serum-resistant strains can make their way to the bloodstream and carry infection throughout the body. As a result, both sexes can develop purulent arthritis (joint fluid containing pus), endocarditis, or meningitis. An infected mother can also infect her newborn during parturition (birth), leading to a serious eye infection called ophthalmia neonatorum. Because of this risk and because most infected women are asymptomatic, all newborns receive antimicrobial eyedrops at birth. Because adults engage in a variety of sexual practices, where it can develop into a mild sore throat. These infections generally remain unrecognized until a sex partner in part because there is phase variation in various surface antigens and because the organism can apparently bind to developed resistance to many antibiotics used in its treatment, but there has always been a new, effective drug ready recommends dual antibiotic therapy that includes an intramuscular injection of ceftriaxone and oral azithromycin or tetracycline. However, the incidence of ceftriaxone-resistant has been raised that new antibiotics must be developed if we are to prevent an uncontrollable explosion of cases of this already epidemic disease. 

The number of people living can directly transfer from an 8 µm infected to an uninfected infection of the lung. Note the cuplike appearance of the fungus, almost like crushed Ping-Pong balls. Organisms range from 2 to 6 µm in resulting from heterosexual sex. The molecular biology and pathogenesis is covered in eTopic 26.5. This section focuses example of viruses that can be transmitted either sexually (vaginally, orally, anally—homosexually or heterosexually) or through direct contact with body fluids, such as occurs increased, however, because of the development of more described in eTopic 26.5. 

surface). The virus replicates very rapidly, producing a billion particles per day. The virus can also spread directly virions and mitochondria (to supply energy) line up at the decrease in number. symptoms, or sometimes swollen lymph nodes) 3. Early symptomatic disease (formerly called AIDSrelated complex) Symptoms in the early symptomatic stage can include fever, headache, macular rash, and weight loss. The symptoms can manifest within a few months of infection, resolve within a few weeks, and then recur. As T-cell numbers decline, the debilitated immune system leaves the victim susceptible to falls below 500 cells/μl, opportunistic infections start to arise and disease processes begin. Opportunistic infections include pneumonia by Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare their depressed immune systems cannot detect and destroy cancer cells generated by secondary agents. Kaposi’s sarcoma lymphatic cells, but the resulting tumors can develop anywhere—gastrointestinal tract, mouth, lungs, skin, or brain. 

Trichomonas vaginalis is a flagellated protozoan that causes a sexually transmitted vaginal disease. The reservoirs for this organism are the male urethra and female vagina. 

defense against the organism, are also usually present. Like giardiasis, this disease is treated with metronidazole. 

The cardiovascular system, which is composed of the heart, arteries, veins, and capillaries, delivers oxygen, nutrients, and immune system components to all tissues of the body. There are pathogens that can directly infect the heart or the endothelial cells lining blood vessels. However, the blood itself can also become infected or serve as a mass transit system to spread pathogens throughout the body. Pathogens disseminated in this way can cause infections in many different organ systems. We will examine both types of infections in this section. Infections of the cardiovascular system include septicemia, endocarditis (inflammation of the heart’s inner lining), pericarditis (inflammation of the heart’s outer lining), myocarditis (inflammation of heart muscle), and, possibly, atherosclerosis (deposition of fatty substances along the inner lining of arteries; eTopic 26.6). These are all lifethreatening diseases. Septicemia is, by strict definition, the presence of bacteria or viruses in the blood. The presence of viruses is a condition more specifically called viremia, while bacteria in the circulation is more specifically called bacteremia. In practice, however, the terms “septicemia” and “bacteremia” are often used interchangeably. Septicemia can develop from a local tissue infection situated anywhere in the body, although blood factors such as complement can nonspecifically kill many types of bacteria that enter the blood. Nevertheless, Gram-positives, Gram-negatives, aerobes, and anaerobes can all produce septicemia under the right conditions. Endocarditis can be either viral or bacterial in origin. It can be a consequence of many bacterial diseases, such as brucellosis, gonorrhea, psittacosis, staphylococcal and Among the many viral causes are coxsackievirus, echovirus, heart are always serious. Viral infections, although common, are rarely life-threatening in healthy individuals and are usually asymptomatic. 

patient’s blood from two different locations (such as two should be done aerobically and anaerobically. Growth of the same organism in cultures taken from two body sites rules out inadvertent contamination with skin microbes, which would likely yield growth in only one culture. Curing endocarditis is difficult because the microbes are usually ensconced in a nearly impenetrable glycocalyx. Consequently, eradicating microorganisms from the vegetations almost always requires hospitalization, where high doses of intravenous antibiotic therapy can be administered and monitored. Antibiotic therapy usually continues for at least a month, and in extreme cases, surgery may be necessary to repair or replace the damaged heart valve. Patients with heart valve prolapse should not shy away from the dentist, however. As long as a healthy immune system is in place, the risk of infection is low. In fact, maintaining good oral hygiene can keep their risk of developing infectious endocarditis low. Immunocompromised patients, on the other hand, are at increased risk and should be treated prophylactically with oral penicillin or erythromycin 1 hour before a procedure, to kill oral bacteria that enter the bloodstream. This prophylactic treatment can prevent the development of endocarditis in these patients. Viruses such as adenovirus and some enteroviruses can also cause endocarditis, as well as a condition known as myocarditis, an inflammation of the heart muscle. 

weakened state is suspected of having a septicemia. Two sets of blood cultures are taken from different arms. One bottle from each set grows Staphylococcus aureus, yet the laboratory report states that the results are inconclusive. New blood cultures are ordered. What would make these results inconclusive? 

Each year, 300–500 million people develop malaria worldwide, and 1–3 million of these people, mostly children, die. In the United States the disease is relatively rare; only about 1,000 cases occur annually, and almost all are acquired as a result of international travel to endemic areas diagnostic importance of knowing a patient’s travel history. The disease is caused by four species of Plasmodium: Chapter 20, is complex and involves two cycles: an asexual erythrocytic cycle in the human, and a sexual cycle in the mosquito (see Fig. 20.39). In the erythrocytic cycle, the organisms enter the bloodstream through the bite of an infected female Anopheles mosquito (the mosquito injects a small amount of saliva containing Plasmodium). The haploid sporozoites travel immediately to the liver, where they undergo asexual fission to produce merozoites. Released from the liver, the merozoites attach to and penetrate red blood cells, where Plasmodium consumes hemoglobin and enlarges into a trophozoite. The protist nucleus divides, so that the cell, now called a schizont, contains up to 20 or so nuclei. The schizont then divides to make the smaller, haploid merozoites releasing merozoites that can infect new red blood cells (see Fig. 20.39). Sudden, synchronized release of the merozoites and red blood cell debris triggers the telltale symptoms of malaria: violent, shaking chills followed by high fever and sweating. 

is left over after division. The erythrocyte has lysed and only a ghost cell remains; no cytoplasm is seen surrounding the merozoites just being released. Free merozoites are seen outside the membrane. 

otherwise the immunity is lost. Many children do not live long enough to gain immunity to malaria in all its forms. Diagnosis of malaria involves microscopic demonstration of the protist within erythrocytes (Wright stain) or serology to identify antimalarial antibodies. Treatment regimens include artemisinin, whose mechanism of action is unknown; chloroquine or mefloquine, which kill the organisms in their erythrocytic asexual stages; and primaquine, effective in the exoerythrocytic stages by disrupting Plasmodium mitochondria. The chloroquine family of drugs acts by interfering with the detoxification of heme generated from hemoglobin digestion. Malaria parasites accumulate the hemoglobin released from red blood cells in plasmodial lysosomes, where digestion occurs. The parasites use the amino acids from hemoglobin to grow but find free heme toxic. To prevent eating itself to death (from accumulating too much heme), the organism detoxifies heme via polymerization, which produces a black pigment. Many antimalarial drugs, such as chloroquine, prevent polymerization by binding to the heme. As a result, the increased iron level (from heme) kills the parasite. Unfortunately, Plasmodium has been developing resistance to these drugs, forcing the development of new ones. 

An effective vaccine has so far proved elusive because of the antigenic shape-shifting carried out by this parasite. To prevent infection, antimalarial drugs are given prophylactically to persons traveling to endemic areas. Which drug is given depends on the destination. Bear in mind that we have described only selected organisms that cause cardiovascular infections; there are many more (for example, Rickettsia typhi). There is even evidence that Chlamydophila pneumoniae may have a role in coronary artery disease (see eTopic 26.6). 

Babesiosis is an emerging disease caused by a protozoan (Babesia microti) that, like Plasmodium, infects red blood transmits the agent for Lyme disease. Typically, babesiosis is a mild, flu-like disease, but in its severe form it can present with symptoms similar to those of malaria. 

Many pathogenic bacteria can produce septicemia as a way to disseminate throughout the body and infect other organs. These organisms cause what are considered systemic infections. 

fleas. illustrates the various infective cycles of the plague bacillus. Humans are not typically part of the natural infection cycle. However, in the absence of an animal host, the flea can take a blood meal from humans and thereby transmit the disease to them. During the Middle Ages, urban rats venturing back and forth to the countryside became infected by the fleas of wild rodents that served as a reservoir. Upon returning to the city, the rat flea passed the organism on to other rats, which then died in droves. The rat fleas, deprived of their normal meal, were forced to feed on city dwellers, passing the disease on to Individuals bitten by an infected flea or accidentally infected through a cut while skinning an infected animal first exhibit the symptoms of bubonic plague. Bubonic plague emerges as the organism moves from the site of infection to the lymph nodes, producing characteristically lymph nodes, the pathogen can enter the bloodstream, causing septicemic plague. In this phase the patient can go into shock from the massive amount of endotoxin in the bloodstream. Neither bubonic nor septicemic plague was 24,700/μl (normal is 5,000–10,000/μl), and his platelet count was 72,000/μl (normal is 130,000–400,000/μl). In the 2 weeks prior to becoming ill, the patient had trapped, killed, and skinned two prairie dogs, four coyotes, and one a Gram-negative rod isolated from blood cultures identified the organism as Yersinia pestis, the organism that causes plague. The patient received an antibiotic cocktail of gentamicin and tetracycline. He eventually recovered, after 6 weeks in intensive care. Plague is caused by the bacterium Yersinia pestis, which can infect both humans and animals. During the Middle Ages, the disease, known as the Black Death, decimated over a third of the population of Europe. Such was the horror it evoked that invading armies would actually catapult dead plague victims into embattled fortresses. This was probably the first reported case of biowarfare. in 17 western states. The microbe is normally transmitted from animal to animal, typically rodents like rats and ■ The cycles of plague. The sylvatic cycle occurs in the wild, where fleas transmit the organism between rodents. An accidental interaction with urban rats can trigger a similar urban cycle. Humans can be infected through contact with infected fleas coming from either cycle. Flea bite transmission initiates bubonic plague symptoms that can progress to pneumonic plague. Pneumonic plague is highly infectious, which can cause epidemic spread of the disease. 

is passed from person to person. As the organism courses through the bloodstream, however, it will invade the lungs be easily transmitted from person to person through aerosol droplets generated by coughing. Pneumonic plague is the most dangerous form of the disease because it can kill quickly and spread rapidly through a population. Pneumonic plague is so virulent that an untreated patient can die within 24–48 hours. The organism is usually identified postmortem. It is now thought that the rapid spread of plague during the Middle Ages was the result of person-to-person transmission through respiratory aerosols. YadA is a surface adhesin that binds collagen. Another adherent biofilm in the flea midgut that contributes to flea-to-mammal transmission. The biofilm blocks flea digestion, making the flea feel “starved” even after a blood meal. Therefore, the flea jumps from host to host in a futile effort to feel full. As the flea tries to take a blood meal, the blockage causes the insect to regurgitate plague spreads so quickly. Unlike Salmonella, which uses type III–secreted proteins an intracellular pathogen, although it can survive in macrophages. Injection of the Yop proteins disrupts the actin cytoskeleton and so helps the organism evade phagocytosis. By evading phagocytosis, the organism avoids triggering an inflammatory response and produces massive tissue Plague has disappeared from Europe; the last major outbreak occurred in 1772. The reason for its disappearance is not known, but it was probably the result of multiple factors, not the least of which was human intervention. Although it wasn’t until the nineteenth century that doctors understood how germs could cause disease, Europeans recognized by the sixteenth century that plague was contagious and could be carried from one area to another. Beginning in the late seventeenth century, governments created a medical boundary, or cordon sanitaire, between Europe and the areas to the east from which epidemics came. Ships traveling west from the Ottoman Empire were forced to wait in quarantine before passengers and cargo could be unloaded. Those who attempted to evade medical quarantine were shot. 

Many bacterial pathogens can, under the right circumstances, infect the bloodstream to cause septicemia and ultimately sepsis; a life-threatening condition involving high fever, high white blood cell counts, rapid heart rate, and/or rapid breathing. The offending bacteria are typically found in the blood (see Chapter 28). Organisms that can cause sepsis include Neisseria meningitidis, Escherichia coli, Enterococcus species, and many others including Yersinia pestis from the preceding case. In severe cases sepsis can progress to septic shock in which the patient’s blood pressure drops to dangerous levels. 

burgdorferi, the agent of Lyme disease associations of Ixodes scapularis. 

an infection anywhere in the body. The organisms secrete the toxin, which disseminates rapidly through the circulation to cause generalized, potentially lethal symptoms. Knowledge that a protein toxin was responsible for the disease led to a recommendation that treatment of toxic shock syndrome include the antibiotic clindamycin. As you will learn in Chapter 27, clindamycin is an inhibitor other antibiotics (vancomycin, for instance) killed the pathogen. The combination saved the girl’s life. In Chapter 25 we discuss the weapons that microbes use to cause disease. 

Ticks engorged with blood will be larger. 

to months in any given joint. Joint-fluid analysis typically encephalopathy, manifested as memory, mood, and sleep Treatment with antibiotics is recommended for all stages of Lyme disease but is most effective in the early stages. Treatment for early Lyme disease (stage 1) is a course of doxycycline for 14–28 days. Lyme arthritis is typically slow to respond to antibiotic therapy. Despite antimicrobial drug treatment, patients with persistent active arthritis and repeated treatment with injected antibiotics. However, the disease in some people does not resolve at all; why is not never experience erythema migrans, and many infected individuals are also unsure of tick bites. Hence, patients with Lyme disease may present with arthritis as their first complaint. Although this makes diagnosis extremely difficult, knowing that the patient lives in or recently traveled to an endemic area can provide a critical clue. be is the case of Kris Kristofferson, a prolific singer, songwriter, and actor, now in his eighties. Kristofferson suffered for years with severe memory loss presumed to be a manifestation of Alzheimer’s disease—until someone decided to test him for Lyme disease. To his doctor’s surprise, and relief, the singer tested positive. Kristofferson immediately began antibiotic treatments and has since recovered much of his memory. Many other bacteria can cause septicemia and systemic illness (Table 26.5). Gram-negative organisms like Bacillus anthracis, can grow in the bloodstream if they can gain entrance. Even anaerobes that are normal inhabitants of the intestine (for example, Bacteroides fragilis) can be lethal if they escape the intestine and enter the blood, as might happen following surgery. This is one reason surgical patients are given massive doses of antibiotics immediately before and after surgery. 

Too Deadly for Its Own Good? 

activity. Administering blood plasma from people who have recovered, anticoagulation agents to reduce hemorrhaging, and interferon has had limited success. Chemical inhibitors of the host cathepsin proteases, which are required for viral replication, have been suggested as one possible antiviral therapy. Ebola enters a cell when the virus membrane glycoprotein attaches to host membranes. The virus is then taken up in an endosome. Cathepsins in the endosome cleave the viral glycoprotein and allow the virus membrane to fuse with the endosome membrane, releasing the uncoated virus into the cytoplasm. Cathepsin inhibitors prevent release and, thus, replication. There is also some hope that an attenuated, replicationdeficient Ebola virus may serve as a vaccine. Ebola epidemics result from person-to-person contact or from inadvertent laboratory exposures. Fortunately, Ebola outbreaks are self-contained because the viruses kill their victims quickly. Death comes before the virus can be transmitted to a new host. Some scientists therefore argue that efficient and quick killing is not the mark of a perfect pathogen. The better pathogen lets its host linger to ensure a home for itself and more opportunity to disseminate. So where does Ebola go when it is not infecting humans? The natural ecology of these viruses is largely unknown, although an association with monkeys and/or bats as possible reservoirs is suggested. 

Septicemia is caused by many Gram-positive and Gramnegative bacterial pathogens. It can start with the bite of an infected insect, introduction via a wound, escape from an abscess, or penetration of the mucosal epithelium by the pathogen (as through the intestine or vagina); it can lead to disseminated, systemic disease. Endocarditis can have acute or subacute onsets. Subacute bacterial endocarditis is usually an endogenous infection of a heart valve caused by Streptococcus mutans. Malaria, caused by Plasmodium species, manifests as repeated episodes of chills, fever, and sweating, owing to the organism’s ability to alter the antigenic appearance of its surface proteins and evade the immune response. Plague, caused by Yersinia pestis, has sylvatic and urban infection cycles involving transmission between fleas. The bite of an infected flea leads to bubonic plague. Bubonic plague can progress to septicemic and pneumonic stages. Pneumonic plague can be spread directly from person to person (no insect vector) by aerosolized respiratory secretions. 

Lyme disease is caused by the spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi, which is transmitted from animal reservoirs to humans by the bite of Ixodes ticks. The three stages of Lyme disease are characterized by a bull’s-eye rash, called erythema migrans (stage 1); joint, muscle, and nerve pain (stage 2); and arthritis with WBCs in the joint fluid (stage 3). Hepatitis is caused by several unrelated viruses; among establish chronic infection, and can be prevented by a products (such as transfusions) and shared hypodermic needles and can lead to chronic hepatitis. Vaccine for Ebola virus spreads from human to human and kills its victims quickly. Its viral proteins alter cytokine production and facilitate virus release from infected cells. 

The brain and spinal cord are especially well protected against infection. Microbes cannot gain easy access to the brain in large measure because of the blood-brain barrier, a filter mechanism that allows only selected substances into the brain. The blood-brain barrier works to our advantage when harmful substances, such as bacteria, are prohibited from entering. However, it works to our disadvantage when substances that we want to enter the brain, such as antibiotics, are kept out. The barrier is not a single structure but a function of the way blood vessels, especially capillaries, are organized in the brain. Furthermore, the endothelial cells in those vessels have tight junctions that do not allow most compounds or microbes to cross. And yet, brain infections do occur. 

found the three isolates to be indistinguishable, meaning that the father and his children were infected with the same strain Meningitis is an inflammation of the meninges, the membranes that surround the brain and spinal cord. Meningitis can be either bacterial or viral in origin. Sinus and ear infections can extend directly to the meninges, whereas septicemic spread requires passage through the blood-brain barrier. Viral meningitis is serious but rarely fatal in people with a normal immune system. The symptoms generally persist for 7–10 days and then completely resolve. Bacterial meningitis is usually caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae, Neisseria meningitidis, or Haemophilus influenzae. Symptoms of bacterial meningitis can include sudden onset of fever, headache, neck pain or stiffness, painful sensitivity to strong light (photophobia), vomiting (often without abdominal complaints), and irritability. Prompt medical attention is extremely important because the disease can quickly progress to convulsions and death. colonize the human oropharynx, where it causes mild, if any, disease. At any given time, 10%–20% of the healthy population can be colonized and asymptomatic. The organism spreads directly by person-to-person contact or indirectly via droplet nuclei from sneezing or fomites. The problem arises when this organism enters the bloodstream. microbe to produce a transient blood infection (bacteremia) and reach the blood-brain barrier. the nasopharynx and then cross the blood-brain barrier? 

26.9 Normal cerebrospinal fluid is usually low in protein and high in glucose. The protein and glucose content does not change much during a viral meningitis, but bacterial infection leads to greatly elevated protein and lowered glucose levels. What could account for this? 

In June, a 47-year-old resident of Oklahoma was admitted to the hospital with rapid onset of progressive dizziness, blurred vision, slurred speech, difficulty swallowing, and nausea. Findings on examination included drooping eyelids, facial paralysis, and impaired gag reflex. He developed breathing difficulties and required mechanical ventilation. The patient reported that during the 24 hours before onset of symptoms, he had eaten home-canned green beans and a stew containing roast beef and potatoes. Analysis of the patient’s stool detected botulinum found. The patient was hospitalized for 49 days, including 42 days on mechanical ventilation, before being discharged. 

1. The binding domain binds to receptor molecules (gangliosides) of the nerve cell. 

Catalytic domain 3. The protease toxin disrupts release of neurotransmitter. 

crograph of Clostridium tetani (cell length 4–8 with tetanus toxin in left diagram of tetanus and representation of the tetanus neurotoxin with the domains marked. 

2. The translocation domain makes a pore for passage of the toxin. 

environment must be present. Home-canning processes are designed to remove oxygen in the canned food, as well as sterilize the food, but if the sterilization process is incomplete, then surviving spores germinate and produce toxin. The toxin is susceptible to heat but will remain active in improperly cooked food. After ingestion, the toxin is absorbed from the intestine. As in the case history given here, the organism is often absent from stool samples. This is why serological identification of the toxin is important. “floppy head syndrome,” can occur when infants (not older spores that can germinate in the gastrointestinal tract, after which the growing vegetative cells will secrete toxin. 

40% identity and have similar structures and nearly identical modes of action. Botulism and tetanus toxins are each comSynapse posed of two peptides—a large, or heavy, fragment analogous Muscle cell single peptides (about 150 kDa) that are cleaved after secreToxin 1. Toxin enters tion to form two fragments (heavy and light chains) that cell by heavy chain includes the binding domain for receptor molecules (gangliosides) on the nerve 4. Light chain cell membrane, and a translocation domain cleaves proteins, that makes a pore in the nerve cell through blocks exocytosis. which the toxin passes. The light chains (cat2. Disulfide bond is alytic domains) are proteases that disrupt 3. Light chain reduced; heavy chain enters cytoplasm. movement of exocytic vesicles containbinds to membrane. ing neurotransmitters needed for contraction or tetanus toxin with the three domains marked. 

is needed to allow synaptic vesicles to bind to the nerve endings. endocytosed into the nerve terminal. Once the toxin cleaves its target, the nerve terminal is no longer able to release acetylcholine. 

motor neuron to the neuromuscular junction causes the release of the neurotransmitter molecule acetylcholine and plasma membranes that allow the synaptic vesicle to fuse with the plasma membrane. 

that botulism and tetanus toxins are nearly identical in structure and mechanism. With such a high degree of mechanistic similarity, why do tetanus and botulism toxins have such drastically different effects? The answer is based on where each toxin acts in the nervous Tetanus, in contrast to botulism, is not a food-borne disease. Clostridium tetani spores are introduced into the body by trauma (such as by stepping on the wrong end of a nail). Necrotic tissue then provides the anaerobic environment required for germination. Growing, vegetative cells release tetanospasmin, which enters the peripheral nerve cells at the site of injury. But rather than cleaving targets here, the toxin travels up axons in the direction opposite to nerve signal transmission until it reaches the spinal column, where it becomes fixed at the presynaptic inhibitory motor but the function of vesicles in these nerves is to release inhibitory neurotransmitters that dampen nerve impulses. too frequently and produce the generalized muscle spasms characteristic of tetanus. illustrates the the DTaP (diphtheria, tetanus, and acellular pertussis) vaccine (see Section 24.6). 

26.11 demonstrates that tetanus toxin has a mode of action (spastic paralysis) opposite to that of botulism toxin (flaccid paralysis). Since they have opposing modes of action, can botulism toxin be used to save a patient with tetanus? 26.12 How do the actions of tetanus toxin and botulinum toxin actually help the bacteria colonize or obtain nutrients? 26.13 If Clostridium botulinum is an anaerobe, how might botulism toxin get into foods? 

when the patient is nearing recovery (convalescence), antibody titers have risen manyfold. The rule of thumb is that a greater-than-fourfold rise in antibody titer between acute disease and convalescence (or in this case death) indicates that the patient has had the disease. While this knowledge could not help the patient in the case described here, it was valuable in terms of public health and prevention strategies. Several bacterial, fungal, and viral causes of encephalitis and meningitis are listed in Table 26.6. 

Imagine slowly losing your mind and knowing there is nothing you can do about it. An unusual infectious agent called the prion has been implicated as the cause of a series of relatively rare but invariably fatal brain diseases (Table 26.7). Prions are infectious agents that do not have a nucleic acid genome. The protein alone can mediate an infection. The prion is now recognized as an infectious, misfolded protein that resists inactivation by procedures that destroy proteins. The discovery that proteins alone can transmit an infectious disease came as a surprise to the scientific community. Diseases caused by prions are especially worrying, since prions resist destruction by many chemical agents and remain active after heating at extremely high temperatures. There have even been documented cases in which sterilized neurosurgical instruments, originally used on a prion-infected person, still held infectious agent and transmitted the disease to a subsequent surgery patient. Extremely rigorous decontamination procedures, such as autoclaving surgical instruments How can a nonliving entity without nucleic acid be an infectious agent? Prions associated with human brain disease are thought to be aberrantly folded forms of a normal brain protein (PrPC). The theory is that when a prion, designated PrPSc, is introduced into the body and manages to enter the brain, it will cause normally folded forms of the damaging aggregated structures within brain cells. 

ingestion or other means and causes the slow refolding of normal PrPC proteins to PrPSc. 

PrPSc aggregates called amyloid form and damage the brain. 

Prion diseases are often called spongiform encephalopathies because the postmortem appearance of the brain includes large, spongy vacuoles in the cortex and cerebellum. These are visible in a brain sample from a victim of one develop these diseases. Since 1996, mounting evidence has pointed to a causal cow disease”) caused by prions and a disease in humans called variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (vCJD). Both disorders are invariably fatal. For humans to contract disease, prions from contaminated meat are ingested and penetrate the patches. The circulation then traffics the agent to the brain. been detected in the United States since 1993. Because of aggressive surveillance efforts in the United States and Canada (where 20 cases have been found), it is unlikely, one per 1 million population. PrPSc in asymptomatic primates has been developed but is not yet ready for human screening. The test is called successfully identified the presence of very tiny amounts of PrPSc in blood or urine. The process involves adding large amounts of normal PrP (PrPC) to samples containing tiny amounts of PrPSc prions. The prions, if present in the sample, will seed the misfolding of PrPC to PrPSc molecules that aggregate. Sonication is then used to partially break up the newly formed PrPSc aggregates into pieces that can further seed the misfolding and aggregation of normal PrP. Repeated cycles of sonication-incubation will exponentially amplify the amount of PrPSc present in a sample. The PrPSc is then identified by western blot (see Section 12.2). 

Serological diagnosis of an infectious disease is possible if specific pathogen antibody titer rises fourfold between the acute and convalescent stages. Spongiform encephalopathies are believed to be caused by nonliving proteins called prions. 

In this chapter we have described key concepts of infectious disease using just a small sample of disease-causing pathogens. Other diseases are considered elsewhere in the book or on the accompanying website. These include anthrax, cholera, the common cold (caused by rhinovirus), dengue fever, diphtheria, gastric ulcers (Helicobacter pylori), herpes, and Whipple’s disease (Tropheryma whipplei). The principal goal in this and the previous chapter was to illustrate how microbial metabolism can undermine the physiology of a human host. The next chapter will describe how humans fight back using pharmacology to sabotage the physiology of the infecting microbes. 

ntibiotics have played a major role in increasing life expectancy throughout the world. But antibiotics may soon become useless. Indiscriminant use of antibiotics to treat patients and boost animal growth has led to widespread antibiotic resistance in many pathogens. As a result, we are becoming vulnerable to infectious diseases once thought conquered. In Chapter 27 we discuss how antimicrobial agents work, how clinicians determine which antibiotics should be used, how microbes resist antibiotics, and how new antibiotics are being discovered. 

Antarctic antibiotic. Lindsey Shaw at the University of South colleague Bill Baker. Shaw’s students showed that darwinolide has the novel ability to kill biofilms of methicillin-resistant darwinolide structure could provide a unique scaffold upon which more potent anti-MRSA therapeutics can be built. 

Nature provided many antibiotics currently used in the clinic. Products from nature have excellent therapeutic properties and still represent viable sources of chemistry. Cures for many human diseases likely exist in nature, if only we can find them. But the potential of most easy-to-explore environments, like soil, has already been exhausted. We must now travel to exotic, hard-to-reach environments looking for new compounds. Antarctica is a perfect example. It possesses a rich biology we can explore for the next blockbuster antibiotic. biofilms. How? We don’t know, although we are working on it! Biofilms are resistant to antibiotics for many reasons (chemical microenvironments, stress responses, persister cells, and so on). Clearly, something about darwinolide is different from most drugs. Perhaps it targets something in biofilm persister cells missing in planktonic cells. It may be that darwinolide has a novel chemical structure that facilitates penetration of the biofilm. Or maybe biofilm bacteria undergoing stress response–type behavior engage a darwinolide-sensitive pathway, or target, that is lacking in active, free-growing cells. 

Antibiotics undeniably have been a benefit to modern society. We live longer than in the past in large measure because of antibiotics. Infections we consider minor today often killed their victims just 50 or 60 years ago. But there has been a downside too: the development of genetically adapted, antibiotic-resistant pathogens that threaten to make current antibiotics obsolete. The Current Research Highlight illustrates the enormous efforts taking place in laboratories and at extreme locales throughout the world to discover replacement antibiotics. How serious is the antibiotic resistance problem? Consider the case of a 56-year-old man with diabetes who entered the hospital for a heart transplant. The operation went well, but 1 week after the surgery, he developed a severe chest wound infection notable for exuded pus. Treatment with oxacillin, a penicillin derivative commonly used to combat infections, failed, and the patient became comatose. The diagnostic microbiology laboratory surgeon to immediately place the patient on intravenous vancomycin for 6 weeks. Vancomycin is an antibiotic, structurally different from methicillin and oxacillin, that can usually kill methicillin-resistant bacteria. Fortunately, this patient recovered; too often, they do not. Where did the infection come from? Surprising as it may seem, this drug-resistant pathogen was a resident of which individual was the actual source of the patient’s infection? In what could be described as “forensic microbiology,” each strain was subjected to pulsed-field gel electrophoresis, and the resulting genomic restriction patterns were compared with that of the isolate from the infected tubing used for cardiopulmonary bypass. Hospital-acquired, or nosocomial, infections are not unusual. As many as 5%–10% of all patients admitted to acute-care hospitals acquire nosocomial infections, resulting in over 80,000 deaths each year. The deaths are due, in part, to the poor health of the patient and in part to the antibiotic-resistant nature of bacteria lurking in hospitals. In fact, as many as 60%–70% of staph infections that develop in a hospital setting are the result report from the United Kingdom finds that one in four study in the United States found that the noses of nearly one in five nonhospitalized people are also colonized by get worse. 

Antibiotics (from the Greek meaning “against life”) are compounds produced by one species of microbe that can kill or inhibit the growth of other microbes. However, the term “antibiotics” is also used for synthetic chemotherapeutic agents, such as sulfonamides, that are clinically useful but chemically synthesized. We think of antibiotics as being a recent biotechnological development, but they have actually been used for centuries. Ancient remedies called for cloths soaked with organic material to be placed on wounds to allow them to heal faster. This organic material likely contained “natural antibiotics” that killed bacteria and prevented further infection. The medicinal properties of molds were also recognized for centuries. The ancient Chinese successfully treated boils with warm soil and molds scraped from cheeses, and in England a paste of moldy bread was a home remedy for wound infections up until the beginning of the twentieth century. 

highlights the area of decreased growth of Staphylococcus aureus taken in 1942, shortly after the introduction of penicillin, show the improvement in a child suffering from an infection 4 days (panel 2) and 9 days (panel 4) after treatment. Panels 5 and 6 show her fully recovered. 

cal structure of sulfanilamide, an analog of para-aminobenzoic acid growth. Sulfanilamide inhibits one of the enzymes that converts for testing antibiotics), Prontosil had shown absolutely no ability to inhibit the growth of streptococcus. Domagk, however, had tested the drug in animals, not agar plates, where he found it could cure animals of infection. Remarkably, Domagk’s daughter recovered completely. Domagk discovered that Prontosil was metabolized by the body into another compound, sulfanilamide, clearly lethal to the streptococcus. This finding led to an entire class of drugs, the sulfa drugs, that saved hundreds of thousands of lives. The take-home message of this story is that an antibiotic’s activity on a plate, or lack thereof, does not necessarily correlate with the drug’s activity in a patient. 

Sulfanilamide is an analog of para-aminobenzoic acid acid precursors, the pathogen stops growing. Sulfa drugs inhibit bacterial growth without affecting human cells because folic acid is not synthesized by humans (it is a dietary supplement instead), and because bacteria do not transport folic acid (they must make it themselves). In a dark turn, Domagk’s possible participation in was a source of controversy that haunted him long after the war ended. Yet his contributions to medicine continued; he also developed the first effective chemotherapy for tuberculosis, the thiosemicarbazones and isoniazid, which are still used today. During the same period of history, Selman Waksman (1888–1973) at Rutgers University began screening 10,000 strains of soil bacteria and fungi for their ability to inhibit triggered the antibiotic gold rush that is still under way and earned him the 1952 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine. 

prevents peptidoglycan synthesis, and tetracycline, which growth but are essentially invisible to host cells, since they do not interact with them at low doses. Although their intended targets are bacterial cells, some antibiotics, particularly at high doses, can interact with elements of eukaryotic cells and cause side effects that harm the development of blood cells in bone marrow—a phenomenon that may result in aplastic anemia (failure to produce red blood cells). The toxicity of an antibiotic can also depend on the age of the patient. Ciprofloxacin, for instance, can cause defects in human bone growth plates and should not be administered to children. Problems can even arise if the drug does not directly impact mammalian physiology. For example, many people develop an extreme allergic sensitivity to penicillin, in which case the treatment of an infection may end up being worse than the infection itself. Physicians must be aware of these allergies and use alternative antibiotics to avoid harming their patients. As a student of microbiology, you must be able to the drug’s action, but a human can develop an allergic sensitivity to the drug. 

antimicrobials are also classified on the basis of whether or not they kill the microbe. An antibiotic is bactericidal if it kills the target microbe, whereas it is bacteriostatic if it merely prevents bacterial growth. Antibiotics are good for treating infectious diseases, but do our microbiomes pay the price? As discussed in several prior chapters, we are increasingly aware that our natural microbiota contribute in important ways to human health and development. Many studies are now exploring the impact of antibiotic use on host-microbiota interactions (discussed in Chapters 23 and 24). We have known for decades that antibiotics—especially broad-spectrum antibiotics— can destroy the ecological balance of bacterial species in the gut (as well as at other body sites) and lead to gastrointestinal disease. Pathology can result when one species resistant to the antibiotic gains a growth advantage over various drug-susceptible species that ordinarily keep the pathogen in check (see the discussion of Clostridioides difficile, formerly Clostridium difficile, in Section 26.4). But what other effects might there be when the microbial balance of power in the intestine is disturbed? We may ultimately find that directing the toxicity of an antibiotic to a single bacterial species (while leaving all others alone) has benefits to human health that we do not currently understand. 

The relative effectiveness of different antibiotics on the organism causing the infection. This determination will reveal whether the organism developed resistance to a drug. 

The average attainable tissue levels of each drug. An antibiotic may work on an agar plate, but the concentration at which it affects bacterial growth may be too high to be safe in the patient. In fact, an important aspect of designing new antibiotics is to enhance the pharmacological activity of an existing drug—for example, modifying it so that the body does not break it down or quickly excrete it in urine. 

Numbers reflect the relative concentrations of antibiotic that are present at various points within the zone of inhibition. The concentrations along the periphery of the clear zone are equal and case is 0.047 µg/ml. 

starting at 8 μg/ml. Each tube was then inoculated with an equal 1.0 μg/ml. 

placed on a freshly laid lawn of methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus bacterial inhibition is caused by a hemolysin secreted by the lawn that will differ when tested against different bacterial species and strains. The outermost ring of the no-growth zone in a Kirby-Bauer disk test must, by definition, contain the minimal concentration of drug needed to prevent the correlation. After incubating agar plates in the Kirby-Bauer test, the diameters of the zones of inhibition around each disk are measured, and the results are compared with a table listing used and the zone size that is considered clinically significant are correlated with the average attainable tissue level for each antibiotic (discussed later). For the antibiotic to invading bacteria will not be affected. 

proportional to the number of organisms used to seed the agar plate. Thus, a standard optical density solution of each organism is prepared, and a cotton swab is used to spread organisms evenly over the entire agar surface. 

that all antibiotics start diffusing into the agar at the same point. 

Concentrations of antibiotics in the disks. The zone of inhibition for an antibiotic is proportional to the concentration of antibiotic in the disk. The higher the concentration of antibiotic in a disk, the faster that drug can diffuse through the plate and inhibit growth. To avoid differences between labs, the concentration of each drug impregnating a disk has been standardized. 

level of ampicillin over time. The important consideration here is how long the serum level of the antibiotic remains higher than the infectious agent fails to be controlled by the drug—in this case, 7–8 hours after the initial dose. To maintain a serum level higher when side effects of the drug start to appear. The graph in shows that as long as the concentration of the drug in tissue or blood remains higher than the be kept at sufficient levels either by administering a higher dose, which runs the risk of side effects, or by giving a second dose at a time when the levels from the fi rst dose have declined. This is why patients are told to take doses of some antibiotics four times a day and other antibiotics only once a day. 

Some antimicrobial agents are initially inactive, until converted by the body to an active agent. Florey and Chain purified penicillin and capitalized on Fleming’s discovery of penicillin. Antimicrobial agents may be produced naturally or Selective toxicity refers to the ability of an antibiotic to attack a unique component of microbial physiology that is missing or distinctly different from eukaryotic physiology. Antibiotic side effects on mammalian physiology can limit the clinical usefulness of an antimicrobial agent. Antibiotic spectrum of activity is the range of microbes that a given drug affects. Bactericidal antibiotics kill microbes; bacteriostatic antibiotics inhibit microbial growth. The spectrum of an antibiotic and the susceptibility of the infectious agent are critical points of information required before prescribing antibiotic therapy. when correlated with average attainable tissue levels of the antibiotic, can predict the effectiveness of an antibiotic in treating disease. can be approximated using the Kirby-Bauer disk diffusion technique. 

The importance of antibiotics in treating disease was recognized in the early 1940s. 

Table 27.2 summarizes the general targets of common antibiotics. Chapters 3, 7, and 8 describe these cellular components and provide the basis for understanding described in Chapters 7 and 8; they receive only brief mention here. 

Bacterial cell walls are the basis of selective toxicity for some antibiotics because peptidoglycan does not exist in mammalian cells; thus, antibiotics that target the synthesis of these structures should selectively kill bacteria. The following case history illustrates the use of two cell wall– targeting antibiotics and also reveals how bacteria can evolve to escape inhibits formation of the dipeptide. 

8. One phosphate on liberated bactoprenol is removed, and lipid moves back to cytoplasmic side of membrane. 

Bacitracin inhibits incorporation of h id units. 

lular chains of this unit. Red lines indicate inhibition. Cycloserine inhibits ligation of the two D-alanines (step 2); bacitracin inhibits linking of the disaccharide units; vancomycin and the beta-lactams, such as penicillin, inhibit the peptide cross-linking of peptidoglycan side chains. 

5. Bactoprenol “flips,” moving cytoplasmic membrane. 

6. Transglycosylase attaches new disaccharide unit to existing chain. 

D-alanine-D-alanine structure of peptidoglycan, which is structurally similar to the beta-lactam ring of penicillins (green shading). different groups, some of which are shown here. Modifying this group changes the pharmacological properties and antimicrobial spectrum of the drug. 

Archaeal pseudopeptidoglycan contains talosaminuronic acid instead of muramic acid and lacks the D-amino acids found in bacterial peptidoglycan. Archaea are thus insensitive to penicillins, which interfere with bacterial transpeptidases. This natural resistance is not a problem, because no archaea are known to be pathogens. 

another type of beta-lactam antibiotic originally discovered in nature but modified in the laboratory to fight microbes that are naturally resistant to penicillins (especially Pseudomonas aeruginosa). Over the years, the structure of cephalosporin has undergone a series of modifications to improve its effectiveness against penicillin-resistant pathogens. Each modification adds complexity and produces what is called a new “generation” of cephalosporins. There are currently five generations of this semisynthetic antibiotic (Fig. 27.9). Unfortunately, the microbial world continually adapts and eventually becomes resistant to new antibiotics. In the case of the cephalosporins, new beta-lactamases evolve that can attack the sterically buried beta-lactam rings in these molecules. It is also important to note that because the core feature of these drugs is the beta-lactam ring, persons who are sensitive to penicillins may also suffer a hypersensitivity reaction to cephalosporins. Treatment note: In the preceding case history, the infecting strain of Streptococcus pneumoniae turned out to be resistant to ampicillin. Had the patient been an adult, a fluoroquinolone (see Section 7.2) might have been the best are not recommended for children, as in this case, because of potential side effects. Other beta-lactam antibiotics, such as the third-generation cephalosporins, may still work on appearing, leaving vancomycin or an oxazolidinone as the best last choice. 

■ Cephalosporin generations. Representative examples. With each successive generation, the side groups become more complex. Highlighted areas indicate the core structure of each of the cephalosporins, with beta-lactam rings. 

growing chain (see Fig. 27.7). Bacitracin binds to and inhibits dephosphorylation of the carrier, thereby preventing the to bacitracin can develop if the organism can rapidly recycle the phosphorylated lipid carrier molecule through dephosphorylation or if the organism possesses an efficient drug export system (discussed in Section 27.3). Normally, bacitracin is used only topically because of serious side effects, such as kidney damage, which can occur if bacitracin is ingested. Relative to bacitracin, it acts at an even earlier step in peptidoglycan synthesis. Cycloserine inhibits the two enzymes that pentapeptide side chain on N-acetylmuramic acid cannot be made (see Fig. 27.7). Without these alanines, cross-linking cannot occur and peptidoglycan integrity is compromised. Vancomycin, a very large and complex glycopeptide produced by the streptomycete Amycolatopsis orientalis the disaccharide unit and prevents the action of transglycosylases and transpeptidases (see Fig. 27.7). The mechanism of resistance is very different for vancomycin and penicillin, which makes vancomycin particularly useful against penicillin-resistant bacteria. To prevent the development and spread of vancomycin-resistant bacteria, this antibiotic is typically used only as a drug of last resort. Resistance to vancomycin can develop when products which vancomycin cannot bind. Another enzyme in the functions just fine, but the organism is resistant to the form. However, the antibiotic teixobactin, discussed in and stop growth of vancomycin-resistant Gram-positive Note that antibiotics targeting cell wall biosynthesis generally kill only growing cells. These drugs do not affect static or stationary-phase cells, because in this state the cell has no need for new peptidoglycan. 

enzymes that closely resemble those of mammals. Thus, you might think it impossible to selectively target bacterial hard Domagk, belong to a group of drugs known as antimetabolites because they interfere with the synthesis of metabolic intermediates. Ultimately, sulfa drugs inhibit the synthesis of nucleic acids. Drugs such as sulfamethoxazole or sulfanilamide work at the metabolic level to prevent the are the sulfa drugs selectively toxic to bacteria? The selectivity occurs because mammals do not synthesize folic acid, a sulfa drugs are selectively toxic toward bacteria. 

example of a prodrug—a drug that is harmless until activated. Metronidazole is activated after it receives an electron (is reduced) from the microbial protein cofactors flavodoxin and ferredoxin, found in microaerophilic and anaerobic bacteria such as Bacteroides (Fig. 27.13). Once thus killing the cell. Because the etiological agent in our case history was an anaerobe, metronidazole was an effective therapy. Metronidazole is also effective against protozoa such as Giardia, Trichomonas, and Entamoeba. Aerobic microbes, although in possession of ferredoxin, are incapable of reducing metronidazole, presumably because oxygen is reduced in preference to metronidazole. 

Ferredoxin and flavodoxin are reducing agents capable of reducing oxidized molecules in cells such as thioredoxin. They can also reduce the prodrug form of metronidazole. 

that quinolone-resistant mutants contain mutations in the then why are these mutations not lethal? 

from ever starting polymerization. The a site called the hinge region, which is a requirement to begin transcription. The second drug, lipiarmycin, is an unusual macrolide antibiotic made by Actinoplanes deccanensis. Lipiarmycin binds to the same region as myxopyronin but open forms. Because the binding site for rifampin is different from those of the other molecules are still sensitive to the new antibiotics. This is exciting because pathogens such as rifampin-resistant strains of Mycobacterium tuberculosis or Clostridioides difficile can now be treated with a new drug that targets the same enzyme. Lipiarmycin difficile–associated diarrhea. 

The differences between prokaryotic and eukaryotic ribosomes account for the selective toxicity of antibiotics that specifically inhibit bacterial protein synthesis. How various antibiotics inhibit protein synthesis was discussed in Section 8.3. Recall that protein synthesis inhibitors can be classified into several groups based on structure and function (Fig. 27.15). 

Most of these antibiotics work by binding and interfering with the function of bacterial rRNA, which differs from eukaryotic rRNA. Recall, too, that protein synthesis inhibitors are, by and large, bacteriostatic (not bactericidal). 

Sixteen-year-old Jamal arrived at the emergency room after 2 days of fever, malaise, chills, and neck stiffness. His most notable symptom was a painful, red, rapidly spreading rash covering the right side of his face. The rash covered his entire cheek, which was swollen, and extended into his scalp. About 7 days earlier, Jamal had had a severe sore throat. Because it had subsided in this organism. Although penicillin would be the drug of choice, Jamal was known to be allergic to this antibiotic. When a patient is known to be immunologically sensitive to the usual drug of choice, a structurally distinct drug is best. Often, that drug will be one that inhibits protein synthesis; in this case, the drug chosen was the macrolide azithromycin. Drugs that inhibit protein synthesis can be subdivided into different groups based on their structures and on which part of the translation machine is targeted. 

Tetracyclines. Tetracycline antibiotics are characterized by a early stages of Lyme disease (caused by Borrelia burgdorferi), acne (Propionibacterium acnes), and other infections. An important adverse side effect of tetracyclines is that they can interfere with bone development in a fetus or young child. Tetracycline use by pregnant mothers will also cause yellow discoloration of the infant’s teeth. As a result, this drug is not recommended for pregnant women or nursing mothers. 

Five classes of drugs subvert translation by binding to the in Chapter 8 and are recapped here only briefly. 

examples are erythromycin and azithromycin. Azithromycin was the antibiotic used to treat the Streptococcus pyogenes infection in our case history, although other drugs could have been used. Because it is structurally dissimilar to any of the beta-lactam antibiotics, such as penicillin, it can be used safely in patients who are penicillin sensitive. 

leading to aplastic anemia is the most common serious side effect and limits its clinical use. 

Usually more than one of these genes must mutate to oxazolidinone-resistant ribosomes will be present. Oxazolidinones are useful primarily against Gram-positive bacteria. Gram-negative bacteria are intrinsically resistant because of multidrug efflux pumps (see Section 27.3) and decreased permeability due to the outer membrane. 

Makes a Bactericidal Drug? 

because the A-type streptogramin alters the binding site for the B-type drug, increasing its affinity. Bacteria can develop resistance through ribosomal modification (the resistance to macrolides), via the production of inactivating enzymes, or by active efflux of the antibiotic. 

Bactericidal antibiotics include quinolones that bind to polymerase; and penicillins that inhibit peptidoglycan synthesis. While these antimicrobials do halt critical cell processes, other antibiotics that inhibit some of these same processes are not bactericidal. For example, aminoglycosides and macrolides inhibit protein synthesis, but macrolides do not typically kill bacteria. modes of action for bactericidal antibiotics is the generation practical consequence of this finding is that determining how more susceptible to antibiotic therapy. Thought Question 27.7 Why might a combination therapy of an aminoglycoside antibiotic and cephalosporin be synergistic? 

a drug, metronidazole, that, when activated, randomly nicks the phosphodiester backbone. 

peptidyltransferase (chloramphenicol), formation of the the ribosome exit channel (streptogramins). 

Why do microbes make antibiotics, and how do they avoid killing themselves in the process? The answers provide insight into the origin of antibiotic-resistant pathogens and our fight to halt their spread throughout the world. 

Microbes Make Antibiotics? 

of penicillin-resistant strains among clinical isolates (strains of diseasecausing bacteria isolated from patients from different countries). No resistance among clinical isolates was noted until after 1967. 

committing suicide? Fungi that make penicillin face no consequence for having done so because the organism does not contain peptidoglycan. Actinomycetes that produce compounds such as streptomycin or chloramphenicol, however, could be susceptible to their own secondary metabolite. Ribosomes isolated from Streptomyces griseus, for example, are fully sensitive to the streptomycin produced by this organism. 

organism synthesizes an inactive precursor of streptomycin, 6-phosphorylstreptomycin, which is secreted from the cell and, once outside the mycelium, becomes activated by a specific phosphatase. In addition, this streptomycete has an enzyme that inactivates anyy streptomycin that may leak back into the mycelium. Other organisms protect themselves by methylating key residues on their rRNA to prevent drug binding or by setting up permeability barriers that thwart reentry of the antibiotic. These and other strategies of self-preservation employed by antibiotic-producing microbes are clever. Unfortunately, these mechanisms have been shared via horizontal gene transfers, making many pathogens antibiotic resistant. Horizontal gene transfers are discussed in Sections 9.6 and 25.2. 

Alter target. 

Degrade antibiotic. 

Modify antibiotic. 

can be part of the chromosome. Each specific antibiotic resistance gene product will use only one of the four mechanisms shown. 

ribosomal proteins, for instance, can confer resistance to methicillin and streptomycin, respectively. These mutations occur spontaneously and are not typically transferred between organisms. 

catalyzes ATP-dependent phosphorylation (yellow) of a hydroxyl group. 

catalyzes ATP-dependent adenylylation (yellow) of a hydroxyl group. 

catalyzes acetyl-CoAdependent acetylation of an amino group. 

aureus, PmrA in Streptococcus pneumoniae, and the TetA pumps are multicomponent systems present in Gramnegative bacteria only (discussed shortly). Efflux in either case is usually energized by proton motive force. 

27.8 Fusaric acid is a cation chelator that normally does not resistance to tetracycline become sensitive to fusaric acid. Resistance to tetracycline is usually the result of an integral membrane efflux pump that pumps tetracycline out of the cell. What might explain the development of fusaric acid sensitivity? 

■ Basic structure of a multidrug resistance efflux pump in Gram-negative bacteria. These efflux systems have promiscuous binding sites that can bind and pump a wide range of drugs out of the bacterial cell. 

(orange and green ribbons) are homotrimers linked by 6 protomers of AcrA (yellow ribbons). Transport of antibiotics is driven by proton conduit that runs from AcrB through the TolC porin domain, spanning the inner and outer membranes. AcrZ is a small peptide that affects substrate preference. 

resistance. Chemists typically try to tweak the structure of range of antibiotics, almost without regard to structure. 

As discussed in previous chapters, nature has engineered repair pathways involving lesion bypass polymerases (for example, UmuDC; see Section 9.4) are thought to play a large role in randomized adaptive and evolutionary processes. For instance, at some point during evolution, gene duplication and mutational reshaping generated a gene product able to cleave the beta-lactam ring, producing an organism resistant to penicillin. However, de novo antibiotic resistance through gene duplication and/or mutation does not occur in all species. Why reinvent the wheel—or, in this case, drug resistance? Gene transfer mechanisms such as conjugation, described in Chapter 9, can move antibiotic resistance genes from one organism to another and from one species to another. In fact, several drug resistance genes found in pathogenic bacteria actually had their start in the chromosomes of the drug-producing organisms and were passed on through gene swapping. For instance, Streptomyces clavuligerus produces a beta-lactamase (encoded by the bla gene) that protects this organism from the penicillin it produces. Transfer of a drug resistance gene is particularly evident if the gene has been incorporated into a plasmid and that plasmid is found in a new species. Antibiotic resistance within uncontacted communities. 

The faster a clinical laboratory can identify a pathogen’s 3 days—one day to grow the organism on an agar plate one day off of that timeline. Meanwhile, the seriously ill patient is subjected to empiric therapy in which very broadspectrum antibiotics—sometimes two or three drugs—are used to “cover” as many pathogens as possible until the organism’s identity and antibiotic susceptibility pattern are Fortunately, more rapid tests that can provide answers in less than a day are slowly being introduced into the machine has also been developed that can detect pathogens at concentrations as low as one organism per milliliter of blood within a few hours. Combining these technologies could mean that a sample brought to the lab at 8 a.m. could be ready by lunch. Such speed could quickly lead to more focused, pathogen-directed therapy. Unfortunately, we have a long way to go before realizing this ideal. 

carbadox, an antibacterial compound formally used to promote growth in swine, activates prophage replication in several enteric (closed symbols). At the indicated times, cells were killed with chloroform and supernatants were titrated for phage on susceptible hosts. The data illustrate that carbadox-treated lysogens generated 100- to 1,000-fold higher titers of phage. 

27.11 Could genomics ever predict the drug resistance phenotype of a microbe? If so, how? 

the antibiotic resistance gene blaNDM-1 is emerging as a dangerous, drug-resistant pathogen. 

The yellow-highlighted sites are all open to attack from aminoglycoside-modifying enzymes. 

to prevent loss of activity due to enzyme action. The side groups block access to enzyme active sites by steric hindrance (that is, the added groups prevent the active site from interacting with its target structure) but do not inactivate the antibiotic. 

Quinolone-oxazolidinone hybrid. Physically combining two different antibiotics may help reduce the emergence of drug-resistant bacteria. 

Linking antibiotics is another strategy currently used to limit resistance. Recent advances have been made in linking a quinolone to an oxazolidinone to form a hybrid antibiotic with dual modes of action (Fig. 27.26). Because it has two modes of action, this hybrid antibiotic may limit the development of antibiotic resistance. Here’s why: The rate of spontaneous resistance to a given antibiotic is roughly one out of 107 cells. For spontaneous resistance to develop to two antibiotics, that probability rises to one out of 1014, making it very unlikely that an organism can become doubly drug resistant. However, multidrug resistance efflux pumps, integron cassettes, and plasmids carrying multiple antibiotic resistance genes can overwhelm that approach. Scientists are also thinking “outside the box” by developing new, more pathogen-specific, antimicrobials. One such avenue, described in Special Topic 27.1, involves synthetically engineering bispecific antibodies that contain binding sites for two different virulence factors. 

Why do some infections return after bactericidal antibiotic treatment is discontinued? The reason is a subpopulation of dormant organisms, called persister cells, that arise within a population of antibiotic-susceptible bacteria. The stalled metabolism of persisters renders them tolerant to bactericidal antibiotics during treatment. Removing the drug allows persisters to grow and reestablish infection. The strategy is analogous to a hiker’s tactic, on accidentally encountering a bear in the woods, of “playing dead” to avoid being attacked. Persistence is a long-recognized mystery of microbiology. Joseph Bigger in 1944 noticed that penicillin would lyse a growing culture of Staphylococcus aureus, but a small number of persister cells always survived. These persisters were not mutants made permanently resistant through mutation. They acted as though dormant. Persister cells that tolerate antibiotic treatment can be found in any biofilm or population of lateexponential-phase cells. In addition to causing antibiotic treatment failures, persistence may be the reason for latent bacterial infections such as recrudescent typhus or latent tuberculosis. 

all susceptible bacteria in an infection, but the remaining persister cells serve as a source of population regrowth (and reinfection) once the antibiotic is removed. 

only under some in vitro conditions (for instance, minimal defi ned medium) and some in vivo conditions. Marvin Whiteley at the University of Texas at Austin. His group studies Pseudomonas aeruginosa, a potentially lethal lung pathogen that plagues cystic fibrosis patients. This bacterium readily grows in the sputum of these patients, so the scientists wondered which bacterial genes might be essential for growth in this substance. Using a massive have a vitamin deficit that forces the microbe to synthesize those cofactors. The inference is that Pseudomonas enzymes required for vitamin synthesis are rational targets for small inhibitors of molecules. Such inhibitors would limit growth of Pseudomonas in vivo but have no effect on growth in the nutrient media typically used to identify new antibiotics Virulence genes and proteins of pathogens hold great promise as targets for new drugs because these genes, too, are required for in vivo growth. However, these proteins are also conditionally essential, so inhibitors fail to inhibit growth in vitro. Virulence proteins that can be potential drug targets are easy to find by measuring loss of virulence when the gene is missing (for instance, the gene encoding the tip of a inhibitors of these proteins? New high-throughput screening platforms that measure in vivo growth need to be developed to find chemical inhibitors of virulence. Currently, it is easier to make monoclonal antibodies that target virulence proteins than it is to design and find chemical inhibitors. Monoclonal antibodies are now being tested as pathogenspecific antimicrobials (see Special Topic 27.1). Other intriguing ideas may lead to novel antimicrobial therapies. One involves using photosensitive chemicals that can penetrate the microorganism and generate toxic reactive oxygen species (such as superoxide) when exposed to specific wavelengths of visible light (obviously good only for topical use). Another clever approach is to interfere with quorumsensing mechanisms of pathogens (see eTopic 27.3). Finally, the promise and flexibility of synthetic-biology approaches discussed in Chapter 12 could revolutionize the process of antibiotic discovery and production. 

Genes encoding some of these drug resistance mechanisms have been transferred to pathogens. 

Mechanisms of antibiotic resistance include modifying the antibiotic, destroying the antibiotic, altering the target to reduce affinity, and pumping the antibiotic out of the cell. Multidrug resistance efflux pumps use promiscuous binding sites to bind antibiotics of diverse structure. Antibiotic resistance can arise spontaneously through mutation, can be inherited by gene exchange mechanisms, or can arise de novo through gene duplication and mutational reengineering. Indiscriminate use of antibiotics has significantly contributed to the rise in antibiotic resistance. Measures to counter antibiotic resistance include synthetically altering the antibiotic, using combination antibiotic therapy, and adding a chemical decoy. Persister cells in a population have stopped actively growing, making them tolerant to bactericidal antibiotics. The quest to discover novel antibiotics includes designing candidate antimicrobial compounds to interact with and inhibit the active site of a known microbial enzyme, and screening previously unculturable microbes for new antibiotics. Potential targets for rational antimicrobial drug design include proteins expressed only in vivo or proteins expressed both in vivo and in vitro. 

but there is nothing of substance the physician can do. The common cold is caused by the rhinovirus, and no antibiotic designed for bacteria can touch it. Why are there so few antiviral agents in the clinician’s arsenal? The reason is that applying the principle of selective toxicity is much harder to achieve for viruses than it is for bacteria. Viruses routinely usurp host cell functions to make copies of themselves. Thus, a drug that hurts the virus is likely to also harm the patient. Nevertheless, there are several useful antiviral agents for which selective viral targets have been found and exploited. Some of these agents are listed in Table 27.3. Select examples are discussed in this section. All of the molecular mechanisms of viruses presented in Chapter 11 are studied as potential drug targets. 

Membrane-coated viruses are vulnerable at two stages: when the virus is invading the host cell and after viral propagation, when the progeny viruses release from the host cell. The flu virus presents a good example of both. 

It is impossible to immunize all humans against any given disease. However, it is estimated that immunizing about 80% of a population for influenza can halt an epidemic by cutting off transmission. Unfortunately, this level of immunization is rarely achieved. 

the endosome is formed, proton pumps in the membrane acidify endosomal contents. The drop in pH changes the structure of hemagglutinin on the viral membrane so that it can now bind to receptors on the endocytic membrane. The result is fusion of the two membranes and release of the virion into the cytoplasm. For hemagglutinin structure to change, the interior of the enveloped virion must also be acidified. Acidification uncoating. Unfortunately, amantadine-resistant strains of influenza have developed, in part because of the widespread use of amantadine by Chinese poultry farmers. As a result, the drug is no longer recommended as a treatment for influenza. The second target of the influenza virus is the envelope protein neuraminidase. The newer antiflu drugs, such as viral envelope allows virus particles to leave the cell in which they were made. The enzyme cleaves any sialic acid on the cell surface that may have bound to the hemagglutinin on the virus. Unencumbered, the virus can leave the cell surface and infect another cell. Neuraminidase inhibitors prevent sialic acid cleavage, causing the virus particles to aggregate at the cell surface. Surface aggregation reduces the number of virus particles released. The contributions of discussed in eTopic 27.4. The neuraminidase inhibitors, when used within 48 hours of disease onset, decrease shedding and reduce the duration of influenza symptoms by approximately one day. However, flu symptoms generally last only 3–10 days. While this does not sound like a substantial benefit, shortening the course of the flu in the elderly can minimize damage to the lungs, which in turn reduces the chance of developing life-threatening secondary bacterial infections such as pneumonia and bronchitis. 

Chapter 11). The integrated provirus can then be activated cytoplasm and directs synthesis of more virus particles. 

The laboratory results indicated that the wife might not yet require therapy (she had a low viral load—that is, less T-cell count), but since she was pregnant, a short course of started on combination antiretroviral therapy, including a protease inhibitor. condition. At least half, if not most, of the HIV-positive people in the United States now live long enough to die from diseases of aging, such as heart attacks or strokes. this recommendation is that many people do not know they are infected, but treating an asymptomatic, HIV-positive person reduces the risk of sexually transmitting the virus. Antiretroviral therapy can also prevent transplacental transmission from an HIV-positive pregnant woman to her fetus, as in our case history. The drugs described next are important components of effective treatment. 

per milliliter of blood. Treatment should be considered even for patients with viral loads as low as 5,000 copies per milliliter, as for the husband in the case history presented earlier. 

virus from infecting cells in the first place. Drugs called entry inhibitors do just that: They stop entry. There are two types needed for virus binding (see Chapter 11 and removing the doorknob from the door so there is nothing to grab. Fusion inhibitors, however, are like gluing the door shut. You can grab the knob but still cannot open the door. 

treatment today involves administering combinations of three or more antiretroviral drugs. This therapeutic strategy protease inhibitor, a nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor, or an integrase inhibitor. Integrase inhibitors, fi rst approved in the United States in 2007, block the enzyme an infected person if the available antiretroviral drugs are so effective. In 2011, Timothy Schaker at the University group found evidence that the virus in these individuals still remained trapped in lymphatic tissues that were poorly strategies designed to more effectively force drugs into tissues might be the cure we have long awaited. newborn baby in rural Mississippi was treated aggressively with antiretroviral drugs starting about 30 hours after Then, in that same year, it was revealed that a group of 14 adults treated within 4–10 weeks of infection, but whose treatment had been inadvertently interrupted for 3 years, did not relapse while off the drugs. The “cured” patients easily kept in check by their immune systems. 

disease. Fortunately, we have effective antivirals that can populations with antivirals before exposure be effective their risk of infection by a sexual partner. Both drugs are nucleoside analogs of adenosine and cytosine, respectively, and are reverse transcriptase inhibitors. Although this is an approved strategy, it is controversial even among physicians. Some fear the drug will encourage risky behavior. 

Kinase inhibitors: erlotinib, sunitinib, for proper folding. The glucosidase inhibitor celgosivir has, indeed, proved effective against many unrelated viruses in vitro and in rodent models, but not yet in humans. Nevertheless, the enzyme warrants further investigation. Host kinases that regulate intracellular virus trafficking are also potential drug targets. refers to the 5´ 7-methylguanosine cap added to export of host mRNA from the nucleus to the cytoplasm where mRNA is translated to protein. not interfering with host transcripts. Because the drug binds to a host protein rather than a viral also shows some host-targeted drugs already approved for other purposes, such as chloroquine (antimalarial agent) and statins (anticholesterol metabolism). These drugs are now being Chloroquine inhibits endosome acidification, which is antivirals. Different stages of viral development are shown (entry, needed by some enveloped viruses to escape the vacuole fusion, genome replication, assembly). Examples of broad-spectrum and enter the host cytoplasm (dengue virus and Zika virus, compounds are connected to the corresponding targeted proteins for instance). Statins interfere with lipid metabolism needed therapeutically effective these drugs will be as antiviral agents is unclear. There are many challenges to the host-as-target approach (proteases, polymerases, entry proteins) because they afford to antiviral therapy. Host proteins function in a complex some measure of selective toxicity. However, a perceived network of interactions, so elucidating drug mechanisms limitation of these direct-acting antivirals is their narrow of actions is difficult. Toxicity is another worry, although spectrum of virus coverage. Narrow-spectrum antivirals it may be possible to identify a therapeutic concentration cannot provide adequate protection against newer, rapidly window in which the drug inhibits virus replication but has emerging viral threats. Examples include flavivirus dengue, minimal toxic effects on the patient. coronaviruses SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV, and the filovirus Ebola. Finding new broad-spectrum antivirals could address this need. But what do we target? Thought Question cell pathways that are required by multiple viruses for 27.12 The text states that cells and viruses would have difficulty developing resistance to antiviral drugs that target host proteins rather than viral proteins. Why would targeting a host protein decrease the likelihood of developing resistance? inhibitors such as alisporivir impair the folding of viral Propose a mechanism by which the drug could still become proteins and augment innate immune responses. These ineffective against a virus. 

Fewer antiviral agents than antibacterial agents are available because it is harder to identify viral targets that provide selective toxicity. Preventing viral attachment to, or release from, host cells is a mechanism of action for antiviral agents, such as amantadine and zanamivir, used to treat influenza viruses and retroviruses. inhibitors that prevent the maturation of viral polyproteins into active forms, and entry inhibitors that Future antiviral agents may target host proteins needed by the virus to replicate. To be useful, such drugs must exhibit concentration-dependent selective toxicity against viral replication rather than host function. 

Fungal infections are much more difficult to treat than bacterial infections, in part because fungal physiology is more similar to that of humans than bacterial physiology is. The other reason is that fungi have an efficient drug detoxification system that modifies and inactivates many antibiotics. Thus, to have a fungistatic effect, repeated applications of a Florida hospital with persistent fever, malaise, and a painful right-arm mass. He denied trauma to the arm. White blood cell count was elevated at 27,000/μl, and chest X-ray revealed a left-lung infiltrate. Bronchoscopy revealed granulomatous inflammation containing a single yeastlike mass. Incision and drainage were performed on the arm mass, and cultures were obtained. Serum cryptococcal antigen tests were negative, as were tests for Bartonella henselae and Toxoplasma. Cultures from the right arm grew out a fungal form similar to that identified from the bronchoscopy specimens. 

medication was changed to fluconazole for a recommended duration of 6 months. 

infections of moist skin and mucous membranes (for example, vaginal yeast infections). The imidazole-containing drugs appear to disrupt the fungal membrane by inhibiting sterol synthesis. Lamisil (a terbinafine compound) is a different class of agent that selectively inhibits ergosterol synthesis by fungi. Humans do not make ergosterol nor use it in their cell membranes. Lamisil is currently a popular antifungal agent used to treat superficial mycoses. More chronic dermatophytic infections typically require another antifungal agent, called griseofulvin, produced by the mitotic spindle and derails cell division (called metaphase arrest). This action does not kill the fungus, but as the hair, skin, or nails grow and are replaced, the fungus is shed. Vaginal yeast infections caused by Candida are often treated with nystatin, a polyene antifungal agent synthesized by Streptomyces that forms membrane pores two of the people who discovered it worked for the laboratory of the New York State Public Health Department (now the Wadsworth Center). The serious, sometimes fatal, consequences of systemic mycoses require more aggressive therapy. The a high affinity for ergosterol, which is prevalent in fungal but not mammalian membranes. Fluconazole, on the other hand, inhibits the synthesis of ergosterol. Thus, fungal cells grown in the presence of f luconazole make defective membranes. Typically, curing systemic fungal infections requires long-term treatment to prevent disease relapse. Table 27.4 lists a number of other commonly used antifungal agents. 

of people live today because antimicrobial drugs cured infectious diseases that we’ve dreaded for centuries. Unfortunately, by the late twentieth century, a sense of complacency about infections and antibiotics was pervasive among citizens of developed countries. This complacency led to the irresponsible use of antibiotics, and now a crisis of antibiotic resistance looms. We may even be entering a postantibiotic era. Despite government and industry throwing considerable amounts of money and human effort at the problem, very few new, clinically useful antibiotics have been discovered over the past four decades. And when one is found, pathogens keep developing resistance. Nevertheless, hope remains. New approaches to antimicrobial discovery are continually being conceived and tested. With any luck, one or more of the strategies will pay off, keeping us one step ahead of the microbes. 

Profiling gut microbiota. Dysbiosis of the gut microbiome is associated with Crohn’s disease, ulcerative colitis, irritable bind a region are fluorescently labeled and mixed with barcoded magnetic pull-down beads containing complementary probes. Fluorescence level reflects prevalence of a taxonomic Source: Casén et al. 2015. Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 42:71–83. 

I’m amazed that we can finally study the “black box” of intestinal microbiota in such detail. We’ve learned that intestinal microbiota affect so many facets of our lives, such as gastrointestinal disease, obesity, diabetes, mental illnesses, and even healthy brain function of infants. I’m also fascinated by how gut microbiota builds in an individual. Environmental surroundings, birth method, mother’s microbiota (even during pregnancy)—all affect the infant’s healthy donors. How might profiling gut microbiota contribute to patient care? 

nfections have killed more people than all of Earth’s wars combined. Today the spread of disease is controlled in large part by worldwide surveillance agencies that can detect outbreaks quickly, before major epidemics develop. These agencies rely on smaller clinical microbiology laboratories scattered throughout the world that help clinicians diagnose infectious diseases. Here in Chapter 28, we discuss the principles of clinical microbiology and epidemiology that are used to identify, treat, and contain outbreaks, and explain how profiling our microbiota can predict diseases. 

based on clinical symptoms (diarrhea, chronic constipation, or a mix). Patients within subgroups, however, harbor very different microbiota. So, profiling patient microbiota can lead to more specific diagnoses. Profiling microbiota can also indicate how a patient might respond to treatments such as anti–tumor necrosis factor. Fecal bacteriotherapy might then convert a nonresponder profile into responder. Finally, monitoring the profile of a recovered patient could signal a coming relapse. Preventive medication could shorten the period to remission. 

Caribbean island of Hispaniola was violently shaken by a magnitude 7.0 earthquake. Over 100,000 people died, thousands of buildings collapsed, and the already fragile sanitation system was severely crippled. Almost immediately, volunteers from around the world poured in to help rescue the living, recover the dead, and rebuild what little infrastructure remained. Then, in October, a cholera epidemic struck. Over the next 5 years, 700,000 cases of severe diarrhea (see Chapter 25) ravaged the populace, and more than 9,000 died. Where did it come from? Haiti had never experienced cholera before. Extensive epidemiological studies utilizing wholegenome sequencing strategies eventually traced the Haitian strain of Vibrio cholerae halfway around the world to a September 2010 cholera outbreak in Nepal. How did this faraway strain make it to Haiti so fast? Unwittingly, the United Nations sent troops infected with the organism from Nepal to Haiti to assist in the recovery. The Nepalese troops set up camp and used a nearby river for sanitation. of the first reported cholera case. From there, the infection Such compelling stories underscore the integral roles that clinical microbiology and epidemiology play in health care. The Haitian cholera epidemic and the Current Research Highlight demonstrate how modern methods of around the world and even predict impending disease in an individual. In Chapter 28 we begin by explaining the basic strategies and methodologies used to diagnose infectious diseases, and we end with a discussion of how epidemiologists identify and track emerging pathogens. Our goal is not to catalog every infectious disease, but to demonstrate general principles and problem-solving approaches. 

As in any good detective mystery, the first step in investigating an infectious disease is to identify the most likely suspects. We can accomplish this, in part, by observing the disease symptoms in a patient and knowing which organisms typically produce those symptoms. It also helps if the physician is aware of a similar disease outbreak under way in the community. Beyond these clues, the etiological agent must be identified through biochemical, molecular, serological, or antigen detection strategies. 

Why Take the Time to Identify an Infectious Agent? 

This is the first question many students ask when contemplating the effort and expense required to identify the genus and species of an organism causing an infection. Why not simply treat the patient with an antibiotic and be done with it? While this approach sounds appealing, there are several compelling reasons for identifying an infectious agent. Antibiotic resistance. As discussed in Chapter 27, antibi- otic resistance is an increasingly serious global problem. Characterizing a microbe’s antibiotic resistance profi le is part of any microbial identification process. Understanding which antibiotics are effective in treating an infectious agent will help the physician avoid prescribing an inappropriate drug. Furthermore, knowing which drugs are ineffective enables health organizations to track the spread of antibiotic-resistant strains. For example, before 1970, most strains of Neisseria gonorrhoeae were susceptible to penicillin. Today, most strains are resistant not only to penicillin, but also to many other antibiotics. Remember, too, that viral pathogens are not susceptible to antibiotics, so knowing that a patient has a viral disease can prevent the inappropriate use of antibiotics. Pathogen-specific disease complications. Many diseases have serious complications that are common to a given organism or strain of organism. For example, children whose sore throats are caused by certain strains of Streptococcus pyogenes can develop serious complications affecting the heart and kidney long after the infection has resolved. These complications are the immunological consequence of bacterial and host antigen cross-reactivity; they are called sequelae (singular, sequela) because they occur after the infection itself is over. Life-threatening sequelae, such as rheumatic fever and acute glomerulonephritis caused by pyogenes has caused a child’s sore throat allows the physician to prescribe antibiotics that will quickly eradicate the infection and prevent the development of sequelae. 

Tracking the spread of a disease. Consider a situation in which ten infants scattered throughout a city develop bloody diarrhea. The clinical laboratory identifies the same strain of Shigella sonnei, a Gram-negative bacillus, as the cause in each case. 

Immunological or nucleic acid amplification tests can be used to type a strain (discussed later). Finding the same strain in all cases suggests that they probably originated from the same source. Shigellosis is transferred from person to person by what is called the fecal-oral route. Carriers of Shigella will shed this organism in their feces. Inadequate hand washing after defecation will leave bacteria on the hands, which can then transfer the pathogen to foods or utensils, or to another person by touching. Public health officials, armed with the knowledge that all the infants have the same strain of Shigella, then question the parents and learn that all of the children attend the same day-care center. By testing the other children and the workers in that center, officials can stop the infection from spreading. This investigative process is called epidemiology (covered in Section 28.3). 

Identifying pathogens present at body sites containing specimens are typically plated onto selective media—for example, MacConkey, Hektoen, or colistin–naladixic acid decrease the number of normal microbiota that might contaminate the specimen. The following techniques are used to collect specimens from nonsterile body sites: placed in specialized liquid nutrient transport medium. Stool samples. Cup or rectal swab; for identifying diarrhea-causing microbes. Abscesses. Needle aspirations. 

To diagnose an infectious disease, physicians must collect, and the laboratory must process, a wide variety of clinical specimens. The types of specimens range from simple cotton swabs of sore throats to urine and fecal samples. Here we describe how these samples should be collected. Note that, upon receiving and processing these specimens, the clinical microbiologist must wear latex gloves and use a laminar flow biosafety hood (see Fig. 5.28) as protection against potential infectious agents. Some body sites should not contain any microorganisms when collected from a healthy individual. These include space that lines the outside of the lungs, synovial fluid from joints, and peritoneal fluid from the abdominal cavity. Because these sites are normally sterile, specimens can be plated onto nonselective agar media as well as selective media. Nonselective media, such as blood or chocolate agars, can be used because any organism found in these specimens is considered significant. The following techniques are used to collect specimens from sterile body sites: Cerebrospinal fluid. Lumbar punctures (spinal taps; Blood samples. Generally taken by syringe from two body sites and placed in liquid media for aerobic and anaerobic culture. The same organism isolated from blood samples taken from the two sites is considered the likely etiological agent. Pleural, synovial, and peritoneal fluid. Samples are aspirated by syringe. The fluid can be viewed microscopically for inflammatory cells and cultured on agar aerobically and anaerobically. 

Urine samples. Midstream clean catch (will contain some microflora from urethra) or collected from catheters placed in the bladder (should be sterile); testing for urinary tract infections. 

The minimum standard for diagnosing a urinary tract infection used to be a finding of greater than 100,000 organisms per milliliter of urine. As noted in the text, this is no longer the case. 

bag, so organisms initially present at insignificant numbers have time to replicate to high numbers even if the patient When a catheter is not in place, urine is most commonly collected by what is called the midstream clean-catch technique, which is performed by the patient. In this procedure, the external genitals are first cleaned with a sterile wipe containing an antiseptic. The patient then partially urinates to wash as many organisms as possible out of the urethra and then collects 5–15 milliliters of the midstream urine in a sterile cup. This urine sample will usually not be sterile, because of urethral contamination, but the number of bacteria will be low. The clinical laboratory determines how many organisms per milliliter are present in the midstream catch and tells the physician whether an infection is present. Finding more than 1,000 organisms of a single species per milliliter of urine from a midstream clean catch is now considered indicative of an infection in a symptomatic patient. 

Once a specimen from any body site has been properly collected, it must be transported to the clinical laboratory under conditions that will not undermine the viability of the pathogen. Then, after arriving in the lab, the sample must be processed quickly using protocols that ensure growth of likely pathogens. 

and MacConkey agars were negative. Why didn’t the infectious agent grow? 

The problem in this instance is related to specimen collection and processing. Internal abscesses located near the gastrointestinal tract are often anaerobic infections, in this case caused by the Gram-negative rod Bacteroides fragilis, a strict anaerobes. Intestinal microbes, the majority of which are anaerobic, can sometimes escape the intestine if the organ is damaged in some way. The specimen in this instance should have been collected under anaerobic conditions by aspiration into a nitrogen-filled tube prior to transport to the clinical laboratory. Alternatively, a swab of the abscess material can be inserted into a special microbes were probably killed by the oxygen. system that permits survival of this anaerobe for 1 or 2 days in oxygen, so some of the bacteria may have survived transport. The laboratory still had a chance to find the organism, which raises the second problem in the case. After receiving the specimen, the lab cultured it only under aerobic conditions. The laboratory should have also incubated a series of plates anaerobically (see Section 5.5, Fig. 5.20). This case, therefore, illustrates the importance of both proper specimen collection and proper processing. 

1. Remove tube from package. 

2. Remove plunger with attached swab. Collect sample. Plastic foil 3. Reinsert swab and press plunger through stopper so that inner tube drops to bottom of outer tube. 

Medical and laboratory personnel are exposed to extremely dangerous pathogens on a daily basis. When working with dangerous pathogens, clinical microbiologists must protect themselves from accidental infection and at the same time be certain the pathogen does not escape from the lab. 

Agents not known to cause disease. 

Agents of moderate potential hazard; also required if personnel may have potential contact with human blood or tissues. 

Agents may cause disease by inhalation route. 

Dangerous and exotic pathogens with high risk of aerosol transmission; only 11 labs in the United States handle these. 

Level 2 procedures plus ventilation providing directional airflow into room, exhaust air directed outdoors; restricted access to lab (no unauthorized persons). 

Level 3 procedures plus one-piece positivepressure suits; lab is completely isolated from other areas present in the same building or is in a separate building. 

her physician. After the examination, the physician asked the patient to collect a midstream urine sample that would be sent to the lab across town for analysis. The woman complied and handed the collection cup to the nurse. The nurse placed the cup on a table at the nurses’ station. Three hours later, a courier service picked up the specimen and transported it to the laboratory. The next day, the report came back: “greater than 200,000 CFUs/ml; multiple colony types; sample unsuitable for analysis.” Why was this determination made? 

■ Biosafety level 4 containment. Dr. Kevin neutralization potential of serum from smallpox vaccination trials. He is protected by a positive-pressure suit working in a biosafety level 4 laboratory. The airflow into his suit is so loud that he must wear earplugs to protect his hearing. Note that this virus is used the World allowed to do so. 

Identifying a pathogen enables clinicians to prescribe appropriate antibiotics, anticipate possible sequelae, and track the spread of the disease. Specimen collection is a critical first step in the process of identifying a pathogen. Common specimens include blood, pus, urine, sputum, throat swabs, stool, and cerebrospinal fluid. Specimens from sites containing normal microbiota must be handled differently from specimens taken from normally sterile body sites. might contain anaerobes must be collected under anaerobic conditions. Various levels of protective measures are used in handling potentially infectious biological materials. Biosafety level 1 agents are generally not pathogenic and require the lowest level of containment. Biosafety level 2 agents are pathogenic but not typically transmitted via the respiratory tract. Laminar flow hoods are required. 

Biosafety level 3 agents are virulent and transmitted by the respiratory route. They require laboratories with special ventilation and air-lock doors. Biosafety level 4 agents are highly virulent and require the use of positive-pressure suits. 

Now that we have collected a sample, how do we identify the pathogen, and do it quickly? Pathogens can be identified on the basis of a variety of observations, including the patient’s symptoms, the presence of organisms in stained clinical specimens, biochemical clues, and serology (the presence in a patient’s serum of antibodies reactive against a specific microbe). 

Conventional Approaches sputum, can be directly stained with the Gram stain procedure (described in Section 2.3) or the acid-fast stain. Knowing that an organism is Gram-positive, Gram-negative, or acid-fast guides which additional tests the clinical microbiologist must run. The case that follows illustrates how the acid-fast stain is critical for presumptively identifying mycobacteria. 

by the acid-fast stain, a technique first described in 1882 (called the Ziehl-Neelsen stain) that is used to find the tubercle bacillus in a patient’s sputum. The acid-fast stain enables a technician to visualize bacteria such as Mycobacterium species that are not stained by the Gram stain. Mycobacteria have a very waxy outer coat composed of mycolic acid that resists penetration by most dyes—an obstacle the acid-fast stain was designed to overcome. The original Ziehl-Neelsen acid-fast stain used phenol and heat to drive carbolfuchsin (a red dye) into mycobacterial cells on glass slides. Destaining with an acidic alcohol solution removes the stain from all cell types except mycobacteria. The slide is subsequently counterstained with methylene blue, after which the mycobacteria will be seen as curved, red rods (called acid-fast bacilli), while everything else will the mycolic acid. This dye also resists removal by an acidic alcohol wash, so the mycobacteria will fluoresce bright yellow when observed under a fluorescence microscope. Although the acid-fast stain is very useful, it detects organisms in the sputum of tuberculosis patients only with inoculating the sputum sample to a blue-green Löwenstein-Jensen medium (selective for mycobacteria) and organism grows, a rapid, nucleic acid amplification test of the organism, even in AFB-negative sputum samples. 

mycobacterial species, some of which grow extremely slowly. The colonies have a “bread crumb–like” appearance. 

tion of an organism is known, the conventional laboratory approach used to identify bacterial pathogens requires understanding basic microbial physiology and how diverse it is. Thousands of bacterial species are capable of causing disease, but no two species have the same biochemical “signature.” The clinical microbiologist can look for reactions, or combinations of reactions, that are unique to a given species, as in the following case history. 

sequentially. To save time, a slew of tests are carried out simultaneously, but the results are interpreted sequentially using the algorithm. In our case history, for instance, consider the most common causes of bacterial meningitis: Neisseria meningitidis, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, and Escherichia coli. an extremely rich medium that looks brown, owing to the Because it is so nutrient-rich, all four organisms will grow grow well, if at all, on ordinary blood agar, because these bacteria cannot lyse red blood cells and release required is a selective and differential medium for enteric Gramnegative rods. Hektoen is selective because bile salts and dyes inhibit the growth of Gram-positives. It is differential because the medium reveals organisms that ferment lactose or sucrose and produce hydrogen sulfide. Differential and selective media are described in Section 4.3. Thus, the organism was a Gram-negative, enteric rod, and identity of the organism had to be carried out, but this simple example shows how simultaneous tests can be interpreted. Identifying Gram-negative bacteria. The Gram-negative bacterium in this case was subjected to a battery of 36 biochemical tests in an automated microbial identification United States and Europe now use these automated identification systems. The organism is inoculated into the wells of a prepared microtiter dish in which each well contains materials that test an organism’s ability to ferment different carbon sources or make different metabolic end products in color produced in different wells, the instrument can quickly identify the pathogen’s metabolic profi le, sometimes within 5–6 hours. For each bacterial species, the system software “knows” the probability that a given reaction will be positive or negative, and from that information the program can identify the pathogen. 

gonorrhoeae. This organism will not grow well on typical blood agar, because important nutrients remain locked within intact red blood cells. ferments lactose to produce acid-fermentation products that give the medium an orange color, owing to the pH indicators acid fuchsin and peptone amino acids. The resulting amines are alkaline and produce a more intense blue color with bromothymol blue. Salmonella species also produce hydrogen sulfide gas from the thiosulfate. Hydrogen sulfide reacts with the medium’s iron salt to produce an insoluble, black iron sulfide precipitate visible in the center of the colonies. 

Gram-positives); and (3) MacConkey agar (which will grow suspect the organism to be Gram-positive—an assumption borne out by the Gram stain. 

Though the skin is normally populated by many different microorganisms, samples from an infected lesion are overwhelmingly populated by the etiological agent. The pathogen predominates because it outgrows normal microbiota. Using selective media to isolate the infectious agent will further simplify diagnosis by decreasing the growth of any normal microbiota that may still be present. 

When performing a catalase test from colonies grown on blood agar, be sure not to transfer any of the agar, since red blood cells also contain catalase. 

Streptococcus pyogenes. The bacitracin and optochin results are designated “positive” if the organism is susceptible and “negative” if the organism is resistant to the agent. 

■ Rebecca Lancefield. In 1918, Dr. Lancefield joined the Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research in New York City, where she studied the hemolytic streptococci, known then as differences in cell wall carbohydrate antigens. The basic technique is still used today and in her honor is known as the Lancefield classification scheme. 

Unfortunately, the Lancefield classification procedure is somewhat time-consuming and not readily amenable as a so, like the catalase test, to be useful for identification the bacitracin test must be used in conjunction with an algorithm. The technician must follow the appropriate algorithm before assigning importance to this or any other test result. It is irrelevant, for instance, if an alpha-hemolytic organism is bacitracin susceptible. Some of these may exist, but they are not associated with disease. The organism in The other tests named in are equally important for identifying Gram-positive infectious agents. 

For example, Streptococcus pneumoniae is an important alpha-hemolytic strains of streptococci are resistant to this compound. Thus, an optochin susceptibility disk test is a Coagulase catalyzes a key reaction used to distinguish the pathogen Staphylococcus aureus, which causes boils and bone infections, from other staphylococci, such as the normal skin species Staphylococcus epidermidis. To conduct a the enzyme coagulase. Coagulase will convert fibrinogen to fibrin and produce a clotted, or coagulated, tube of plasma. Coagulase-negative staphylococci can still be medically important, however. Staphylococcus saprophiticus, for instance, is an important cause of urinary tract infections. 

28.3 Use to identify the organism from the the arm of a 62-year-old man. Bacteriological examination revealed the presence of Gram-positive cocci that were also catalase-positive, coagulase-positive, and novobiocin resistant. 

become detectable in blood, the patient is usually already recovering from the disease. 

strain possesses, not on the basis of surface antigens. Isolates can to electrophoresis. The slower-moving fragments (toward top of gel) are larger than those moving farther down the gel toward the type different strains of the anaerobic pathogen Clostridium botulinum, the cause of food-borne botulism. These organisms are not typed serologically, as is the case for sets of primers, one pair for each gene, combined in a single tube with a specimen. Care must be taken to be sure that the primers chosen make different-sized products, do genes present in a single species or can screen for the presence of multiple pathogens in a clinical sample. In the latter, primer sets are designed to amplify genes unique to each pathogen. disease. Can molecular tools identify them? 

primer is added to an 2. Reverse transcriptase displaces mRNA and copies second cDNA strand. 4. The result is double-stranded cDNA. 

The trick is in the method used to quantify the result. In one method, a third, fluorescent oligonucleotide (called the probe contains a fluorescent dye at the 3´ end and a chemical dye at the 5´ end that quenches (absorbs) energy emitted from the fluorescent dye. As long as the two chemicals are kept in close proximity by the intact probe, no light is emitted. The probe is designed to anneal to a sequence between the binding sites of the two other primers (modifications on the ends of the probe prevent it from being used as a primer). probe oligonucleotide as it passes through that area. This cleavage separates the dye from the quencher, and the dye begins to fluoresce. The greater the amount of cDNA there was to begin with, the fewer cycles it takes to register a fluorescence increase over background (Fig. 28.14). Thought Question their blood? 

RT-qPCR is used routinely for the high-throughput diagnosis of many viral pathogens, including the West Nile virus. can be attempted. The quantita5 tive advantage of RT-qPCR is that you can estimate the num8 ber of virus particles present in the sample by the number of The basic technique is as fol14 is added. Once annealed, the primer allows reverse tran21 scriptase to synthesize the first (cDNA) (Fig. 28.13). Reverse transcriptase then digests the more virus particles there are in the sample (viral load), the more the more cDNA product will Taq polymerase (see Section 12.2, Fig. 12.13). 

hybridization and polymerization. The switch to yellow indicates therefore the level of fluorescent dye released remained below background. After cycle 10, fluorescence increased logarithmically: will increase over background (that is, the fewer cycles will be needed to see the increase over background). The slope eventually decreases because the fluorescent probe has become limiting. 

14-year-old boy with severe combined immunodeficiency and antibiotic treatments did not provide answers or relief. The scientists used this technology to perform an unbiased sequences of the spirochete Leptospira santarosai, an easily treatable organism. After being given intravenous high-dose penicillin for 7 days, the boy eventually recovered. Leptospirosis is a zoonotic disease. The organism is excreted in the urine of infected animals, usually into nearby bodies of freshwater. The child probably contracted the disease during a trip to Puerto Rico, where he swam in freshwater. Why didn’t immunological tests initially identify antibodies to Leptospira? The immunocompromised state of the boy likely prevented him from making detectible only way. This metagenomic strategy to detect pathogens is not widely used yet because of its complexity, but someday it could be used to diagnose any infection. 

of nucleic acid–based diagnostic microbiology includes a molecular weight of the “amplicon” and sequences it. As described for proteins in eAppendix 3, sequencing involves product one base at a time, and mass spectrometry to calculate the weight of each new, shortened fragment. The fragment and the progressively shortened ones is used to determine the identity of each base removed and, thus, the sequence of the fragment. Because culturing would no longer be needed, this technology could eventually replace the time-honored petri dish. 

insect-borne pathogen that causes serious developmental defects, such as microcephaly, in infected fetal brains (see the Current Research Highlight in Chapter 26, and Section 28.4). The virus has been declared a public health emergency that requires a quick and easy diagnostic test. Keith Pardee (University of Toronto) and Alexander Green (Arizona State using synthetic-biology approaches (see Section 12.5). It is a paper-based test that takes only 3 hours to complete. flip a riboswitch sensor. To make sufficient amounts of the 3´ end binds to the Zika virus cDNA and whose 5´ end virus will trip the riboswitch in the next phase of the test. The synthetically constructed riboswitch sensor is shown start codon. This is called a “toehold” switch. When Zika start codon. Translation of the mRNA produces LacZ protein that will convert a yellow substrate to a purple product (a the mixture is placed on paper disks containing protein synthesis components, which, after an hour, are analyzed by an electronic reader. This rapid test product is not yet on the market, but its development provides a glimpse of what this technology can bring to the field of rapid diagnostics. Serology-based pathogen detection. In addition to directly identifying a pathogen by culture isolation or by patient’s serum, as seen in the following case history. 

died. The cause remained unknown, and no precautions were taken. Consequently, over the next month the illness spread to four other prefectures in Guinea, killing at least half of those laboratory at the Pasteur Institute in France finally identified the agent as the Zaire strain of Ebola virus, the most deadly form of this filovirus. Laboratory confirmation tests included RT-qPCR, viral antigen detection, and antibody too late to stop the horrific Ebola epidemic that swept through western Africa in 2014–15, killing thousands. than the West Nile virus identified in the earlier case history. Pathogenesis of Ebola was discussed in Section 26.6 (Fig. 26.25). This case includes many elements of epidemiology (discussed later), all of which rely on an ability to identify the presence of the virus. Diagnosis during this epidemic involved three techniques. We already discussed RT-qPCR, but what serological tests were used? 

picogram is one one-thousandth of a nanogram.) One in a 96-well microtiter plate, which allows multiple patient serum samples to be tested simultaneously. An antigen from the virus (Ebola in this case) is attached (adsorbed) to the plastic of the wells (Fig. 28.16). Albumin or powdered milk is used to block the remaining sites on the plastic that could result in false positives. Patient serum is then added. Ebola-specific antibodies present in the serum will react with the antigen attached to the microtiter plate. The antigen-antibody complex is then reacted with rabbit antihuman IgG to which an enzyme has been attached, or conjugated (for example, horseradish peroxidase). The result is a chain of viral antigen connected to patient antibody connected to rabbit antibody-enzyme that links the enzyme to the well. The chromogenic substrate for the enzyme is added next (for example, tetramethylbenzidine). 

Antigen capture 4. If Ebola antigen is present, the conjugated antibody will be captured by the complex. The addition of substrate will lead to production of a colored product. 

3. Enzyme-conjugated anti-Ebola antibody is then added. 

Plastic of microtiter plate 1. Anti-Ebola monoclonal antibody is attached to the plate surface. 

Rinse off excess and add patient serum. 

Wash off unbound serum and add conjugated antibody. 

Wash off unbound conjugated antibody and add substrate. 

Rate of conversion of substrate to colored product is proportional to the amount of anti-Ebola antibody that was present in the patient’s serum. 

If enzyme-conjugated antibody has bound to human IgG captured by the antigen in the well, the enzyme will convert the substrate to a colored product (blue for tetramethylbenzidine). Enzyme activity can be measured with formed, detected as absorbance with a spectrophotometer, will be an indication of the amount of anti-Ebola antibody present in the patient sample. 

instance, anti-Ebola antibody, not viral antigen, is adsorbed to the wells of a microtiter plate (Fig. 28.17). Patient serum is then added to the wells. If the serum contains Ebola antigen, the antigen will be captured by the antibody attached to the well. Then a second, enzyme-conjugated antibody against the Ebola antigen is added. The more antigen there is in the serum, the more enzyme-linked antibody will affix to the well. Addition of the appropriate chromogenic substrate will produce a colored product that can be measured. Antibody against Ebola, or any other viral pathogen, may be easier to detect than viral antigen because antibodies will be present at higher levels than the virus itself. But since there is a delay between the time when the virus is first present in serum and when the body manages to make antibody, a speedier diagnosis can be made by directly detecting viral antigen. 

4. Time of flight for each protein is recorded and graphed. 

3. Electrostatic field accelerates proteins through a vacuum tube. 

1. Whole colony or extract is mixed with matrix solution and spotted on metal plate. 

5. Pathogen is identified by comparing patterns of peaks against database. 

2. Laser ionizes protein-matrix mix. 

colony isolate must be used for identification, but the technology can now identify bacteria directly from blood (sepsis) or urine (cystitis). 

Space does not permit a complete listing of the methods used to identify microbial pathogens, but Table 28.3 presents some additional examples. In general, bacteria that are easily cultured are grown in the laboratory, after which biochemical tests are performed. Bacterial, viral, and fungal species that are difficult to grow are typically identified using immunological techniques that either identify a microbial antigen present in infected tissues or measure a rise in antibody titer. Nucleic acid–based methodologies are also used to identify organisms that are difficult to grow. Eukaryotic microbial parasites such as Plasmodium species (the cause of malaria), Giardia lamblia (which causes giardiasis, a diarrheal disease), and Entamoeba histolytica (the cause of amebic dysentery) can be identified via their telltale morphologies under the microscope, making biochemical tests unnecessary. 

munochromatography test for anti–Legionella antibodies. Serum placed on strip 1 contained antibodies to Legionella. 

Infection chains among patients with similar symptoms are revealed. 

The newer nucleic acid–based tests described earlier exhibit better sensitivity and specificity than most immunochromatographic assays, but they require more expensive instrumentation and training. In the coming years, pathogens suspected in a specific clinical setting. The development of next-generation serology-based and/or molecularbased multiplex tests will certainly facilitate quicker diagnosis and improved patient care. We also saw earlier how synthetic biology may revolutionize rapid diagnostics, as exemplified by the newly described Zika virus riboswitch test. 

Direct Gram or acid-fast stains are appropriate procedures to perform on some specimens. The results guide the direction of subsequent testing. Knowing which patient specimens should be sterile and which should contain normal microbiota informs the selection of media for processing the specimen. So, too, does understanding whether anaerobes may be Selective media are used to prevent growth of normal microbiota while permitting growth of others (such as Gram-positive bacteria versus Gram-negative bacteria). Differential media exploit the unique biochemical properties of a pathogen to distinguish it from similarlooking nonpathogens. Growth-dependent pathogen identification uses numerous, simultaneously run biochemical tests. An algorithm or a dichotomous key is applied to the results to identify the species. Different algorithms (or decision trees) are applied to Gram-positive and Gramnegative bacteria. Pathogens can be identified with biochemical analyses (useful for bacteria), molecular techniques (for for bacteria or viruses). Fluorescent antibody staining can rapidly identify organisms or antigens present in tissues. initiated rapidly following a positive result. Sensitivity (the ability to detect small amounts of the pathogen) and specificity (the ability to distinguish one pathogen from another) for any point of care test are factors used to evaluate how accurate the test is at eliminating false negative and false positive reactions, respectively. 

Immunochromatography is the primary platform for infections may be missed. 

In Section 25.1 we discussed how a new infectious disease can be identified using a version of Koch’s postulates. But how do scientists track the spread of a new disease, or find and identify new variants of influenza virus that develop thousands of miles away, and then predict when that virus will arrive on our “doorsteps” many months in advance? We start our discussion of epidemiology with a case in which scientists had to trace a heinous criminal act back to its source. 

The terms “endemic” and “epidemic” are often used when is always present in a population at a low frequency. For example, Lyme disease, caused by the spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi, is endemic to the northeastern United States because the organism has found a reservoir in deer and ticks. Recall that a reservoir is an animal, bird, or insect that harbors the infectious agent and is indigenous to a geographic area. Humans become infected only when they on the other hand, when larger-than-normal numbers of individuals in a population become infected over a short time. Epidemics arise, in part, because of rapid and direct human-to-human transmission. Food-source epidemics, for instance, are discussed in Chapter 16. 

used in the 2001 anthrax attack had the same genetic signature as a strain used by Bruce Ivins, a scientist working at the army’s Fort Detrick biodefense laboratory. Although his involvement was never proved, Dr. Ivins took his own life as agents were about to arrest him. The word “epidemiology” is derived from the Greek meaning “that which befalls man.” In scientific parlance, epidemiology examines the distribution and determinants of disease frequency in human populations. Put more simply, epidemiologists determine the source of a disease outbreak and the factors that influence how many individuals will succumb to the disease. Epidemiological principles are also used to determine the effectiveness of therapeutic measures and to identify new syndromes, (Middle East respiratory syndrome), and Lyme disease. Some of the basic concepts of epidemiology were already covered in Chapter 26 when we discussed infection cycles. Now we will explore how those principles are used to track disease. Epidemiological early-warning systems require an extensive organization that coordinates information from many sources. In the United States, that duty falls to centers, usually within 48 hours of diagnosis. The local centers forward that information to their state agencies, authorities in 2001 quickly recognized that an outbreak of anthrax was under way. 

quarantined area housing Ebola patients in the Ivory Coast. Epidemics can be minimized if infected persons are kept segregated from the general population (quarantined) to avoid spread of the infectious agent. 

Pandemics may be long-lived, such as the bubonic plague or they may be short-lived, as with the 1918 flu pandemic. When discussing a disease, epidemiologists distinguish between the prevalence and incidence of active cases. Prevalence describes the total number of active cases of a disease in a given location, regardless of when the case first developed. Incidence, however, refers to the number of new cases of a disease in that location over a specified time. Incidence reflects the risk a person has of acquiring the disease. Incidence rates can provide insight into whether efforts to limit a disease are working. Take a city of 100,000 people. If the incidence of new cases rises from 10 cases/100,000 population in one year to 30 cases/100,000 population the next year, then efforts to stem the disease are failing. Prevalence, reflecting the total burden on society, could also increase over those two years or might remain the same— say, 500 cases/100,000—if more people are being cured or perhaps die in that second year despite the increase in new cases. Endemic diseases maintain relatively constant prevalence and incidence rates. Outbreaks are typically marked by an increase in both parameters. 

When trying to contain the spread of an epidemic, it is vital to track down the first case of the disease (known as the index case or patient zero) and then identify everyone who has had contact with that individual so that they can be number of patients have been diagnosed and a new disease syndrome declared. This is what happened with the Ebola epidemic in 2015. Identifying an index case within a specific community is easier if the disease syndrome is already recognized, as and who has traveled to an area of documented disease or index case in Singapore was a 23-year-old woman who had stayed on the ninth floor of a hotel in Hong Kong while on the same floor of the hotel during this period is believed to have been the source of her infection, as well as that of the index patients who precipitated subsequent outbreaks in Vietnam and Canada. 

one of lesser concern. Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus considered more pressing dangers. 

How do epidemiologists first recognize that an epidemic is under way, and then identify the agent and its source? Certain diseases, because of their severity and transmissibility, are called reportable, or notifiable, diseases (Table 28.5). the incidences of certain diseases within a population to be tracked and upsurges noted. An emerging disease not on the list of notifiable diseases can be detected as a cluster of patients with unusual symptoms or combinations of symptoms. Such detection is possible because diseases of unknown etiology are also reported to health authorities. be linked to a known disease agent by clinical tests. An upsurge in cases, of either a reportable disease or an emerging disease, will set off institutional “alarms” that initiate epidemiological efforts to determine the source and cause of the outbreak. 

Snow in 1855 shows the location of cholera victims of the 1854 outbreak. The map illustrates that each victim within the marked area lived closer to the Broad Street pump than to other nearby pumps. The Broad Street well is found within the red circle. Each black bar represents a death from cholera. 

Microbiologists have successfully developed many strategies to identify the causes of infectious diseases. As noted earlier, Robert Koch in the late nineteenth century devised a set of postulates that, when followed, can identify the agent of a new disease (discussed in Sections 1.3 and 25.1). One important tenet of Koch’s postulates is that the suspected organism must be grown in pure culture. However, there are bacterial diseases for which the agent cannot be cultured. How might they be identified? 

Disease Surveillance affects over 2 billion people. Many of the Mycobacterium tuberculosis infections are caused by multidrug-resistant strains that are difficult, if not impossible, to kill with existing antibiotics (see Section 26.3). This problem is especially serious among refugee populations attempting to flee wartorn countries. As a result, it is important to screen these refugees as they enter neighboring countries with low incidences of tuberculosis. Although chest X-rays are mandatory in many cases, a positive image will be obtained only if the disease is at a relatively advanced stage. Actively infected individuals who have not developed the characteristic lung tubercles seen on X-ray will not be identified. Unfortunately, the acid-fast staining of sputum samples (discussed in Section 28.2) also fails to detect individuals at an early stage of infection. Studies have shown, (that is, determine the relatedness of) different microbial cases of salmonellosis in 2010 to a single strain of Salmonella enterica serovar Enteritidis. The results, conducted by a national network of public health agencies (PulseNet), led to the recall of over a half billion eggs. 

■ Whipple’s disease. Fluorescence in situ hybridization of a small-intestine biopsy in a case of Whipple’s disease (confocal laser scanning microscopy). In this test, a fluorescently green = nuclei of human cells; red = intracellular cytoskeletal protein vimentin. Magnification approx. 200×. 

The most effective bioweapon in terms of inflicting death (biowarfare) would have a low infectious dose, be easily transmitted between people, and be one to which a large percentage of the population was susceptible. Smallpox fits these criteria and would be the bioweapon of choice eradicated (almost) from the face of the Earth and is not easily obtained. Two laboratories still harbor the virus— one in the United States and one in Russia. It is believed that the virus has been destroyed in all other laboratories. Since smallpox is the perfect biowarfare agent, it is imperative that the last two smallpox repositories remain secure. While the good news is that smallpox disease has been eradicated, the bad news is that no individual born after 1970 has been vaccinated, with the exception of some military and laboratory personnel. As a result, anyone under 50 years of age is susceptible to smallpox. Even those of us who received the smallpox vaccination over 45 years ago are at risk, since our protective antibody titers have diminished. has been stockpiled. Were a smallpox attack to be launched, the vaccine would be rapidly administered to limit the spread of disease. Nevertheless, the economic and psychological impact of a smallpox epidemic would be devastating. Research with organisms considered to be select agents is tightly regulated. Because Yersinia pestis, for instance, is a select agent, laboratory personnel working with it must now possess security clearance with the Department of Justice (even though the organism itself can be handled under pathogen, and access to the lab and the organism must be tightly controlled. Much has improved since Michael Osterholm offered his dire assessment of a wide-scale bioterrorism attack. Education and surveillance procedures have been bolstered, and new detection technologies are being developed (Special Topic 28.1; see also eTopic 28.3). We will probably never be fully protected from attack, biological or otherwise, but recent efforts have improved the situation. 

Finding patient zero (the index case) is important for containing the spread of disease. 

Bioweapons, when they have been used, typically kill few people but incite great fear. bioweapon potential. 

News, whether obtained from traditional sources or Twitter, almost always carries stories of new infectious diseases cropping up in the world, so-called emerging infectious diseases. This section discusses the concept of emerging diseases, how they develop, and how health organizations detect and track them. 

In April 1979, workers at a secret Soviet biological weapons facility neglected to replace a filter in a laboratory ventilation system, and a cloud of highly weaponized Bacillus anthracis spores quickly spewed into the air outside. The deadly plume drifted downwind, infecting humans and cattle across a wide area. The resulting anthrax outbreak ultimately killed more than 64 people. Had a rapid pathogen detection system been available and deployed at the facility, all those lives could have been saved. Unfortunately, 30 years ago such technology was only the stuff of science fiction. Today, that technology exists in small, portable forms. Several multipathogen molecular detection platforms have specific pathogen genes and detect the products through hybridization to immobilized oligonucleotides. The wet chemistries for all of these detection systems are carried out in a roughly 2-inch square called lab-on-a-chip. device was developed in 2008. BioFlash-E can detect and identify a pathogen in as little as 3 minutes—significantly faster than traditional methods requiring isolation and growth of the pathogen (which can take 48 hours or longer). The sensor Analysis and Notification of Antigen Risks and Yields) that can detect as few as a dozen particles of a pathogen per liter of air. Currently, it can detect 24 pathogens, including the potential bioterrorism agents of anthrax, plague, smallpox, and tularemia. 

Borders was quoted as saying: “The quicker we can contain this the fewer cases we’ll have, then the smaller the scale of the epidemic. That’s the idea of going in as strong as we can early on.” We now know that this report represented the leading edge of the horrific Ebola epidemic that ravaged West Africa. As a fledgling microbiologist, tracking these ProMED reports allows you to see epidemics and new diseases emerge almost in real time. 

28.10 On the ProMED-mail web page (www.promedmail. org), click on the interactive world map to view outbreaks world during the current year? 

2. B-cell antibodies bind to the agent. 

5. Photons released hit the photon detector. 

primers that their system uses to amplify indicator genes of over 20 potential biowarfare agents. Discuss why this decision to publish was either good or bad. 

Sometimes world and national health organizations quickly and efficiently identify and contain outbreaks of emerging infectious diseases, as was the case in 2003 with severe instances, outbreaks take more time to contain, such as the 2014 Ebola epidemic in West Africa, described earlier. Agencies can also face difficulties in clearly identifying the causative agent of an outbreak, as in the current 2015–16 Zika virus outbreak in Brazil. The unfolding Zika virus story provides an instructive example of how new diseases are identified. 

One 7:e36528. 

is now endemic to Brazil. There is no treatment for Zika fever, although furious efforts are under way to develop a vaccine. At the moment, the only protection against Zika is to prevent infection by avoiding or eradicating the Aedes So, have Koch’s postulates been fulfilled? Does Zika virus infection of the mother lead to transplacental transmission of the virus to the fetus? And does virus replication interfere with fetal brain development? Evidence of the virus has been found in the blood of mothers who have delivered babies with microcephaly, and also in umbilical cord blood. The virus itself has been isolated from the brains of fetuses who died from microcephaly (see the Current Research Highlight in Chapter 26). Other studies have recapitulated the neurotropic nature of the virus and indicate that Zika virus can interfere with neurogenesis during human brain development. In sum, the evidence of a link is convincing but not yet ironclad. More epidemiological studies must be conducted to unequivocally prove the link. As of this writing, at least 1,000 babies in Brazil have been born with microcephaly and other birth defects linked to Zika virus. But it is important to point out that despite the fear Zika virus brings to pregnant women, the vast majority of confirmed Zika virus–infected pregnant Zika virus throughout the Americas by intensively screening mosquitoes. 

Lyme disease. Suburban development in the northeastern United States destroys predators of the mice that carry Borrelia burgdorferi. 

Natural environmental events can also trigger upsurges in the incidence of unusual diseases. For example, an unprecedented outbreak of hantavirus pulmonary disease occurred in 1993 in the Four Corners area of the Southwest, where Arizona, New Mexico, Colorado, and Utah meet, when rain led to greater-than-normal increases in plant and animal numbers. The resulting tenfold increase in deer mice, which carries the virus, made it more likely that recent outbreak of hantavirus occurred among campers at Yosemite National Park in 2012. 

demographics that can affect disease patterns, degradation in the quality and availability of both drinking water and food, and changes in animal and plant species health. Climate change will continue to create opportunities for some pathogens and may even limit the transmission of others. To stay ahead of these evolving infections, surveillance programs capable of detecting pathogen or disease emergence are essential. Make no mistake: Together, the effect of climate change on infectious diseases and the rise in antibiotic-resistant microbes pose a serious threat to the living world. 

ditches close to the spinach fields in the area. Scientists pondering these facts within the One Health framework a field, thereby contaminating wild hogs. The wild hogs, by running through the spinach fields, had contaminated those fields with their feces, and the irrigation water had then swept the pathogen into the plant vasculature. Only by integrating our knowledge of the environment and ecology could this investigation be completely understood and appropriate intervention and prevention strategies implemented. This outbreak exemplifies the fact that human health and animal health are inextricably linked and that a holistic approach is needed to understand, protect, and promote the health of all species. 

the One Health approach is being carried out in the Ruaha region of Tanzania, Africa—a sprawling, wild area with scattered small villages and a rich wildlife. Thousands of children and adults in underdeveloped countries such as Tanzania die every day from diseases arising from the human-animal-environment interface. People in these areas often live in close contact with wild and domestic animals and are brought even closer as water becomes scarcer (Fig. 28.29). Sharing the same water sources for drinking, washing, and swimming facilitates zoonotic disease transmission to humans. 

illustrates the close relationship that some residents of Tanzania have with their livestock, and the opportunities by which zoonotic infections can be transmitted to humans. 

